
S-4/A 1 v386031_s4a.htm FORM S-4/A
AS FILED WITH THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION ON AUGUST 7, 2014
REGISTRATION NO. 333-197826
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 1
TO
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Pyramid Oil Company
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter)
CALIFORNIA
1311
(State or Other Jurisdiction of
(Primary Standard Industrial
94-0787340
Incorporation or Organization)
Classification Code Number)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification Number)
2008 – 21st Street
P.O. Box 832
Bakersfield, California 93302
(661) 325-1000
(Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Registrant’s Principal Executive Offices)
Michael D. Herman
Interim President and Chief Executive Officer
Pyramid Oil Company
2008 – 21st Street
P.O. Box 832
Bakersfield, California 93302
(661) 325-1000
(Name, Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Agent for Service)
Copies To:
Marc L. Brown, Esq.
Sam L. Banks
Reid A. Godbolt, Esq.
TroyGould PC
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Jones & Keller, P.C.
1801 Century Park East
Yuma Energy, Inc.
1999 Broadway
Suite 1600
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Suite 3150
Los Angeles, California 90067
Houston, Texas 77027
Denver, Colorado 80202
(310) 553-4441
(713) 968-7000
(303) 573-1600
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after the effectiveness of this
registration statement and the satisfaction or waiver of all other conditions to the closing of the merger described herein.
If the securities being registered on this form are to be offered in connection with the formation of a holding company and there is
compliance with General Instruction G, check the following box. ¨
If this form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the
following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same
offering. ¨
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list
the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller
reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule
12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer ¨Accelerated filer ¨Non-accelerated filer o
Smaller reporting company x
(Do not check if a smaller 
 
reporting company)
If applicable, place an X in the box to designate the appropriate rule provision relied upon in conducting this transaction:
Exchange Act Rule 13e-4(i) (Cross-Border Issuer Tender Offer) ¨
Exchange Act Rule 14d-1(d) (Cross-Border Issuer Third Party Tender Offer) ¨
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its
effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment that specifically states that this Registration Statement
shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act, or until the Registration
Statement shall become effective on such date as the Securities and Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said
Section 8(a), may determine.
The information in this proxy statement/prospectus is not complete and may be changed. Pyramid Oil Company may not sell the
securities offered by this proxy statement/prospectus until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission is effective. This proxy statement/prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities nor should it be considered a
solicitation of an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED AUGUST 7, 2014
MERGER PROPOSED — YOUR VOTE IS VERY IMPORTANT
Yuma Energy, Inc., which we refer to as Yuma, and Pyramid Oil Company, which we refer to as Pyramid, have entered into an
amended and restated agreement and plan of merger and reorganization dated as of August 1, 2014, as it may be amended from
time to time, which we refer to as the merger agreement, and which is attached as Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus
and incorporated herein by reference.
Upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the merger agreement, Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware
corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid, referred to herein as “Merger Subsidiary,” shall be merged with and into
Yuma in accordance with the Delaware General Corporation Law, which we refer to as the DGCL. Upon the merger, the separate
corporate existence of Merger Subsidiary shall cease and Yuma shall continue as the surviving corporation under Delaware law
and as a wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid. Pyramid’s name will be changed to Yuma Energy, Inc. as part of the merger. The
obligations of Pyramid and Yuma to effect the merger are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of several conditions set forth in the
merger agreement. If the merger is completed pursuant to the merger agreement, Yuma stockholders will receive an aggregate of
66,336,701 shares of Pyramid common stock, which we collectively refer to as the merger consideration, for all shares of Yuma
common stock and preferred stock (on an as converted to common stock basis) held immediately prior to the effective time. The
merger consideration is fixed and will not be adjusted to reflect changes in the stock price of Pyramid common stock. The dollar
value of this Pyramid common stock will change depending on fluctuations in the market price and will not be known at the time
Yuma stockholders vote on the merger.
In connection with the proposed transaction, Pyramid and Yuma will each hold a special meeting of their respective
stockholders. At Pyramid’s special meeting, Pyramid stockholders will be asked to vote on (i) a proposal to approve and adopt
the merger agreement; (ii) the proposals related to certain amendments to the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation; (iv) a
proposal to approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan; and (v) a proposal to adjourn the
special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals listed above.
At Yuma’s special meeting, Yuma stockholders will be asked to vote on (a) a proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement; and (b) a proposal to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of
the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement. Based on 57,493 shares of Yuma common stock (including Yuma
restricted stock awards), 16,531 shares of Yuma Series A preferred stock and 20,192 shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock
that are expected to be outstanding and exchanged in the merger, holders of Yuma common stock would receive approximately
43,484,014 shares of Pyramid common stock (plus cash in lieu of any fractional shares), holders of Yuma Series A preferred
stock would receive approximately 15,091,925 shares of Pyramid common stock (plus cash in lieu of any fractional shares), and
holders of Yuma Series B preferred stock would receive approximately 7,760,762 shares of Pyramid common stock (plus cash in
lieu of any fractional shares), subject to a downward adjustment as described in the merger agreement and further described
herein, for shares of Yuma common stock, Yuma Series A preferred stock or Yuma Series B preferred stock, respectively, they
own.
Additionally, the pro rata portion of the merger consideration to be received is dependent upon the number of shares of Yuma
common stock and preferred stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the merger and whether the
downward adjustment to the merger consideration provided in the merger agreement occurs for dissenting shares.
Consequently, the exact number of shares of Pyramid common stock to be received as a result of the merger by holders of Yuma
common stock and preferred stock will not be known at the time Yuma stockholders vote on the merger agreement.
The board of directors of Pyramid unanimously: (i) has determined that the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
thereby, including the merger, are fair to, and in the best interests of, Pyramid and its stockholders; (ii) has approved the merger
agreement and the other transactions contemplated thereby; (iii) has approved the amendments to the Pyramid restated articles
of incorporation; (iv) recommends that the stockholders of Pyramid vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement and the actions contemplated thereby; (v) recommends that the stockholders of Pyramid vote “FOR” the proposals
related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid; (vi) recommends that the stockholders of Pyramid vote “FOR” the
proposal to approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan; and (vii) recommends that the
stockholders of Pyramid vote “FOR” any proposal to authorize the Pyramid board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the
special meeting. Approval and adoption of the merger agreement and approval of the proposals related to the restated articles of
incorporation of Pyramid each requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Pyramid
common stock. Approval and adoption of the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan and approval of the proposal
to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors to adjourn the special meeting each requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the
shares represented and voting in person or by proxy at the Pyramid special meeting. Because of their mutual dependence, if the
proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement or the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid
are not all approved, then none will be deemed to have been approved.
The board of directors of Yuma unanimously: (a) has determined that the merger agreement, the merger, in accordance with the
terms of the merger agreement, and the other transactions contemplated thereby are advisable, fair to, and in the best interests of
Yuma and its stockholders; (b) has approved and adopted the merger agreement and approved the merger and the other
transactions contemplated thereby; (c) has directed that the merger agreement be submitted to a vote of the Yuma stockholders
at the Yuma special meeting; (d) recommends that the stockholders of Yuma vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the
merger agreement, and (e) recommends that the stockholders of Yuma vote “FOR” any proposal to authorize Yuma’s board of
directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting. Approval of the merger agreement requires the affirmative vote of the
holders of at least a majority of the shares of Yuma common stock and at least two-thirds or 66⅔% of the shares of Yuma
preferred stock voting together as a separate class, issued and outstanding and entitled to vote at the Yuma special meeting. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast by holders of common stock and preferred stock at the Yuma special meeting is
required to approve any proposal to adjourn the Yuma special meeting.
Your vote is important. The merger cannot be completed unless Yuma stockholders approve and adopt the merger agreement
and Pyramid stockholders approve and adopt the merger agreement and approve the proposals related to the amendments to
the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation at their respective stockholder meetings. The obligations of Pyramid and Yuma to
complete the merger are also subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions. The places, dates and times of the
respective stockholder meetings of Pyramid and Yuma are as follows:
For Pyramid stockholders:
For Yuma stockholders:
[-]
[-]
[-] a.m. local time
[-] a.m. local time
[-], 2014
[-], 2014
This proxy statement/prospectus gives you detailed information about the respective stockholder meetings of Pyramid and Yuma
and the matters proposed to be considered and acted upon at the meetings. We urge you to read this proxy
statement/prospectus carefully, including “Risk Factors” beginning on page [—] for a discussion of the risks relating to
the merger and other matters. Whether or not you plan to attend your meeting, to ensure your shares are represented at the
meeting, please vote as soon as possible by either completing and submitting the enclosed proxy card or voting using the
telephone or Internet voting procedures described on your proxy card.
Pyramid’s common stock is listed on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “PDO” and the closing price of Pyramid’s common stock
on August 6, 2014 was $5.33 per share. Yuma is a privately held company and there is no public market for its securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission, which we refer to as the SEC, nor any state securities commission
has approved or disapproved of the merger or the securities to be issued under this proxy statement/prospectus or has
passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of the disclosures in this proxy statement/prospectus. Any representation to
the contrary is a criminal offense.
This proxy statement/prospectus is dated [-], 2014 and is first being mailed to Pyramid stockholders and Yuma
stockholders on or about [-], 2014.
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
P. O. Box 832
Bakersfield, California 93302
(661) 325-1000
___________________________
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON [-], 2014
___________________________
To the Stockholders of Pyramid Oil Company:
We are pleased to invite you to attend a special meeting of the stockholders of Pyramid Oil Company, a California corporation,
which we refer to as Pyramid, which will be held at [-] , on [-], 2014 at [-] a.m., local time, for the following purposes:
1.       To consider and vote upon a proposal to approve and adopt the Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger
and Reorganization dated as of August 1, 2014, as it may be amended from time to time, which we refer to as the merger
agreement, by and among Pyramid, Pyramid Delaware Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned
subsidiary of Pyramid, Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid,
referred to as Merger Subsidiary, and Yuma Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation, referred to as Yuma.
2.       To consider and vote upon separate proposals to approve certain amendments to Pyramid’s restated articles of
incorporation, each to take effect only upon consummation of the merger, as follows:
·to increase the authorized shares of Pyramid common stock from 50,000,000 shares to 300,000,000 shares;
·to provide for the classification of the board of directors of Pyramid into two classes with staggered terms;
· to eliminate cumulative voting in the election of directors; and
·to change the name of the Pyramid to “Yuma Energy, Inc.” after the merger.
3.       To approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan.
4.       To consider and vote on any proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special
meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals listed above at
the time of the special meeting.
We do not expect to transact any other business at the special meeting. Pyramid’s board of directors has fixed the close of
business on [-], 2014 as the record date for determining those Pyramid stockholders entitled to vote at the special meeting and
any adjournment or postponement thereof. Accordingly, only Pyramid stockholders of record at the close of business on that date
are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the special meeting. A complete list of the Pyramid stockholders will be available for
examination at the offices of Pyramid in Bakersfield, California, during ordinary business hours for a period of 10 days prior to the
special meeting.
The board of directors of Pyramid recommends that Pyramid stockholders vote “FOR” each of the proposals to be
voted on at the special meeting. Because of their mutual dependence, if the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement or the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid are not all approved, then none
will be deemed to have been approved.
We cordially invite you to attend the special meeting in person. However, to ensure your representation at the special meeting,
please complete and promptly mail your proxy card in the return envelope enclosed, or authorize the individuals named on your
proxy card to vote your shares by calling the toll-free telephone number or by using the Internet as described in the instructions
included with your proxy card or voting instruction card. This will not prevent you from voting in person, but will help to secure a
quorum and avoid added solicitation costs. If your shares are held in “street name” by your broker or other nominee, only that
holder can vote your shares and the vote cannot be cast unless you provide instructions to your broker. You should follow the
directions provided by your broker regarding how to instruct your broker to vote your shares. Your proxy may be revoked at any
time before it is voted. Please review the proxy statement/prospectus accompanying this notice for more complete information
regarding the matters to be voted on at the meeting.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Michael D. Herman
Chairman, Interim President and Chief Executive Officer
Bakersfield, California
[-], 2014
IMPORTANT: WHETHER OR NOT YOU PLAN TO ATTEND THE SPECIAL MEETING, WE ASK YOU TO COMPLETE AND
PROMPTLY RETURN THE ENCLOSED PROXY CARD IN THE ENVELOPE PROVIDED OR TO VOTE BY TELEPHONE OR
ON THE INTERNET USING THE INSTRUCTIONS ON THE PROXY CARD.
YUMA ENERGY, INC.
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Houston, Texas 77027
(713) 968-7000
___________________________
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON [-], 2014
___________________________
To the Stockholders of Yuma Energy, Inc.:
We are pleased to invite you to attend a special meeting of the stockholders of Yuma Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation, which
we refer to as Yuma, which will be held at [-], on [-], 2014 at [-] a.m., local time, for the following purposes:
1.       To consider and vote upon a proposal to approve and adopt the Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger
and Reorganization dated as of August 1, 2014, as it may be amended from time to time, which we refer to as the merger
agreement, by and among Pyramid Oil Company, two wholly owned subsidiaries of Pyramid, and Yuma.
2.       To consider and vote on any proposal to authorize Yuma’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special
meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposal to approve and
adopt the merger agreement.
We do not expect to transact any other business at the special meeting. Yuma’s board of directors has fixed the close of business
on [-], 2014 as the record date for determining those Yuma stockholders entitled to vote at the special meeting and any
adjournment or postponement thereof. Accordingly, only Yuma stockholders of record at the close of business on that date are
entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the special meeting. A complete list of the Yuma stockholders will be available for
examination at the offices of Yuma in Houston, Texas, during ordinary business hours for a period of 10 days prior to the special
meeting.
The board of directors of Yuma recommends that Yuma stockholders vote “FOR” each of the proposals to be
considered at the special meeting.
Under the Delaware General Corporation Law (“DGCL”), if the merger is completed, holders of Yuma common stock or preferred
stock who do not vote in favor of approval and adoption of the merger agreement will have the right to seek appraisal of the fair
value of their shares, but only if they submit a written demand for such an appraisal prior to the vote on the merger agreement and
they comply with the other DGCL procedures and requirements explained in the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus. A
copy of Section 262 of the DGCL is attached to the proxy statement/prospectus as Annex E.
We cordially invite you to attend the special meeting in person. However, to ensure your representation at the special meeting,
please complete and promptly mail your proxy card in the return envelope enclosed. This will not prevent you from voting in
person, but will help to secure a quorum and avoid added solicitation costs. Your proxy may be revoked at any time before it is
voted. Please review the proxy statement/prospectus accompanying this notice for more complete information regarding the
matters to be voted on at the meeting.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Sam L. Banks
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Houston, Texas
[-], 2014
IMPORTANT: WHETHER OR NOT YOU PLAN TO ATTEND THE SPECIAL MEETING, WE ASK YOU TO COMPLETE AND
PROMPTLY RETURN THE ENCLOSED PROXY CARD IN THE ENVELOPE PROVIDED.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
This proxy statement/prospectus incorporates important business and financial information about Pyramid and Yuma that is not
included in or delivered with this proxy statement/prospectus. See “Where You Can Find More Information” on page [—]. This
information is available to you without charge upon your written or oral request to:
Pyramid Oil Company
Yuma Energy, Inc.
P. O. Box 832
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Bakersfield, California 93302
Houston, Texas 77027
(661) 325-1000
(713) 968-7000
Attention: Corporate Secretary
Attention: Corporate Secretary
You also may obtain certain documents relating to Pyramid at the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website,
www.sec.gov, and you may obtain certain of these documents at Pyramid’s website, www.pyramidoil.com, by selecting
“Investors,” then selecting “Financial Information” and then selecting “SEC Filings.” Information contained on the Pyramid
website is expressly not incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. To receive timely delivery of the
documents in advance of the Pyramid special meeting of stockholders, your request should be received no later than [-], 2014.
Yuma’s board of directors is using this proxy statement/prospectus to solicit proxies from Yuma’s stockholders in connection with
the merger agreement and the merger. Pyramid’s board of directors is using this proxy statement/prospectus to solicit proxies
from Pyramid’s stockholders in connection with the merger agreement, the merger and the amendments to the restated articles of
incorporation of Pyramid, and also as a prospectus for stockholders of Yuma because Pyramid is offering shares of its common
stock to be issued in exchange for shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock in the merger.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THE MERGER
 
 
7
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
 
9
SUMMARY
9
The Companies
9
The Merger
14
The Special Meetings and Voting
15
Matters to be Considered in Deciding How to Vote
18
Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Pyramid
19
Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Yuma
Selected Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
20
Summary Pro Forma Combined Oil, Natural Gas and Natural Gas Liquids Reserve and Production Data21
22
Comparative Per Share Information
Comparative Per Share Market Price and Dividend Information
23
RISK FACTORS
Risks Relating to the Merger
Risks Relating to Pyramid’s Business
Risks Relating to Yuma’s Business
Risks Relating to Pyramid’s Operations After Consummation of the Merger
Risks Relating to Pyramid Common Stock After Consummation of the Merger
 
THE COMPANIES
Pyramid Oil Company
Yuma Energy, Inc.
 
PYRAMID SPECIAL MEETING
General
Purpose of the Pyramid Special Meeting
Recommendation of the Pyramid Board of Directors
Record Date and Voting
Quorum
Vote Required
Revocability of Proxies
Voting Methods
Solicitation of Proxies
 
YUMA SPECIAL MEETING
General
Purpose of the Yuma Special Meeting
Recommendation of the Yuma Board of Directors
Record Date and Voting
Quorum
Vote Required
Revocability of Proxies
Voting by Mail
Solicitation of Proxies
 
THE MERGER
General
Background of the Merger
Recommendation of Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger
Recommendation of Yuma’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger
Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors
Interests of Yuma’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
Interests of Pyramid’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Management After Consummation of the Merger
Regulatory Filings and Approvals Required For Completion of the Merger
Treatment of Yuma Restricted Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Units
Treatment of Pyramid Restricted Stock Awards
i
Dividends
Corporate Name Following the Completion of the Merger
Listing of Pyramid Shares
 
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
Merger Consideration
Conversion of Shares; Exchange of Certificates
Effective Time
Conditions to the Completion of the Merger
Representations and Warranties
Conduct of Business Pending the Merger
No Solicitation
24
24
26
28
36
36
 
38
38
39
 
40
40
40
40
41
41
42
42
42
42
 
43
43
43
43
43
44
44
44
45
45
 
46
46
46
51
53
55
59
59
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
 
61
61
62
62
62
64
65
67
Termination of the Merger Agreement
Amendment of the Merger Agreement
Expenses
No Third Party Beneficiaries
Specific Performance
 
VOTING AGREEMENTS
Pyramid Significant Stockholder
Yuma Stockholders
 
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
 
DISSENTERS’ RIGHTS OF APPRAISAL
 
ACCOUNTING TREATMENT
 
INFORMATION ABOUT YUMA
General
Recent Developments
Competition
Environmental Regulations
Employees
Properties
Legal Proceedings
 
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF
YUMA
Overview
Critical Accounting Policies
Sales and Other Operating Revenues
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Hedging Activities
Commitments and Contingencies
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk of Yuma
 
INFORMATION ABOUT PYRAMID
Overview
Description of Business – Oil & Gas Operations
Employees
Properties
Legal Proceedings
 
MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID
 
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF
PYRAMID
Impact of Changing Prices
Critical Accounting Policies
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Results of Operations For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared To The Fiscal Year Ended December 31,
2012
Results of Operations For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared To The Fiscal Year Ended December 31,
2011
68
70
70
70
70
 
71
71
71
 
72
 
75
 
78
 
79
79
80
80
80
81
81
89
90
90
90
90
96
98
100
100
100
 
101
101
101
103
103
105
 
106
109
109
109
110
111
113
ii
Results of Operations For the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 Compared To The Three Months Ended March 31, 2013 114
 
MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID FOLLOWING THE MERGER
116
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT OF YUMA
 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID
 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID UPON
CONSUMMATION OF THE MERGER
 
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
 
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK AND DIVIDENDS
Pyramid
Yuma
Pyramid Future Dividend Policy
 
DESCRIPTION OF PYRAMID CAPITAL STOCK
Common Stock
Preferred Stock
Transfer Agent and Registrar
Listing
 
FUTURE STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS
 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
 
RESTATED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF PYRAMID OIL COMPANY PROPOSALS
 
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY 2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN PROPOSAL
 
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE CORPORATION LAWS OF CALIFORNIA AND DELAWARE
 
LEGAL MATTERS
 
EXPERTS
 
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
 
GLOSSARY OF OIL AND GAS TERMS
 
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Historical Consolidated Financial Statements of Yuma
Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid
125
 
126
127
128
 
134
134
134
134
 
135
135
135
135
135
 
136
 
136
 
138
 
140
 
 147
 
152
 
152
 
152
 
153
 
F-1
F-2
F-
79
Annex
A
Annex
B
 
Annex
C
 
Annex
D
 
Annex
E
 
Annex
F
Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization dated as of August 1, 2014, by and among
Yuma Energy, Inc., Pyramid Oil Company, Pyramid Delaware Merger Subsidiary, Inc., and Pyramid Merger Subsidiary,
Inc.
Amended and Restated Voting Agreement – Michael D. Herman
Amended and Restated Voting Agreement – Yuma Stockholders
Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners, LLC
Section 262 of the Delaware General Corporation Law
Proposed Restated Articles of Incorporation of Pyramid Oil Company
Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
Pyramid Oil Company Amended and Restated Bylaws
Annex
G
 
Annex
H
iii
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THE MERGER
Q: What is the proposed merger transaction?
A:
Pyramid Oil Company, which we refer to as “Pyramid,” and Yuma Energy, Inc., which we refer to as “Yuma,” have entered into
a merger agreement pursuant to which Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid, which we refer
to as Merger Subsidiary, will merge with and into Yuma with Yuma surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of
Pyramid, and Yuma will change its name to “The Yuma Companies, Inc.” We refer to this as the merger. As part of the merger,
Pyramid’s name will be changed to “Yuma Energy, Inc.” At the effective time of the merger, each issued and outstanding share
of Yuma’s common stock and preferred stock (other than dissenting shares) will be converted automatically into the right to
receive a pro rata portion of 66,336,701 shares of Pyramid common stock, no par value per share, as described under “The
Merger Agreement—Merger Consideration” beginning on page [—]. After the merger, former holders of Yuma common stock
and preferred stock will own approximately 93% of Pyramid’s common stock then outstanding and holders of Pyramid’s
common stock will own approximately 7% of Pyramid’s common stock then outstanding.
Q: Why are Pyramid and Yuma proposing the merger?
A:The boards of directors of Pyramid and Yuma have each concluded that the merger is in the best interests of their stockholders.
As set forth in greater detail elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus, Pyramid’s board of directors considered many factors
in making its recommendations to Pyramid’s stockholders. Among the factors considered by Pyramid’s board of directors were:
·the combination will greatly diversify and increase estimated proved reserves;
the combined entity’s market capitalization and its expected enhanced access to debt and equity capital markets, which the
·
Pyramid board of directors believes will enhance the ability to finance development and production of the combined entity’s
increased scale of operations;
the combination will provide Pyramid with a larger portfolio of exploitation and exploration opportunities in liquids prone
·
resource plays within areas targeted by Yuma; and
the presentation and opinion of ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, referred to herein as “ROTH,” Pyramid’s financial advisor, to the
effect that, as of the date of the opinion and based upon the assumptions, limitations, qualifications and conditions stated in the
·
opinion letter, the merger exchange ratio of the merger as between Pyramid and Yuma stockholders is fair to Pyramid and its
stockholders, from a financial point of view, as more fully described below under the caption “The Merger – Opinion of ROTH
Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors.”
For more detailed information regarding the factors considered by Pyramid’s board of directors, see “The Merger—
Recommendation of Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page [—].
As set forth in greater detail elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus, Yuma’s board of directors considered many factors in
making its recommendations to Yuma’s stockholders. Among the factors considered by Yuma’s board of directors were:
Yuma’s stockholders would receive an aggregate of 66,336,701 shares of Pyramid common stock and that receipt of these
·
shares would not be a taxable transaction for Yuma’s stockholders;
Pyramid’s common stock is traded on the NYSE MKT, and the shares to be issued to Yuma’s stockholders will also be listed on
·
the NYSE MKT thereby providing liquidity which Yuma’s privately held shares do not presently have; and
Yuma’s stockholders will have the opportunity to participate in the combined company’s growth and share appreciation in the
·
future should they retain their Pyramid common stock after the merger.
1
For more detailed information regarding the factors considered by Yuma’s board of directors, see “The Merger—
Recommendation of Yuma’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page [—].
Q: Why am I receiving this proxy statement/prospectus?
A:
Pyramid’s and Yuma’s boards of directors are using this proxy statement/prospectus to solicit proxies of Pyramid and Yuma
stockholders in connection with the merger agreement and the merger. In addition, Pyramid is using this proxy
statement/prospectus as a prospectus for Yuma stockholders because Pyramid is offering shares of its common stock to be
issued in exchange for shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock in the merger.
In order to complete the merger, Pyramid stockholders must vote to (i) approve and adopt the merger agreement; (ii) approve all
of the proposals related to certain amendments to the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation; and Yuma stockholders must
vote to approve and adopt the merger agreement.
Pyramid and Yuma will hold separate special meetings of their respective stockholders to obtain these approvals. This proxy
statement/prospectus contains important information about the merger and the special meetings of the stockholders of Pyramid
and Yuma, and you should read it carefully. The enclosed voting materials allow you to vote your shares of Pyramid common
stock and/or Yuma common stock and preferred stock without attending the applicable special meetings.
We encourage you to submit your proxy as promptly as possible.
Q:When and where is the special meeting of Pyramid stockholders?
A:Pyramid’s special meeting will be held at [-] on [-], 2014 at [-] a.m., local time.
Q:When and where is the special meeting of Yuma stockholders?
A:Yuma’s special meeting will be held at [-] on [-], 2014 at [-] a.m., local time.
Q:
Who can vote at the special meeting?
A:
All Pyramid stockholders of record as of the close of business on [-], 2014, the record date for determining stockholders entitled
to notice of and to vote at Pyramid’s special meeting, are entitled to receive notice of and to vote at Pyramid’s special meeting.
As of the record date, there were [-] shares of Pyramid common stock outstanding and entitled to vote at the Pyramid special
meeting, held by approximately [-] holders of record. Each share of Pyramid common stock is entitled to one vote on each
proposal presented at Pyramid’s special meeting.
All Yuma stockholders of record as of the close of business on [-], 2014, the record date for determining stockholders entitled to
notice of and to vote at Yuma’s special meeting, are entitled to receive notice of and to vote at Yuma’s special meeting. As of the
record date, there were [-] shares of Yuma’s common stock outstanding and [-] shares of its preferred stock outstanding and
entitled to vote at the Yuma special meeting, held by approximately [-] holders of record. Each share of Yuma common stock and
each share of preferred stock is entitled to one vote on each proposal presented at Yuma’s special meeting. The Yuma common
stock and preferred stock will each be voted and counted as separate classes of stock.
Q:
What constitutes a quorum?
A:
The Pyramid bylaws provide that a majority of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock entitled to vote at the meeting,
represented in person or by proxy, constitutes a quorum at a meeting of its stockholders.
The Yuma bylaws provide that a majority of the outstanding shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock entitled to vote,
represented in person or by proxy, constitutes a quorum at a meeting of its stockholders.
Shares that are voted and shares abstaining from voting are treated as being present at each of the Pyramid special meeting and
the Yuma special meeting, as applicable, for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present.
2
Q:What vote is required to approve the proposals at Pyramid’s special meeting and Yuma’s special meeting?
A:
Approval of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the proposals related to the Pyramid restated articles
of incorporation each requires the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of
Pyramid common stock. Approval of the proposal of Pyramid to approve and adopt the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive
Plan and approval of the proposal of Pyramid to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special
meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals listed above each requires the
affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the shares of Pyramid common stock represented in person or by proxy at
the special meeting and voting on each such proposal, provided that such shares voting affirmatively must also constitute a
majority of the required quorum for the meeting.
Approval of the proposal by Yuma to approve and adopt the merger agreement requires the affirmative vote of the holders of at
least a majority of the outstanding shares of Yuma common stock and at least two-thirds or 66⅔% of Yuma’s outstanding Series
A and Series B preferred stock voting together as a separate class. The proposal to authorize Yuma’s board of directors, in its
discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposal to
approve and adopt the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting each requires the affirmative vote of the holders of at
least a majority of each class of the shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock represented in person or by proxy at the
special meeting and entitled to vote on such proposal.
Your vote is important. We encourage you to submit your proxy as promptly as possible.
Q.           How will Pyramid’s significant shareholder vote the shares owned by him?
A.          Yuma has entered into a voting agreement with Michael D. Herman, Chairman and Interim President and Chief
Executive Officer of Pyramid, who currently owns 2,052,580 shares of Pyramid common stock or approximately 42.9% of the
outstanding Pyramid common stock. The voting agreement provides that Mr. Herman will vote his shares of Pyramid common
stock in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the proposals related to the Pyramid restated
articles of incorporation.
Q.           How will Yuma’s directors vote their shares owned by them?
A.          Pyramid has entered into a voting agreement with the directors of Yuma, who currently own an aggregate of 54,234
shares of Yuma common stock or approximately 99.9% of the outstanding Yuma common stock, an aggregate of 471 shares of
Yuma Series A preferred stock or approximately 2.8% of the outstanding Yuma Series A preferred stock, and an aggregate of
1,909 shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock or approximately 9.4% of the outstanding Yuma Series B preferred stock. The
voting agreement provides that the Yuma directors will vote their shares of Yuma preferred stock and common stock in favor of
the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement.
Q:If my shares of Pyramid common stock are held in “street name” by my broker or other nominee, will my broker or
other nominee vote my shares of Pyramid common stock for me? What happens if I do not vote for a proposal?
A:
Unless you instruct your broker or other nominee how to vote your shares of Pyramid common stock held in street name, your
shares will NOT be voted. This is referred to as a “broker non-vote.” If you hold your shares in a stock brokerage account or if
your shares are held by a bank or other nominee (that is, in street name), you must provide your broker or other nominee with
instructions on how to vote your shares. Please follow the voting instructions provided by your broker or other nominee on the
enclosed voting instruction card. You should also be aware that you may not vote shares of Pyramid common stock held in
street name by returning a proxy card directly to Pyramid or Yuma or by voting in person at the Pyramid or Yuma special
meetings unless you provide a “legal proxy,” which you must obtain from your broker or other nominee.
If you are a Pyramid stockholder, abstentions will be counted in determining the presence of a quorum and broker non-votes will
be counted in determining the presence of a quorum. Broker non-votes will not be counted as votes cast with regard to the
proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the proposals related to the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation,
and as such, broker non-votes could result in there not being sufficient votes cast for such proposals. With respect to the proposal
to approve and adopt the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan and the proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors, in
its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals
listed above, broker non-votes and abstentions could prevent the proposals from receiving the required affirmative vote of (i) a
majority of the shares represented in person or by proxy and voting on the proposals and (ii) a majority of the shares required to
constitute the quorum.
If you are a Yuma stockholder, abstentions will be counted in determining the presence of a quorum. Abstentions will have the
same effect as votes cast AGAINST (i) the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement, and (ii) the proposal to
authorize Yuma’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit
additional proxies in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
3
Q: If I am a Yuma stockholder, should I send in my stock certificates with my proxy card?
A:
NO. Please DO NOT send your Yuma stock certificates with your proxy card. If the merger is approved and adopted, you will
be sent written instructions for exchanging your stock certificates.
Q: If I am a Pyramid stockholder, should I send in my stock certificates with my proxy card?
A: NO. Please DO NOT send your Pyramid stock certificates with your proxy card.
Q: What are the tax consequences of the merger?
A:
The merger is intended to qualify as a reorganization pursuant to Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended, which we refer to as the Code. Subject to the discussion set forth in “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences” beginning on page [—], a Yuma stockholder will not recognize (i.e., take into account for tax purposes) gain or
loss as a result of the merger. A taxable gain or loss may be recognized on the subsequent sale or disposition by a person
receiving stock in the merger.
If you are a non-U.S. holder of Yuma common stock, your tax treatment and whether you are taxable as a result of the merger will
differ from what is described above and will depend on the percentage of Yuma common stock that you own and your individual
circumstances at the effective time of the merger.
Tax matters are very complicated, and the tax consequences of the merger to a particular stockholder will depend on such
stockholder’s circumstances. Accordingly, Yuma and Pyramid urge you to consult your tax advisor for a full understanding of the
tax consequences of the merger to you, including the applicability and effect of U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income and
other tax laws. For a more complete discussion of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger, see
“Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences” beginning on page [—].
It is a condition to Yuma’s obligations to complete the merger that the Yuma board of directors has a good faith belief that the
merger will qualify as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. This condition may be waived by
Yuma, and in such event Yuma will undertake to recirculate and re-solicit its stockholders if the condition is waived and the
change in tax consequences is material.
Q: Are Yuma stockholders entitled to appraisal rights?
A:
Yes. Common and preferred stockholders of Yuma who do not vote in favor of the proposal of Yuma to approve and adopt the
merger agreement will be entitled to dissent to the merger pursuant to Section 262 of the Delaware General Corporation Law,
which we refer to as the DGCL, and obtain the fair value of the stockholders’ shares if such rights are properly demanded and
perfected and not withdrawn or lost and the merger is completed.
Q: Are Pyramid stockholders entitled to appraisal rights?
A:
No.
Q: How does Pyramid’s board of directors recommend that Pyramid stockholders vote?
A:
Pyramid’s board of directors has unanimously (i) determined that the merger agreement, the merger, the other transactions
contemplated thereby, and the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid are advisable, fair to, and in the best interests of
Pyramid and its stockholders, (ii) approved the merger agreement, the merger, the other transactions contemplated thereby,
and the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, (iii) approved the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, and (iv)
approved the proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary
or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies.
Pyramid’s board of directors unanimously recommends that Pyramid stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt
the merger agreement, “FOR” all of the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, “FOR” the proposal
to approve and adopt the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, and “FOR” any proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of
directors to adjourn the special meeting. For a more complete description of the recommendation of Pyramid’s board of directors,
see “The Merger — Recommendation of Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page [—].
4
Q: How does Yuma’s board of directors recommend that Yuma’s stockholders vote?
A:
Yuma’s board of directors has unanimously (i) determined that the merger agreement, the merger and the other transactions
contemplated thereby are advisable, fair to, and in the best interests of Yuma and its stockholders, (ii) approved the merger
agreement, the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and (iii) approved the proposal to
authorize Yuma’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit
additional proxies.
Yuma’s board of directors unanimously recommends that Yuma’s stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the
merger agreement, and “FOR” any proposal to authorize Yuma’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special
meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement at the time of the special meeting. For a more complete description of the recommendation of Yuma’s board of
directors, see “The Merger — Recommendation of Yuma’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page
[—].
Q:How will Pyramid stockholders be affected by the merger and share issuance?
A:
After the merger, each Pyramid stockholder will continue to own the same number of shares of Pyramid common stock that the
stockholder held immediately prior to the merger. However, because Pyramid will be issuing new shares of common stock to
Yuma stockholders in the merger, each outstanding share of Pyramid common stock immediately prior to the merger will
represent a smaller percentage of the aggregate number of shares of Pyramid common stock outstanding after the merger. As
a result of the merger, each Pyramid stockholder will own a smaller percentage of shares in a larger company with more
assets.
Q:What do I need to do now?
A:
After you have carefully read this proxy statement/prospectus, please respond by completing, signing and dating your proxy
card or voting instruction card and returning it in the enclosed preaddressed postage-paid envelope or, if available, by
submitting your proxy by one of the other methods specified in your proxy card or voting instruction card as promptly as
possible so that your shares of Pyramid common stock or Yuma common stock and preferred stock will be represented and
voted at Pyramid’s special meeting or Yuma’s special meeting, as applicable.
Please refer to your proxy card or voting instruction card forwarded by your broker or other nominee to see which voting options
are available to you.
The method by which you submit a proxy will in no way limit your right to vote at Pyramid’s special meeting or Yuma’s special
meeting if you later decide to attend the meeting in person. However, if your shares of Pyramid common stock are held in the
name of a broker or other nominee, you must obtain a legal proxy, executed in your favor, from your broker or other nominee, to
be able to vote in person at Pyramid’s special meeting.
Q:How will my proxy be voted?
A:
All shares of Pyramid common stock entitled to vote and represented by properly completed proxies received prior to
Pyramid’s special meeting, and not revoked, will be voted at Pyramid’s special meeting as instructed on the proxies. If you
properly sign, date and return a proxy card, but do not indicate how your shares of Pyramid common stock should be voted on
a matter, the shares of Pyramid common stock represented by your proxy will be voted as Pyramid’s board of directors
recommends and therefore “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement, “FOR” all of the proposals related
to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan, and “FOR” any proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors to adjourn the special meeting. If you do not
provide voting instructions to your broker or other nominee, your shares of Pyramid common stock will NOT be voted at the
meeting and will be considered broker non-votes.
All shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock entitled to vote and represented by properly completed proxies received
prior to Yuma’s special meeting, and not revoked, will be voted at Yuma’s special meeting as instructed on the proxies. If you
properly sign, date and return a proxy card to Yuma, but do not indicate how your shares of Yuma common stock and/or preferred
stock should be voted on a matter, the shares of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock represented by your proxy will be
voted as Yuma’s board of directors recommends and therefore “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement
and “FOR” any proposal to authorize Yuma’s board of directors to adjourn the special meeting. If you do not provide voting
instructions to Yuma, your shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock will be voted “FOR” both proposals described
above.
5
Q:Can I revoke my proxy or change my vote after I have delivered my proxy?
A:
Yes. You may revoke your proxy or change your vote at any time before your proxy is voted at Pyramid’s special meeting or
Yuma’s special meeting, as applicable. If you are a holder of record, you can do this in any of the three following ways:
by sending a written notice to the Corporate Secretary of Pyramid or the Corporate Secretary of Yuma, as applicable, at the
·
address set forth below, in time to be received before Pyramid’s special meeting or Yuma’s special meeting, as applicable,
stating that you would like to revoke your proxy;
by completing, signing and dating another proxy card and returning it by mail in time to be received before Pyramid’s special
·
meeting or Yuma’s special meeting, as applicable, or by submitting a later dated proxy by the Internet or telephone (in the case
of Pyramid stockholders) in which case your later-submitted proxy will be recorded and your earlier proxy revoked; or
by attending the Pyramid special meeting or the Yuma special meeting, as applicable, and voting in person. However, simply
·
attending Pyramid’s special meeting or Yuma’s special meeting without voting will not revoke your proxy or change your vote.
If your shares of Pyramid common stock are held in an account at a broker or other nominee and you desire to change your vote
·
or vote in person, you should contact your broker or other nominee for instructions on how to do so.
Q: What should I do if I receive more than one set of voting materials for Pyramid’s special meeting?
A:
You may receive more than one set of voting materials for Pyramid’s special meeting, including multiple copies of this proxy
statement/prospectus and multiple proxy cards or voting instruction cards. For example, if you hold your shares of Pyramid
common stock in more than one brokerage account, you will receive a separate voting instruction card for each brokerage
account in which you hold shares of Pyramid common stock. If you are a holder of record and your shares of Pyramid common
stock are registered in more than one name, you may receive more than one proxy card. Please complete, sign, date and
return each proxy card and voting instruction card that you receive or if available, please submit your proxy by telephone or
over the Internet.
Q: What happens if I am a stockholder of both Pyramid and Yuma?
A:
You will receive separate proxy cards for each company and must complete, sign and date each proxy card and return each
proxy card in the appropriate preaddressed postage-paid envelope or, if available, by submitting a proxy by one of the other
methods specified in your proxy card or voting instruction card for each company.
Q:Who can I call with questions about the stockholders’ meetings, the merger and the other matters to be voted upon?
A:
If you have any questions about these matters or how to submit your proxy or voting instruction card, or if you need additional
copies of this proxy statement/prospectus or the enclosed proxy card or voting instruction card, you should contact:
If you are a Pyramid stockholder:
Pyramid Oil Company
P. O. Box 832
Bakersfield, California 93302
(661) 325-1000
Attention: Corporate Secretary
If you are a Yuma stockholder:
Yuma Energy, Inc.
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Houston, Texas 77027
(713) 968-7000
Attention: Corporate Secretary
6
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This proxy statement/prospectus contains certain forward-looking statements with respect to the financial condition, results of
operations, plans, objectives, intentions, future performance and business of each of Pyramid and Yuma that are not historical
facts and are subject to risks and uncertainties. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of the management
of the companies and on the information currently available to such management. Forward-looking statements include
information concerning possible or assumed future results of Pyramid, Yuma and the combined company and may be preceded
by, followed by, or otherwise include the words “probable,” “may,” “expect,” “estimate,” “project,” “plan,” “believe,” “intend,”
“achievable,” “anticipate,” “will,” “continue,” “potential,” “should,” “could” or similar expressions. These statements occur in, among
other places:
· “Questions and Answers About the Merger;”
“Summary—Selected Historical Financial Data of Yuma;” “—Selected Historical Financial Data of Pyramid;” “—Selected
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Consolidated Financial Information;” “—Summary Pro Forma Combined Oil, Natural Gas and
·
Natural Gas Liquids Reserve and Production Data;” “—Comparative Per Share Information;” and “—Comparative Per Share
Market Price and Dividend Information;”
·
“Risk Factors;”
“The Merger—Background of the Merger;” “—Recommendation of Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger;”
·
and “—Recommendation of Yuma’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger;”
·“The Merger—Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors;”
·“Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information;” and
Statements contained elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus concerning Pyramid’s and Yuma’s plans for the combined
·
company’s growth and future operations or financial position.
These forward-looking statements involve certain risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those
contemplated in the forward-looking statements due to, among others, the factors discussed under “Risk Factors” beginning on
page [—] of this proxy statement/prospectus, as well as the following factors:
·the possibility that the companies may be unable to obtain stockholder approvals required for the merger;
·the possibility that problems may arise in successfully integrating the businesses of the two companies;
· the possibility that the merger may involve unexpected costs;
·the possibility that the businesses may suffer as a result of uncertainty surrounding the merger;
·the possibility that the industry may be subject to future regulatory or legislative actions (including any additional taxes);
·the volatility in commodity prices for oil, gas and natural gas liquids, and in the supply of and demand for oil and natural gas;
the presence or recoverability of estimated oil, gas and natural gas liquids reserves and the actual future production rates and
·
associated costs;
·the ability of the combined company to replace oil, gas and natural gas liquids reserves;
·
environmental risks;
· drilling and operating risks;
· exploration and development risks;
7
·
competition;
·the ability of the combined company’s management to execute its plans to meet its goals;
·the ability of the combined company to retain key members of its senior management and key employees;
the combined company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations, borrowings or other sources to fully execute its
·
business plan;
general economic conditions, whether internationally, nationally or in the regional and local market areas in which Pyramid and
Yuma conduct their businesses, may be less favorable than expected, including the possibility that economic conditions in the
·
United States will worsen and that capital markets are disrupted, which could adversely affect demand for oil and natural gas
and make it difficult to access financial markets;
·social unrest, political instability, armed conflict, or acts of terrorism or sabotage in oil and natural gas producing regions, such as
northern Africa, the Middle East or our markets; and
other economic, competitive, governmental, legislative, regulatory, geopolitical and technological factors that may negatively
·
impact our business, operations or pricing.
Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements are
discussed in reports filed with the SEC by Pyramid. See “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page [—] of this
proxy statement/prospectus.
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus. All subsequent written and oral
forward-looking statements concerning the merger or other matters addressed in this proxy statement/prospectus and attributable
to Pyramid or Yuma or any person acting on their behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements
contained or referred to in this section. Except to the extent required by applicable law or regulation, neither Pyramid nor Yuma
undertakes any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
8
SUMMARY
The following summary highlights some of the information contained in this proxy statement/prospectus. This summary may not
contain all of the information that is important to you. For a more complete description of the merger agreement, the merger and
the other transactions contemplated thereby, Pyramid and Yuma encourage you to read carefully this entire proxy
statement/prospectus, including the attached Annexes. We have defined certain oil and gas industry terms used in this proxy
statement/prospectus in the “Glossary of Oil and Gas Terms” beginning on page [—].
The Companies
(Pages [—] and [—])
Pyramid Oil Company
P. O. Box 832
Bakersfield, California 93302
(661) 325-1000
Pyramid is engaged in the business of the exploration, development and production of crude oil and natural gas. Pyramid
acquires interests in land and producing properties through acquisitions and leases and then drills and/or operates crude oil or
natural gas wells in efforts to discover and produce oil and gas. Crude oil and natural gas produced from these properties are
sold to various refineries and pipeline companies. The majority of the oil and gas properties that Pyramid owns and operates are
for its account. Pyramid also participates in joint ventures with other companies in the development of oil and gas properties.
Although Pyramid owns some minor oil and gas interests in New York, Wyoming and Texas, all of its major revenue-producing
properties are in California. Immediately prior to the completion of the merger, Pyramid intends to transfer most of its oil and gas
working interests to a wholly-owned subsidiary.
Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc.
P. O. Box 832
Bakersfield, California 93302
(661) 325-1000
Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., which we refer to as Merger Subsidiary, is a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly owned
subsidiary of Pyramid and was formed solely for the purpose of consummating the merger. Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc. has
not carried on any activities to date, except for activities incidental to formation and activities undertaken in connection with the
merger.
Yuma Energy, Inc.
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Houston, Texas 77027
(713) 968-7000
Yuma Energy, Inc. is a U.S.-based oil and gas company focused on the exploration for, and development of, conventional and
unconventional oil and gas prospects. Yuma’s predecessor was established in 1983. Yuma has employed a 3-D seismic-based
strategy to build a multi-year inventory of development and exploration prospects. Yuma’s current operations are focused on
onshore central Louisiana, where Yuma is targeting the Austin Chalk, Tuscaloosa, Wilcox, Frio, Marg Tex and Hackberry
formations. In addition, Yuma has a non-operated position in the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Yuma’s core competencies in
generating oil and gas prospects include: unconventional oil plays; onshore liquids-rich projects; and high impact deep onshore
prospects located beneath known producing trends, identified through the use of 3-D seismic surveys.
The Merger
(Pages [—])
The Structure of the Merger
Pyramid has agreed to acquire Yuma under the terms and conditions set forth in the merger agreement, which we describe in this
proxy statement/prospectus. Pursuant to the merger agreement, a newly formed subsidiary of Pyramid, which we refer to as
“Merger Subsidiary,” will merge with and into Yuma, with Yuma continuing as the surviving corporation and a wholly owned
subsidiary of Pyramid. We refer to this as the merger. This process is often called a “reverse merger” because a larger private
company (Yuma) is merged with a subsidiary of a smaller public company (Pyramid). We have attached the merger agreement
as Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus. We encourage you to carefully read the merger agreement in its entirety. We
currently expect that the merger will be completed in the third quarter of 2014. However, we cannot predict the actual timing of the
completion of these transactions or if they will ultimately occur.
9
Merger Consideration
The merger agreement provides that at the effective time of the merger each share of Yuma common stock and preferred stock
issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time will be converted into the right to receive shares of Pyramid
common stock. In the merger, Pyramid agreed to issue 66,336,701 shares of its common stock to former Yuma stockholders at
the effective time of the merger. No assurance can be given that the current fair market value of Pyramid common stock will be
equivalent to the fair market value of Pyramid common stock on the date that the merger consideration is received by a Yuma
stockholder or at any other time. The actual fair market value of the Pyramid common stock received by Yuma stockholders
depends upon the fair market value of Pyramid common stock upon receipt, which may be higher or lower than the market price
of Pyramid common stock on the date the merger was announced, on the date that this proxy statement/prospectus is mailed to
Yuma’s stockholders, or on the date of the special meeting of Yuma stockholders.
Treatment of Yuma Restricted Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Units
Each restricted stock unit issued by Yuma under any stock option, purchase or award plan, program or arrangement and
outstanding at the time of the merger shall be assumed by Pyramid, multiplied by the number of shares of Pyramid common stock
to be received for each share of Yuma common stock in the merger and converted into the number of Pyramid restricted stock
units described under “The Merger—Treatment of Yuma Restricted Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Units.” Each outstanding
Yuma restricted share granted under any Yuma stock plan and which will not vest upon consummation of the merger, will be
assumed by Pyramid, multiplied by the number of shares of Pyramid common stock to be received for each share of Yuma
common stock in the merger and converted into Pyramid restricted shares. Any Yuma restricted shares that have vested or vest
upon the closing of the merger shall be deemed outstanding and shall be entitled to their pro rata share of the merger
consideration discussed below under “Ownership of Pyramid After the Merger” beginning on page [—].
Treatment of Pyramid Options and Pyramid Restricted Stock Awards
Options granted by Pyramid under the Pyramid stock option plan will remain outstanding and continue to represent rights to
acquire shares of Pyramid common stock on the terms and conditions presently governing the stock options. Restricted stock
granted by Pyramid under the Pyramid stock option plan will vest upon the closing of the merger.
Ownership of Pyramid After the Merger
Pyramid will issue 66,336,701 shares of Pyramid common stock to former Yuma stockholders pursuant to the merger.
Immediately following the completion of the merger, Pyramid expects to have approximately 71,224,786 shares of its common
stock outstanding. Yuma stockholders are therefore expected to hold approximately 93% of Pyramid’s common stock outstanding
immediately after the merger. Consequently, Pyramid stockholders, as a general matter, will have less influence over the
management and policies of Pyramid than they currently exercise.
Directors and Executive Officers of Pyramid After the Merger
The directors and executive officers of Pyramid prior to the merger will resign as directors and executive officers of Pyramid as
part of the closing of the merger. Information concerning the six board nominees and the officers expected to be appointed to
serve Pyramid upon closing of the merger is set forth in detail under “Management of Pyramid After Consummation of the Merger”
beginning on page [—].
Effective Time and Completion of the Merger
Pyramid and Yuma hope to complete the merger as soon as reasonably practicable and expect the closing of the merger to occur
in the third quarter of 2014. However, the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of other conditions, and it is possible that
factors outside the control of Pyramid and Yuma could result in the merger being completed at an earlier time, a later time or not
at all. If the merger has not been completed on or before December 31, 2014, either Pyramid or Yuma may terminate the merger
agreement unless the failure to complete the merger by that date is due to the failure of the party seeking to terminate the merger
agreement to fulfill any material obligations under the merger agreement or a material breach of the merger agreement by such
party.
Completion of the Merger is Subject to Certain Conditions
A number of conditions must be satisfied or waived, where legally permissible, before the merger can be consummated. These
include, among others:
10
·the approval by the Pyramid stockholders of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals;
·the approval and adoption by Pyramid stockholders of the merger agreement;
·the approval and adoption of the merger agreement by Yuma stockholders;
the effectiveness of the Form S-4 registration statement, of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part, and the absence of a
·
stop order suspending the effectiveness of the Form S-4 registration statement or proceedings for such purpose pending before
or threatened by the SEC;
the issuance of shares of Pyramid common stock shall be exempt from registration, or shall have been registered or qualified,
·
under state securities laws;
the approval for listing on the NYSE MKT of the shares of Pyramid common stock to be issued pursuant to the merger
·
agreement, subject to official notice of issuance;
the board of directors of Yuma shall have a good faith belief that the merger will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of
·
the Code (which is a condition to the merger and such belief will be based on the tax opinion of TroyGould PC discussed under
“Material Federal U.S. Tax Consequences” beginning on page [—]);
no governmental entity having jurisdiction over any party shall have enacted, issued, promulgated, enforced or entered any
·
order, whether temporary, preliminary or permanent, that makes illegal, enjoins or otherwise prohibits consummation of the
merger or the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
the board of directors of Pyramid shall have received an opinion from ROTH to the effect that, as of the date of the original
·
merger agreement and based upon and subject to the qualifications and assumptions set forth therein, the exchange ratio of the
merger is fair, from a financial point of view, to Pyramid and its stockholders;
the accuracy of the representations and warranties of Pyramid and Yuma in the merger agreement, subject to certain materiality
·
thresholds;
the performance in all material respects by each of Pyramid and Yuma of its respective covenants required to be performed by it
·
under the merger agreement at or prior to the closing date;
receipt of certificates by executive officers of each of Pyramid and Yuma to the effect that the conditions described in the
·
preceding two bullet points have been satisfied;
·Pyramid and Yuma shall each have obtained any consents, approvals and waivers to the merger required of any third party;
there not having occurred a material adverse effect on Pyramid or Yuma since the date of the merger agreement, the effects of
·
which are continuing; and
dissenting shares, if any, shall constitute less than 1% of the issued and outstanding common stock of Yuma and less than 5% of
·
the issued and outstanding shares of its Series A and its Series B preferred stock.
Neither Pyramid nor Yuma can give any assurance as to when or if all of the conditions to the consummation of the merger will
be satisfied or waived or that the merger will occur.
It is a condition to Yuma’s obligations to complete the merger that the Yuma board of directors has a good faith belief that the
merger will qualify as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. This condition may be waived by
Yuma, and in such event Yuma will undertake to recirculate and re-solicit its stockholders if the condition is waived and the
change in tax consequences is material.
Termination of the Merger Agreement; Fees Payable
In general, the merger agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the effective time of the merger in the following ways,
subject to certain exceptions discussed in “The Merger Agreement – Termination of the Merger Agreement”:
11
·by mutual written agreement of Pyramid and Yuma;
·by either Pyramid or Yuma:
if the merger is not completed on or before December 31, 2014, unless the failure of the closing to occur by such date is due to
·
the failure of the party seeking to terminate the merger agreement to fulfill any material obligation under the merger agreement or
a material breach of the merger agreement by such party;
if any court or other governmental entity shall have issued a statute, rule, order, decree or regulation or taken any other action
·
permanently restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the consummation of the merger or making the merger illegal;
·if the Yuma stockholders fail to approve and adopt the merger agreement by the requisite vote;
if there has been a material breach of any of the representations, warranties or covenants set forth in the merger agreement on
the part of any of the other parties, which breach has not been cured prior to the earlier of 10 days (with regard to representations
·
and warranties) or 20 days (with regard to covenants) following receipt by the breaching party of written notice of such breach
from the terminating party or December 31, 2014 (provided that the terminating party is not then in material breach of any
representation, warranty, covenant or other agreement contained in the merger agreement); or
·if the Pyramid stockholders fail to approve and adopt the merger agreement.
by Yuma if, notwithstanding the existence of the voting agreement with the members of the board of directors of Yuma, prior to
receipt of the Yuma stockholders’ approval, Yuma receives a superior offer (as defined below), resolves to accept such superior
·
offer, complies with the termination fee payment obligations and gives Pyramid at least four business days’ prior written notice of
its intention to terminate;
by Yuma, if the board of directors of Pyramid shall have failed to recommend, or shall have withdrawn, modified or amended in a
manner adverse to Yuma in any material respect its previous board recommendation, or shall have resolved to do any of the
·
foregoing, or shall have recommended another acquisition proposal defined below or if the board of directors of Pyramid shall
have resolved to accept a superior offer;
by Pyramid, if, notwithstanding the existence of the voting agreement with Michael D. Herman, Chairman, and Interim President
and Chief Executive Officer of Pyramid, prior to receipt of the Pyramid stockholders’ approval, Pyramid receives a superior offer,
·
resolves to accept such superior offer, complies with the termination fee payment obligations and gives Yuma at least four
business days’ prior written notice of its intention to terminate;
by Pyramid, if the board of directors of Yuma shall have failed to recommend, or shall have withdrawn, modified or amended in a
manner adverse to Pyramid in any material respect its previous Yuma board recommendation, or shall have resolved to do any
·
of the foregoing, or shall have recommended another acquisition proposal or if the board of directors of Yuma shall have
resolved to accept a superior offer;
·by Pyramid, if the stockholders of Yuma fail to approve the merger; or
by Yuma, if the stockholders of Pyramid fail to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the proposals related to the
·
restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid at the Pyramid stockholders’ meeting (including any adjournment or postponement
thereof).
For purposes of these termination provisions, the term “acquisition proposal” means any offer or proposal, whether written or oral,
from any person or group (as defined in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) other than Pyramid or Yuma or any affiliates
thereof (each, a “third party”) to acquire beneficial ownership of (a) 15% or more of any class of the equity securities of such party
or (b) 15% or more of the fair market value of the assets of such party. The term “superior offer” means an unsolicited bona fide
written offer by a third party to enter into (a) a merger, consolidation, business combination or other similar transaction as a result
of which either (A) the stockholders of a party to the merger agreement prior to such transaction in the aggregate cease to own at
least 50% of the voting securities of the entity surviving or resulting from such transaction (B) in which a person or group acquires
beneficial ownership of securities representing 50% or more of the voting power of the party’s capital stock or (b) a sale, lease or
other disposition of at least 50% of the assets of the party, taken as a whole, that: (A) was not obtained or made as a direct or
indirect result of a breach of (or in violation of) the merger agreement; and (B) is on terms and conditions that the board of
directors of Pyramid or Yuma, as applicable, determines, in its reasonable, good faith judgment, after obtaining and taking into
account such matters that its board of directors deems relevant following consultation with its outside legal counsel and financial
advisor is reasonably likely to be more favorable, from a financial point of view, to Pyramid’s stockholders or Yuma’s
stockholders, as applicable, than the merger and the other transactions and is reasonably capable of consummation.
12
For more information regarding the rights of Pyramid and Yuma to terminate the merger agreement, see “The Merger Agreement
—Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on page [—].
Except for the termination fee set forth in the merger agreement and as described below, all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated therein shall be paid by the party incurring such costs
or expenses.
Under the merger agreement, Yuma may be required to pay to Pyramid or Pyramid may be required to pay Yuma a termination
fee of $1.0 million if the merger agreement is terminated under certain circumstances. For more information regarding termination
fees, see “The Merger Agreement—Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on page [—].
Payment of Termination Fee by Yuma. Yuma shall pay Pyramid a cash termination fee of $1.0 million (the “Yuma Termination
Fee”) in the event that (i) Yuma terminates the merger agreement because it accepts a superior offer; (ii) Pyramid terminates the
merger agreement as a result of a breach of a covenant by Yuma or because Yuma changes or fails to make its recommendation
of the merger; or (iii) Pyramid terminates the merger agreement because Yuma stockholders fail to approve the merger; provided
that in this instance (A) after the date of the merger agreement and prior to the date Yuma solicits the approval of Yuma’s
stockholders, an acquisition proposal has been publicly announced and not withdrawn or abandoned at the time of termination,
and (B) within one year after such termination, Yuma enters into a definitive agreement with respect to or consummates such
acquisition proposal.
Payment of Termination Fee by Pyramid. Pyramid shall pay Yuma a cash termination fee of $1.0 million (the “Pyramid
Termination Fee”) in the event that (i) Pyramid terminates the merger agreement because it accepts a superior offer; (ii) Yuma
terminates the merger agreement as a result of a breach of a covenant by Pyramid; or (iii) Yuma terminates the merger
agreement because Pyramid’s stockholders fail to approve the issuance of stock necessary to effect the merger; provided that in
this instance (A) after the date of the merger agreement and prior to the Pyramid special meeting, an acquisition proposal has
been publicly announced and not withdrawn or abandoned at the time of termination, and (B) within one year after such
termination, Pyramid enters into a definitive agreement with respect to or consummates such acquisition proposal.
We May Amend the Terms of the Merger and Waive Rights Under the Merger Agreement
Subject to compliance with applicable law, Pyramid and Yuma may amend the merger agreement at any time before or after
approval and adoption of the merger agreement by Pyramid and Yuma stockholders. However, after such approval and adoption
there may not be, without further approval of Pyramid and Yuma stockholders, any amendment of the merger agreement that
alters or changes, in a way that adversely affects the holders of any shares of Pyramid or Yuma capital stock or alters or changes
the merger consideration to be received by the Yuma stockholders in the merger.
At any time prior to the effective time of the merger, Pyramid and Yuma may, to the extent legally allowed:
·extend the time for the performance of any of the obligations or other acts of the other parties under the merger agreement;
·waive any inaccuracies in the other parties’ representations and warranties; and
·waive the other parties’ compliance with any of its agreements or conditions contained in the merger agreement.
Any such waiver or extension is subject to certain conditions. See “The Merger Agreement—Amendment of the Merger
Agreement.”
Regulatory Filings and Approvals Required to Complete the Merger
We are not aware of any material governmental or regulatory approvals required for the completion of the merger and compliance
with the applicable corporate law of the States of California and Delaware.
13
The Special Meetings and Voting
(Pages [—])
Pyramid Special Meeting of Stockholders
The special meeting of the stockholders of Pyramid will be for the following purposes:
1.To consider and vote upon a proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement, as it may be amended from time to time.
2.To consider and vote upon the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid.
3.To approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan.
4.
To consider and vote on any proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting
to a later date or dates, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals listed above.
Pyramid does not expect to transact any other business at the special meeting. Pyramid’s board of directors has fixed the close of
business on [-], 2014 as the record date for determining those Pyramid stockholders entitled to vote at the special meeting and
any adjournment or postponement thereof. Accordingly, only stockholders of record at the close of business on that date are
entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the special meeting. A complete list of the Pyramid stockholders will be available for
examination at the offices of Pyramid in Bakersfield, California during ordinary business hours for a period of 10 days prior to the
special meeting.
The approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the approval of the proposals related to the Pyramid restated articles of
incorporation each require the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the shares of Pyramid common stock issued
and outstanding and entitled to vote at the Pyramid special meeting. The affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of
the shares of Pyramid common stock represented in person or by proxy at the special meeting and voting on each such proposal,
provided that such shares voting affirmatively must also constitute a majority of the required quorum for the meeting, is required to
approve the proposal to approve and adopt the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan and the proposal to adjourn the Pyramid
special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals listed above.
The board of directors of Pyramid recommends that Pyramid stockholders vote “FOR” each of the proposals to be
voted on at the special meeting.
Yuma Special Meeting of Stockholders
The special meeting of the stockholders of Yuma will be for the following purposes:
1.
To consider and vote on the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement, as it may be amended from time to time,
and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement; and
2.
To consider and vote on the proposal to adjourn the Yuma special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional
proxies if there are not sufficient votes to approve the foregoing proposal regarding the merger.
Yuma’s board of directors has fixed the close of business on [-], 2014 as the record date for determining the holders of shares of
Yuma common stock and preferred stock entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Yuma special meeting and any
adjournments or postponements thereof. Each holder of shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock outstanding on the
record date will be entitled to one vote for each share held of record upon each matter properly submitted at the Yuma special
meeting and at any adjournment or postponement thereof. In order for Yuma to satisfy its quorum requirements, the holders of at
least a majority of the total number of outstanding shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock entitled to vote at the
meeting must be present.
The approval of the merger agreement requires the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the shares of Yuma
common stock issued and outstanding and entitled to vote at the Yuma special meeting. Approval of the merger agreement also
requires the affirmative vote of the holders of two-thirds or 66⅔% of Yuma’s Series A and Series B preferred stock issued and
outstanding and voting together separately as a class. The affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast by holders of Yuma
common stock at the Yuma special meeting is required to approve the proposal to adjourn the Yuma special meeting, if
necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies if there are insufficient votes at the time of the Yuma special meeting to
approve and adopt the merger agreement.
14
Voting Agreements
Yuma has entered into an amended and restated voting agreement with Michael D. Herman, Chairman, Interim President and
Chief Executive Officer of Pyramid, who owns approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock as of the
record date of the Pyramid special meeting of stockholders. The voting agreement provides, among other things, that Michael D.
Herman will vote in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the proposals related to the Pyramid
restated articles of incorporation. Mr. Herman also agreed not to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of his shares of Pyramid
common stock, subject to certain exceptions provided in the voting agreement.
Certain of Yuma’s officers and directors (and certain of their affiliates) who own in the aggregate approximately [-]% of the
outstanding shares of Yuma common stock, approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma Series A preferred stock, and
approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock as of the record date of the Yuma special meeting
of stockholders entered into an amended and restated voting agreement with Pyramid, in which each stockholder agreed to vote
in favor of the merger. Each stockholder also agreed not to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of that stockholder’s shares of
Yuma common stock and preferred stock, subject to certain exceptions provided in the voting agreement.
For more information regarding these voting agreements, see “Voting Agreements” on page [—].
Matters to be Considered in Deciding How to Vote
(Pages [—])
Recommendation of the Pyramid Board of Directors and Its Reasons for the Merger
After careful consideration, the Pyramid board of directors approved the merger agreement on February 4, 2014. The Pyramid
board of directors recommends that Pyramid stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement; “FOR the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid; “FOR” the proposal to
approve and adopt the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan; and “FOR” any proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board
of directors to adjourn the special meeting. Because of their mutual dependence, if the proposal to approve and adopt the
merger agreement or the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid are not all approved, then none will
be deemed to have been approved.
For the factors considered by Pyramid’s board of directors in reaching its decision to approve these matters as well as the
Pyramid board of directors’ reasons for, and certain risks related to, the merger, see “The Merger—Recommendation of
Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page [—].
Recommendation of the Yuma Board of Directors and Its Reasons for the Merger
After careful consideration, on February 4, 2014, the Yuma board of directors unanimously (i) determined that the merger is fair to
and in the best interests of Yuma and its stockholders, (ii) declared the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
thereby advisable, and (iii) approved the merger, the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. The Yuma
board of directors unanimously recommends that Yuma stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt
the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and “FOR” any adjournment
proposal.
For the factors considered by the Yuma board of directors in reaching its decision to approve the merger agreement and approve
the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, as well as the Yuma board
of directors’ reasons for, and certain risks related to, the merger, see “The Merger—Recommendation of Yuma’s Board of
Directors and Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page [—].
Fairness Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors
ROTH rendered its opinion to Pyramid’s board of directors that, as of the date of the opinion, based upon and subject to the
qualifications, limitations and assumptions stated in its opinion, the exchange ratio (meaning the number of shares of Pyramid
common stock to be issued for each share of Yuma common stock and preferred stock in the merger) is fair to Pyramid and its
stockholders, from a financial point of view.
The full text of the written opinion of ROTH, dated February 5, 2014, which sets forth assumptions made, procedures followed,
matters considered and limitations on the review undertaken in connection with the opinion, is attached as Annex D to this proxy
statement/prospectus. ROTH provided its opinion for the information and assistance of Pyramid’s board of directors in connection
with its consideration of the merger. ROTH’s opinion is not a recommendation as to how any holder of Pyramid’s common stock
should vote with respect to the issuance of Pyramid common stock in the merger or any other matter.
15
Pursuant to a letter agreement dated December 20, 2013, Pyramid engaged ROTH to act as its financial advisor in connection
with the contemplated merger transaction. As compensation for its services in connection with the merger, Pyramid paid ROTH
$150,000 upon the delivery of its fairness opinion. Additional compensation equal to 1.5% of the merger consideration, in no
event less than $300,000 nor more than $450,000, will be payable on completion of the merger. In addition, Pyramid has agreed
to reimburse ROTH for its expenses, including attorneys’ fees and disbursements, and to indemnify ROTH and related persons
against various liabilities.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger
Subject to the qualifications, limitations and assumptions described in “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences”
beginning on page [—], the following five paragraphs are the opinion of TroyGould PC regarding the material U.S. federal
income tax consequences of the merger:
the merger, that is, the merger of Merger Subsidiary with and into Yuma, will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of
·
Section 368(a) of the Code;
no gain or loss will be recognized by a U.S. holder of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock on receipt of Pyramid common
·
stock pursuant to the merger;
the aggregate tax basis of the Pyramid common stock received by each U.S. holder of Yuma common stock and/or preferred
·
stock will equal the aggregate tax basis of the Yuma stock surrendered by such holder in exchange for Pyramid common stock;
the holding period of the Pyramid common stock received by each U.S. holder will include the period during which such holder
·
held the Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock surrendered in exchange for Pyramid common stock; and
·no gain or loss will be recognized by Pyramid, Yuma or the U.S. holders of Pyramid common stock by reason of the merger.
Interests of Pyramid and Yuma Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
In considering the recommendation of the boards of directors of Pyramid and Yuma with respect to the merger, stockholders
should be aware that the executive officers and directors of Pyramid and Yuma have certain interests in the merger that may be
different from, or in addition to, the interests of Pyramid and Yuma stockholders. Pyramid’s and Yuma’s boards of directors were
aware of these interests and considered them, among other matters, when adopting resolutions to approve and adopt the merger
agreement and recommending that their respective stockholders vote to approve and adopt the merger agreement. For a
discussion of the possibly conflicting interests, see “The Merger—Interests of Yuma’s Directors and Executive Officers in the
Merger” beginning on page [—] and “The Merger—Interests of Pyramid’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger”
beginning on page [—]
Per Share Market Price and Dividend Information
The following table sets forth the closing prices per share of Pyramid common stock, as well as the implied value of the proposed
merger consideration for each share of Yuma common stock (after conversion of Yuma preferred stock to Yuma common stock),
on February 5, 2014, the last full trading day prior to the public announcement of the merger, and [-], 2014 the last full trading day
that this information could practicably be calculated prior to the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, which was calculated by
assuming that (A) 57,493 shares of Yuma common stock are issued and outstanding, (B) all issued and outstanding shares of
Yuma Series A preferred stock convert into 19,954 shares of Yuma common stock, (C) all issued and outstanding shares of
Yuma Series B preferred stock convert into 10,261 shares of Yuma common stock, and (D) no shares of Yuma common stock or
preferred stock dissent, (E) Yuma does not issue any restricted stock awards to its employees between the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus and the effective time of the merger, and (F) Pyramid issues 66,336,701 shares of its common stock in the
merger..
Pyramid
 
Common Stock
February 5, 2014 $ 5.44
[-], 2014
[-]
Implied Value Per Share of 
  
 
Yuma Common Stock
  $ 4,114.47
[-]
Because the aggregate merger consideration is fixed and will not be adjusted as a result of changes in the market price of
Pyramid common stock, the merger consideration equivalent will fluctuate with the market price of Pyramid common stock. The
merger agreement does not include a price-based termination right or provisions that would limit the impact of increases or
decreases in the market price of Pyramid common stock. You should obtain current market quotations for the Pyramid shares
from a newspaper, the Internet or your broker prior to voting on the merger agreement.
16
Neither Pyramid nor Yuma paid dividends on its common stock during the past three years and neither company has any current
intention of doing so in the foreseeable future.
Appraisal Rights
Holders of Yuma common stock and preferred stock have the right to dissent from the proposed merger and, subject to certain
conditions provided for in Section 262 of the DGCL, are entitled to receive payment of the fair value of their Yuma common stock
or preferred stock. Yuma stockholders will be bound by the terms of the merger unless they dissent by complying with all of the
requirements of the Delaware dissenters’ rights statute. See “Dissenters’ Rights of Appraisal” beginning on page [—] for a
summary of dissenters’ rights available to Yuma stockholders, which summary is not intended to be a complete statement of
applicable Delaware law and is qualified in its entirety by reference to Section 262 of the DGCL which is set forth in its entirety as
Annex E to this proxy statement/prospectus.
Pyramid stockholders do not have dissenter’s or appraisal rights in connection with the merger.
Comparison of the Rights of Stockholders of Yuma Energy, Inc. and Pyramid Oil Company
Holders of Yuma common stock and preferred stock hold stock in a Delaware corporation and will have different rights as
stockholders of Pyramid, a California corporation, due to the different laws governing these companies. The differences are
described in more detail under “Significant Differences Between the Corporation Laws of California and Delaware” beginning on
page 147.
17
Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Pyramid
Set forth below are selected data derived from Pyramid’s audited financial statements as of and for the years ended
December 31, 2009 through 2013 and Pyramid’s unaudited financial statements as of and for the three months ended March 31,
2014 and 2013. This information should be read together with Pyramid’s financial statements and related notes and
management’s discussion and analysis of operations and financial condition of Pyramid contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus under the captions “Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid” and “Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Operations and Financial Condition of Pyramid,” respectively.
2013
2013
2011
2012
Three Months Ended March 31,  Year Ended December 31,
 2014
 (unaudited)
 (In thousands, except per share data)
  
 $ 1,044
  
(224
(159
  
  
 
 $ (0.03
$5,201   $4,995   $5,690   $4,836   $3,312  
    (77
    (537 )
    (189 )
    157
     
     
 
  $0.03
  $(0.04 )
1,161     53
    1,095     246
     
  $0.23
$ 1,008
)     164
)     113
     
)   $ 0.02
)   975
    778
     
  $0.17
$0.05
2009
2010
4,688
4,688
4,688     4,686     4,684     4,678     4,678
-
$ 4,556
   2,142
   13,206
  
   10,821
   13,206
  
  
  
 $ 2.31
   4,688
-
$ 3,828
      2,137
      12,789
     
      10,771
      12,789
     
     
     
    $ 2.30
      4,688
-
$4,404   $3,834   $2,763   $1,536   $1,439  
    2,141     2,136     2,128     3,059     3,344  
    14,180    12,761    11,882    10,630    10,142 
    -
 
    10,980    10,658    9,881     8,742     8,373  
    14,180    12,761    11,882    10,630    10,142 
 
     
 
     
     
 
  $2.34
 
    4,688     4,688     4,684     4,678     4,678
$2.27
$2.11
$1.87
$1.79
55
40
21
Statement of Operations Data
Total Revenue
Income (Loss) from Operations
Net Income (Loss)
Net Income (Loss) per Share
Basic and Diluted
Weighted Average Number of Basic Shares
Outstanding
 
Balance Sheet Data
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Short-term Investments
Total Assets
Notes Payable
Stockholders’ Equity
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
 
Per Share Data
Net Book Value per
Common Share
Common Shares Outstanding
18
Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Yuma
Set forth below are selected data derived from Yuma’s audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended
December 31, 2010 through 2013, Yuma’s unaudited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December
31, 2009, and Yuma’s unaudited consolidated financial statements as of and for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and
2013. This information should be read together with Yuma’s consolidated financial statements and related notes and
management’s discussion and analysis of operations and financial condition of Yuma contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus under “Historical Consolidated Financial Statements of Yuma” and “Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Operations and Financial Condition of Yuma,” respectively.
2013
2010
2012
2013
Three Months Ended March 31,  Year Ended December 31,
  2011
 2014
 (unaudited)
   
 (In thousands, except outstanding shares and per share data)
  
 $ 10,355
   241
   10,597
  
  
   321
   3,659
   2
$28,076   $21,282   $18,954  $16,847  $ 27,169
    1,067     602
    1,344
    29,143     21,884     19,431    17,375    28,513
     
     
     
     
    1,234     891
    4,153     5,904     11,541
    9,316     5,099     4,792     6,039     6,508
    2,522     434
2009
 
  (unaudited)
$ 4,870
      127
      4,997
     
     
      2336
      1,348
      51
1,340     -
477
528
-
-
-
27
  
   13,075
48
142
Revenues and other operating income:
Sales of natural gas and crude
Other revenue
Total revenues
 
Expenses:
 Marketing cost of sales
 Lease operating
 Re-engineering and workovers
 General and administrative – stock based
compensation
 General and administrative – other
   3,150
 Depreciation, depletion and amortization    5,726
 Asset retirement obligation accretion
expense
 (Gain) loss on asset disposal
 Ceiling test write-down
 Bad debt expense
 Recovery of bad debts
Total expenses
 
Other income (expense):
 Change in fair value of preferred stock
derivative liability - Series A in 2011-2013,
Series B in 2013 and 2012
 Interest expense
 Interest income
 Bank mandated derivative instruments
novation cost
 Other, net
Total other income (expense)
 
Net loss from continuing operations before
taxes
Income tax expense (benefit)
Net loss from continuing operations
Discontinued operations – pipeline
segment
Net income (loss)
Less net income attributable to non-
controlling interest
Net loss attributable to Yuma Energy, Inc.
 
Preferred stock, Series A and Series B
Accretion
Dividends paid in cash
Dividends paid in kind
Net loss available to common stockholders  $ (577
1,334
(849
(295
(577
1
1,472
282
(139
(295
(1,144
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Earnings (loss) per common share:
-
452
-
-
-
-
1,252
      1,662
5,605     4,340     3,485     4,030     4,157
    12,077     5,074     2,866     3,740     7,605
64
668
265
240
203
305
-
     
     
-
      1
     
-
      4,612
138
    -
    238
)   -
)   10
    -
    210
)   (69
(19
    -
    194
    (3
    32,046     16,254     17,252    20,078    35,909
2
    5,639
    152
    -
4
    -
    158
    -
2,004
(26,259)   (17,099)   (5,604 )   -
-
(165
)    
      2
-
)   (568
    7
)   (210
    8
)   (597 )   (860 )   (747
    14
18
53
(175
)   -
-
-
-
(2
1,838
)   -
)   (72
    181
    (27,067)   (17,301)   (6,021 )   (169 )   (548
166
638
)     2,223
(29,970)   (11,671)   (3,841 )   (2,873 )   (7,944
)     115
)     2,108
3,080     3,098     854
    (797 )   (1,896
    (33,050)   (14,769)   (4,695 )   (2,076 )   (6,048
-
-
-
(18
)   3,973     4,013
)     2,108
(33,050)   (14,769)   (4,715 )   1,897     (2,036
-
-
-
2
6
6
)     1,836
(33,050)   (14,769)   (4,713 )   1,891     (2,042
272
1,102     964
-
-
-
-
-
)   $ 1,836
1,363     438
146
    5,412     -
  $(39,710) $(17,096) $(5,153 ) $1,891   $ (2,042
-
    -
-
    -
-
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
As of and for the Year Ended December 31,
As of and for the Three Months
 
Ended March 31,
 2014
 (unaudited)
 (In thousands, except outstanding shares and per share data)
2011
2013
2012
2013
2010
2009
 
  (unaudited)
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average shares outstanding:  
Basic
Diluted
 
Statement of Cash Flow Data
Cash provided by (used in)
Operating activities
Investing activities
Financing activities
 
Balance Sheet Data
Total assets
Long-term debt
Stockholders’ equity
$ (10.64
 $ (10.64
54,000
   54,000
  
  
  
 $ 4,930
   (1,906
   (853
  
  
 $ 111,760
   30,565
   (48,501
)  $ 34.00
)  $ 26.67
    
     54,000
     79,036
    
    
    
   $ 5,676
)    (5,160
)    725
    
    
   $ 91,406
     19,050
)    (6,651
) $(95
) $(95
) $(317
) $(317
) $1,657   $ (1,790
) $1,657   $ (1,790
$(732
  $(732
     
    54,236     54,000     54,000     1,141     1,141
    54,236     54,000     54,000     1,141     1,141
     
     
     
  $13,008   $4,897   $2,735   $7,845   $ 5,054
)   (25,346 )   (30,410)   (10,677)   4,587     (6,473
)   (9,384 )   7,051
    11,247     29,877     (43
     
     
     
     
  $111,632  $87,015   $57,118   $56,954  $ 66,206
    31,215     17,875     2,975     11,000    17,650
)   (47,888 )   (8,434 )   8,566     14,575    16,444
)
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
19
Selected Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
The merger will be accounted for under the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification Topic
805 which governs transactions that are considered to be reverse acquisitions for accounting purposes. In the merger, Pyramid is
the acquiror for legal purposes, but for accounting purposes, Yuma will be deemed to be the acquiror and Pyramid the acquiree.
The following table shows information about Yuma’s financial condition and results of operations, including per share data, on a
pro forma basis after giving effect to the merger of Pyramid and Yuma. We refer to this information in this proxy
statement/prospectus as pro forma financial information. The table sets forth information relating to the merger as if it had become
effective on March 31, 2014 with respect to balance sheet data (using currently available fair value information for Pyramid) and
January 1, 2013, with respect to statement of operations data for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and for the year ended
December 31, 2013. This unaudited pro forma financial information assumes that the merger will be accounted for using the
purchase method of accounting and represents a current estimate based on available information of pro forma results of
operations. The unaudited pro forma balance sheet data includes adjustments to record the assets and liabilities of Pyramid at
their estimated fair values as of the date the merger is effective, and is subject to further adjustment as additional information
becomes available and as additional analyses are performed. As part of the merger, Yuma’s outstanding preferred stock will be
converted to common stock of the combined company and Yuma’s derivative liability will be reclassified to equity of the
combined company; and these adjustments have been made to reflect the conversion of Yuma’s preferred stock to common
stock.
The merger agreement provides that Pyramid issue approximately 66,336,701 shares of common stock as consideration to
Yuma stockholders.
This table should be read together with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the historical financial statements, including the notes
thereto, of Pyramid and Yuma appearing elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus and the more detailed unaudited pro
forma condensed combined financial information, including the notes thereto, appearing under “Unaudited Pro Forma
Condensed Combined Financial Information” beginning on page [•].
The unaudited pro forma financial information, while helpful in illustrating the financial characteristics of the combined company
using certain assumptions, does not reflect the impact of possible revenue enhancements, expense efficiencies and asset
dispositions, among other factors that may result as a consequence of the merger and, accordingly, does not attempt to predict or
suggest future results. It also does not necessarily reflect what the historical results of the combination would have been had they
occurred as of the beginning of such periods.
As of and for the 
As of and for the 
  
Three Months Ended 
 
Year Ended 
March 31, 2014
December 31, 2013
 (In thousands, except per share data)
 
  
Pro Forma Statement of Operations Data
Operating revenues
 $ 11,641
Net income (loss) available to common stockholders $ (2,122
Net income (loss) per common share:
Basic
Diluted
 
Pro Forma Balance Sheet Data
Total assets
Long-term debt
Stockholders’ equity
$ 33,534
) $ (6,992
   
) $ (0.10
) $ (0.10
$ (0.03
 $ (0.03
  
  
 $ 146,075
 $ 30,565
 $ 63,346
)
 
)
)
20
Summary Pro Forma Combined Oil, Natural Gas and Natural Gas Liquids Reserve and Production Data
The following table sets forth information with respect to the historical and pro forma combined estimated oil, natural gas and
natural gas liquids, or NGLs, reserves as of December 31, 2013 of Yuma and Pyramid. This pro forma information gives effect to
the merger as if it occurred on December 31, 2013. The Yuma and Pyramid reserve data presented below was derived from
independent engineering reports of each company.  Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”) prepared the Yuma reserve
estimates as of December 31, 2013, and MHA Petroleum Consultants, Inc. (“MHA”) prepared the Pyramid reserve estimates as of
December 31, 2013. Future exploration, exploitation and development expenditures, as well as future commodity prices and
service costs, will affect the reserve volumes attributable to the acquired properties. The reserve estimates shown below were
determined using a 12-month average price for oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids for the year ended December 31, 2013.
Estimated Proved Reserves:
Oil (MBbls)
NGL (MBbls)
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Total (Mboe)(1)
Estimated Proved Developed Reserves:
Oil (MBbls)
NGL (MBbls)
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Total (Mboe)(1)
Estimated Proved Undeveloped Reserves:    
Oil (MBbls)
NGL (MBbls)
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Total (Mboe)(1)
10,008
   2,275
   28,056
   16,958
(1)Assumes a ratio of 6 Mcf of natural gas per barrel of oil.
Pyramid 
Historical
Merger Pro
Forma Combined
Estimated Quantities of Reserves as of December 31, 2013 
Yuma 
 
Historical
    
   11,615
   2,767
   38,372
   20,777
    
   1,607
   493
   10,317
   3,819
450
    -
    14
    452
     
    450
    -
    14
    452
     
    -
    -
    -
    -
12,065
    2,767
    38,386
    21,229
     
    2,057
    493
    10,331
    4,261
     
    10,008
    2,275
    28,056
    16,958
The following table sets forth summary historical and pro forma combined oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids production
information for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and for the year ended December 31, 2013. This pro forma information
gives effect to the merger as if it occurred on January 1, 2014 and January 1, 2013 for the three and twelve month periods,
respectively. The historical Pyramid and Yuma oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids production data presented below is
derived from the independent engineering reports of each company.
Yuma 
 
Historical
Pyramid
  
Historical
Three Months Ended March 31, 2014  Year Ended December 31, 2013  
Merger Pro
Forma
  
Combined
   184,349    43,000    227,349  
   51,875
   51,875
 
   1,580,468   6,000
   1,586,468  
   499,635    44,000    543,635
Merger
Pro Forma
  
Combined
   73,235
   31,326
   855,889
   247,209
Yuma 
  
Historical
Pyramid
  
Historical
62,887
  31,326
10,348
Oil (Bbls)
NGL (Bbls)
   -
Natural Gas (Mcf)  855,889    -
Total (Boe)(1)
236,861    10,348
-
(1)Assumes a ratio of 6 Mcf of natural gas per barrel of oil.
21
Comparative Per Share Information
The following table sets forth certain historical net income (loss) per share of Yuma and Pyramid and per share book value
information on an unaudited pro forma combined basis after giving effect to the merger under the reverse acquisition purchase
method of accounting and on a pro forma basis.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined per share information does not purport to represent what the results of operations
or financial position of Yuma would actually have been had the merger occurred at the beginning of the periods shown or to
project Yuma’s results of operations or financial position for any future period or date. Such pro forma information is derived from,
and should be read in conjunction with, the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information and accompanying
notes included in this proxy statement/prospectus as described under “Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial
Information” beginning on page [—].
The historical per share information is derived from, and should be read in conjunction with, the financial statements for Pyramid,
and the financial statements for Yuma, both included elsewhere herein. Neither Yuma nor Pyramid declared any cash dividends
related to their respective common stock during the periods presented.
Yuma Historical Per Common Share Data:
Basic
Diluted
Book value (a)
Pyramid Historical Per Common Share Data:
Basic
Diluted
Book value (a)
Merger Pro Forma Combined Per Common Share Data:
As of and for the
As of and for the 
  
Three Months Ended 
 
Year Ended 
March 31, 2014
December 31, 2013
   
  
) $
 $ (10.64
) $
 $ (10.64
 $ (894
) $
   
  
) $
 $ (0.03
) $
 $ (0.03
 $ 2.31
  $
(732
(732
(883
 
0.03
0.03
2.34
)
)
)
Basic (b)
Diluted (b)
Book value (c)
$ (0.03
 $ (0.03
 $ 0.90
) $
) $
  $
(0.10
(0.10
0.92
)
)
(a)
Computed by dividing stockholders’ equity by the weighted average number of shares of common stock at the end of such
period plus the dilutive effect of interests in securities (such as outstanding options and Yuma’s preferred stock on an as
converted basis).
(b)Based on the pro forma net income which gives effect to the merger under the reverse acquisition method of accounting.
(c)
Computed by dividing stockholders’ equity by the number of weighted average outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock
at the end of such period, adjusted to include the estimated number of shares of Pyramid common stock to be issued in the
merger plus the dilutive effect of interests in securities (such as outstanding options) at the end of such period.
22
Comparative Per Share Market Price and Dividend Information
Pyramid common stock is listed for trading on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “PDO.” The following table sets forth, for the
periods indicated, the high and low sale prices per share of Pyramid common stock on the NYSE MKT. There is no trading
market in Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock.
For current price information, you should consult publicly available sources. Yuma has neither declared nor paid any cash
dividends on its common stock in the past two years. Pyramid has neither declared nor paid any cash dividends on its common
stock during the past two years, and does not anticipate declaring any dividends on its common stock in the foreseeable future.
Pyramid Common Stock
High   Low  
 
 
Quarter Ended    
2012
 
    
 $6.23  $3.82 
March 31
June 30
   5.20    4.05 
September 30    4.85    4.07 
December 31    4.56    3.75
2013
 $4.48  $4.04 
March 31
June 30
   4.33    3.90 
September 30   4.74    4.15 
December 31    5.77    4.61
2014
    
 
March 31
 $7.15  $4.86 
June 30
 $6.30  $5.03 
September 30 (through August 6, 2014) $5.92  $5.30
The following table sets forth the closing prices per share of Pyramid common stock, as well as the implied value of the proposed
merger consideration for each share of Yuma common stock (after conversion of Yuma preferred stock to Yuma common stock),
on February 5, 2014, the last full trading day prior to the public announcement of the merger, and [-], 2014 the last full trading day
that this information could practicably be calculated prior to the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, which was calculated by
assuming that (A) 57,493 shares of Yuma common stock are issued and outstanding, (B) all issued and outstanding shares of
Yuma Series A preferred stock convert into 19,954 shares of Yuma common stock, (C) all issued and outstanding shares of
Yuma Series B preferred stock convert into 10,261 shares of Yuma common stock, and (D) no shares of Yuma common stock or
preferred stock dissent, (E) Yuma does not issue any restricted stock awards to its employees between the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus and the effective time of the merger, and (F) Pyramid issues 66,336,701 shares of its common stock in the
merger.
Pyramid
 
Common Stock
February 5, 2014 $ 5.44
[-], 2014
[-]
Implied Value Per Share of
  
 
Yuma Common Stock
  $ 4,114.47
[-]
23
RISK FACTORS
In addition to the other information contained in this proxy statement/prospectus, including the matters addressed in “Cautionary
Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements,” you should carefully consider the following risk factors before deciding
how to vote. You should also read and consider the risk factors associated with each of the businesses of Pyramid and Yuma
because these risk factors may affect the operations and financial results of the combined company.
Risks Relating to the Merger
Because all of the merger consideration to be received by Yuma stockholders is a fixed amount of Pyramid common
stock and the market price of shares of Pyramid common stock will fluctuate, Yuma stockholders cannot be sure of the
aggregate value of the merger consideration they will receive.
Upon the effective time of the merger, each share of Yuma common stock and preferred stock will be converted into the right to
receive merger consideration consisting of a pro rata share of an aggregate of 66,336,701 shares of Pyramid common stock
pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement. Because the aggregate number of shares of Pyramid common stock is fixed and
will not be adjusted as a result of changes in the market price of Pyramid common stock, the value of the merger consideration
Yuma stockholders will receive will fluctuate with the market price of Pyramid common stock. The merger agreement does not
include a price-based termination right or provisions that would limit the impact of increases or decreases in the market price of
Pyramid common stock or adjust the portion of the merger consideration to be paid in Pyramid common stock as a result of any
change in the market price of shares of Pyramid common stock between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the date
that Yuma stockholders receive shares of Pyramid common stock in exchange for their shares of Yuma common stock or
preferred stock. The market price of Pyramid common stock will likely be different, and may be lower, on the date Yuma
stockholders receive their shares of Pyramid common stock than the market price of shares of Pyramid common stock as of the
date of this proxy statement/prospectus.
During the 12-month period ended on June 30, 2014, shares of Pyramid common stock traded in a range from a low of $4.03 to a
high of $7.15 and ended that period at $5.78 per share. See “Price Range of Common Stock and Dividends” beginning on page
[—] for more detailed share price information. Stock price changes may result from a variety of factors, including general market
and economic conditions, changes in oil and natural gas prices, changes in Pyramid’s business, operations and prospects, and
regulatory considerations. Many of these factors are beyond Pyramid’s control. If the market price of Pyramid common stock
declines after Yuma stockholders vote, they may receive less value than they expected when they voted. Neither Pyramid nor
Yuma is permitted to terminate the merger agreement, adjust the merger consideration or resolicit the vote of Yuma stockholders
because of changes in the market price of Pyramid common stock.
The merger agreement limits Pyramid’s ability to pursue alternatives to the merger.
The merger agreement contains provisions that could adversely impact competing proposals to acquire Pyramid. These
provisions include the prohibition on Pyramid generally from soliciting any acquisition proposal or offer for a competing
transaction and the requirement that Pyramid pay a termination fee of approximately $1.0 million in cash if the merger agreement
is terminated in specified circumstances in connection with an alternative transaction. In addition, even if the board of directors of
Pyramid determines that a competing proposal to acquire Pyramid is superior, Pyramid may not exercise its right to terminate the
merger agreement unless it notifies Yuma of its intention to do so and gives Yuma at least four business days to propose
revisions to the terms of the merger agreement or to make another proposal in response to the competing proposal. See “The
Merger Agreement—No Solicitation” beginning on page [—].
Yuma required Pyramid to agree to these provisions as a condition to Yuma’s willingness to enter into the merger agreement.
These provisions, however, might discourage a third party that might have an interest in acquiring all or a significant part of
Pyramid from considering or proposing that acquisition, even if that party were prepared to pay consideration with a higher value
than the current proposed merger consideration. Furthermore, the termination fee may result in a potential competing acquiror
proposing to pay a lower per share price to acquire Pyramid than it might otherwise have proposed to pay.
The opinion obtained by the board of directors of Pyramid from its financial advisor will not reflect changes in
circumstances between signing the merger agreement and the completion of the merger.
The Pyramid board of directors has not requested an updated opinion as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus from
ROTH, Pyramid’s financial advisor, nor has it obtained such an update since the board is not aware of any material changes to
Pyramid, Yuma or their respective businesses, results of operations or financial positions. This opinion was necessarily based
on financial, economic, monetary, market and other conditions and circumstances as in effect on, and the information made
available to the financial advisor as of, the date of such opinion. Developments subsequent to the date of such opinion, including
changes in the operations and prospects of Yuma or Pyramid, general market and economic conditions and other factors that
may be beyond the control of Yuma and Pyramid, may affect such opinion. The opinion is included as Annex D to this proxy
statement/prospectus. For a description of the opinion that the Pyramid board of directors received from its financial advisor and a
summary of the material financial analyses ROTH provided to the Pyramid board of directors in connection with rendering such
opinion, please refer to the section entitled “The Merger—Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors”
beginning on page [—].
24
Pyramid stockholders will have a significantly reduced ownership and voting interest after the merger and will exercise
less influence over management.
Immediately after the completion of the merger, it is expected that former Pyramid stockholders, who collectively own 100% of
Pyramid, will own approximately 7% of Pyramid, based on the number of shares of Pyramid common stock outstanding as of [-],
2014.
The merger and related transactions are subject to approval by the stockholders of both Pyramid and Yuma.
In order for the merger to be completed, both Pyramid’s stockholders and Yuma’s stockholders must approve and adopt the
merger agreement, which requires the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of
Pyramid common stock and Yuma common stock, and at least two-thirds or 66⅔% of Yuma’s outstanding Series A and Series B
preferred stock voting together as a separate class.
Any delay in completing the merger may substantially reduce the benefits expected to be obtained from the merger.
The closing of the merger is conditioned on obtaining various approvals by Yuma’s and Pyramid’s respective stockholders and a
number of other conditions beyond the control of Yuma and Pyramid. These conditions may prevent or delay the merger from
being completed. Yuma and Pyramid cannot predict whether or when the conditions required to complete the merger will be
satisfied. Any delay in completing the merger may materially adversely affect the ability of the combined company to attain the
benefits that Yuma and Pyramid expect to achieve from the merger. If the merger is not completed on or before December 31,
2014, either Yuma or Pyramid may terminate the merger agreement, unless the failure to complete the merger by that date is due
to the failure of the party seeking to terminate the merger agreement to fulfill any material obligations under the merger agreement
or a material breach of the merger agreement by such party. See “The Merger Agreement —Conditions to the Completion of the
Merger” beginning on page [—].
Merger-related charges will be incurred.
Yuma and Pyramid estimate that, as a result of the merger, the combined company expects to incur merger-related cash
expenses of approximately $1.5 million, consisting of investment banking, legal and accounting fees and financial printing and
other related charges. The foregoing amount is a preliminary estimate and the actual amount may be higher or lower. Moreover,
the combined company is likely to incur additional expenses in future periods in connection with the integration of Yuma’s and
Pyramid’s businesses.
Failure to complete the merger could negatively impact the stock price and the future business and financial results of
Pyramid.
If the merger is not completed, the ongoing business of Pyramid may be adversely affected and Pyramid would be subject to a
number of risks, including the following:
Pyramid will not realize the benefits expected from the merger, including a potentially enhanced competitive and financial
·
position, and instead will be subject to all the risks it currently faces as an independent company;
·Pyramid may experience negative reactions from the financial markets and Pyramid’s customers and employees;
under the merger agreement, Pyramid may be required to pay to Yuma a termination fee of approximately $1.0 million if the
merger agreement is terminated under certain circumstances. If such termination fee is payable, the payment of this fee could
·
have material and adverse consequences to the financial condition and operations of Pyramid. See “The Merger Agreement —
Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on page [—];
the merger agreement places certain restrictions on the conduct of Pyramid’s business prior to the completion of the merger or
the termination of the merger agreement. Such restrictions, the waiver of which is subject to the consent of Yuma, may prevent
·
Pyramid from making certain acquisitions, taking certain other specified actions or otherwise pursuing business opportunities
during the pendency of the merger. See “The Merger Agreement — Conduct of Business Pending the Merger” for a description
of the restrictive covenants applicable to Pyramid beginning on page [—]; and
25
matters relating to the merger (including integration planning) may require substantial commitments of time and resources by
·
Pyramid management, which would otherwise have been devoted to other opportunities that may have been beneficial to
Pyramid as an independent company.
Risks Relating to Pyramid’s Business
Pyramid’s future performance is dependent upon its ability to continue to identify, acquire and develop additional oil
and gas properties, the failure of which could result in under use of capital and losses.
Pyramid’s future performance depends upon its ability to continue to identify, acquire and develop additional oil and gas reserves
that are economically recoverable. Pyramid’s success will depend upon Pyramid’s ability to continue to acquire working and
revenue interests in properties upon which oil and gas reserves are ultimately discovered in commercial quantities, and
Pyramid’s ability to develop additional prospects that contain proven oil and gas reserves to the point of production. The
successful acquisition and development of oil and gas properties requires an assessment of recoverable reserves, future oil and
gas prices and operating costs, potential environmental and other liabilities, and other factors. Such assessments are necessarily
inexact and their accuracy inherently uncertain.
The oil and gas industry is highly competitive, and Pyramid may not have sufficient resources to compete effectively.
The oil and gas industry is highly competitive. Pyramid competes with oil and natural gas companies and other individual
producers and operators, many of which have substantially greater financial and other resources than it has. Pyramid’s larger
competitors, by reason of their size and relative financial strength, can more easily access capital markets than Pyramid can and
may enjoy a competitive advantage in the recruitment of qualified personnel. Competitors may be able to absorb the burden of
any changes in laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which Pyramid does business and handle longer periods of reduced
prices for oil and gas more easily than it can. Pyramid’s competitors may be able to pay more for oil and gas leases and
properties and may be able to define, evaluate, bid for and purchase a greater number of leases and properties than it can.
Further, these companies may enjoy technological advantages and may be able to implement new technologies more rapidly
than Pyramid can. Pyramid’s ability to acquire additional properties in the future will depend upon its ability to conduct efficient
operations, evaluate and select suitable properties, implement advanced technologies and consummate transactions in a highly
competitive environment.
Pyramid’s exploration, development and production activities are subject to certain environmental regulations which
may affect its costs of operations.
In general, Pyramid’s exploration and production activities are subject to certain federal, state and local laws and regulations
relating to environmental quality and pollution control. Such laws and regulations increase the costs of these activities and may
prevent or delay the commencement or continuance of a given operation. Specifically, Pyramid is subject to legislation regarding
emissions into the environment, water discharges and storage and disposition of hazardous wastes. However, such laws and
regulations are frequently changed and any such changes may have material adverse effects on Pyramid’s activities. Pyramid is
unable to predict the ultimate cost of compliance with such laws and regulations. To date Pyramid has not been required to
spend any material amounts on compliance with environmental regulations. However, Pyramid may be required to do so in future
and this may affect its ability to expand or maintain its operations.
Any change to government regulation or administrative practices may have a negative impact on Pyramid’s ability to
operate and its profitability.
The business of oil and gas exploration and development is subject to substantial regulation under federal, state, local and
foreign laws relating to the exploration for, and the development, upgrading, marketing, pricing, taxation, and transportation of oil
and gas and related products and other matters. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and activities
of oil and gas exploration and development operations could have a material adverse impact on Pyramid’s business. Permits,
leases, licenses, and approvals are required from a variety of regulatory authorities at various stages of exploration and
development.
Pyramid may be unable to replace, maintain or expand its oil and gas reserves in order to prevent its future reserves and
production from declining, which would adversely affect future cash flows and income.
In general, production from oil and gas properties declines over time as reserves are depleted, with the rate of decline depending
on reservoir characteristics. Pyramid’s future oil and gas production is highly dependent upon its ability to economically find,
develop, acquire and maintain reserves in commercial quantities.
To the extent cash flow from operations is reduced, either by a decrease in prevailing prices for oil and gas or an increase in
finding and development costs, and external sources of capital become limited or unavailable, Pyramid’s ability to make the
necessary capital investment to maintain or expand its asset base of oil and gas reserves would be impaired. Even with sufficient
available capital, Pyramid’s future exploration and development activities may not result in additional proved reserves, and it
might not be able to drill productive wells at acceptable costs.
26
The oil and gas exploration and production industry is historically a cyclical industry and market fluctuations in the
prices of oil and gas could adversely affect Pyramid’s business.
Prices for oil and gas tend to fluctuate significantly in response to factors beyond Pyramid’s control. These factors include:
·weather conditions in the United States and where Pyramid’s property interests are located;
·economic conditions, including demand for petroleum based products, in the United States and the rest of the world;
· actions by OPEC, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries;
·political instability in the Middle East, North Africa and other major oil and gas producing regions;
· governmental regulations;
·
domestic tax policy;
· the price of foreign imports of oil and gas;
· the cost of exploring for, producing and delivering oil and gas;
· the discovery rate of new oil and gas reserves;
· the rate of decline of existing and new oil and gas reserves;
· available pipeline and other oil and gas transportation capacity;
· the ability of oil and gas companies to raise capital;
· the overall supply and demand for oil and gas; and
· the availability of alternate fuel sources.
Changes in commodity prices may significantly affect Pyramid’s capital resources, liquidity and expected operating results. Price
changes will directly affect revenues and can indirectly impact expected production by changing the amount of funds available to
reinvest in exploration and development activities. Reductions in oil and gas prices not only reduce revenues and profits, but
could also reduce the quantities of reserves that are commercially recoverable. Significant declines in prices could result in non
cash charges to earnings due to impairment.
Changes in commodity prices may also significantly affect Pyramid’s ability to estimate the value of producing properties for
acquisition and divestiture and often cause disruption in the market for oil and gas producing properties, as buyers and sellers
have difficulty agreeing on the value of the properties. Price volatility also makes it difficult to budget for and project the return on
acquisitions and the development and exploitation of projects. Pyramid expects that commodity prices will continue to fluctuate
significantly in the future.
Exploratory and developmental drilling and production operations involve many risks that are outside Pyramid’s control
and which may result in a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition or results of operations.
The business of exploring for, developing and producing oil and gas involves a substantial risk of investment loss. Drilling and
operating oil and gas wells involves the risk that the wells may be unproductive or that, although productive, the wells may not
produce oil or gas in economic quantities. Other hazards, such as unusual or unexpected geological formations, pressures, fires,
blowouts, power outages, gas leakage, loss of circulation of drilling fluids or other conditions may substantially delay or prevent
completion of any well. Adverse weather conditions can also hinder drilling operations. A productive well may become
uneconomic if water or other deleterious substances are encountered that impair or prevent the production of oil or gas from the
well. In addition, production from any well may be unmarketable if it is impregnated with water or other deleterious substances.
27
At times Pyramid participates in joint ventures wherein it is dependent upon the efforts of various third parties that
Pyramid does not control and, as a result, it may not be able to control the timing of development efforts, associated
costs, or the rate of production of reserves (if any).
The success of Pyramid’s business interests in certain joint ventures, where it owns less than a majority interest depends upon
the efforts of various third parties that Pyramid does not control. As a result, Pyramid may have limited ability to exercise
influence over certain joint venture decisions, operations or costs in certain joint venture activities. Pyramid’s dependence on the
operator and, where applicable, other working interest owners for these projects and Pyramid’s limited ability to influence
operations and associated costs could prevent Pyramid from realizing targeted returns on capital in drilling or acquisition
activities. The success and timing of development and exploitation activities on joint venture properties operated by others
depend upon a number of factors that will be largely outside of Pyramid’s control, including:
· the timing and amount of capital expenditures;
· the operator's expertise and financial resources;
· approval of other participants in drilling wells;
·
selection of technology;
· the rate of production of the reserves; and
the availability of suitable drilling rigs, drilling equipment, production and transportation infrastructure, and qualified operating
·
personnel.
Pyramid also relies upon various consultants and service companies to provide it with technical assistance and services.
Pyramid relies upon the services of geologists, geophysicists, chemists, engineers and other scientists to explore and analyze oil
and gas prospects to determine a method in which its oil and gas prospects may be developed in a cost effective manner.
Risks Relating to Yuma’s Business
You should read and consider the following risk factors specific to Yuma’s business that will also affect the combined company
after the merger.
Oil and natural gas prices are volatile, and low prices could have a material adverse impact on Yuma’s business.
Yuma’s revenues, profitability and future growth and the carrying value of its properties depend substantially on prevailing oil and
natural gas prices. Prices also affect the amount of cash flow available for capital expenditures and Yuma’s ability to borrow and
raise additional capital. The amount Yuma will be able to borrow under its credit agreement will be subject to periodic
redetermination based in part on current oil and natural gas prices and on changing expectations of future prices. Lower prices
may also reduce the amount of oil and natural gas that Yuma can economically produce and have an adverse effect on the value
of its properties.
Historically, the markets for oil and natural gas have been volatile, and they are likely to continue to be volatile in the future.
Among the factors that can cause volatility are:
· the domestic and foreign supply of oil and natural gas;
the ability of members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other producing countries to agree upon and
·
maintain oil prices and production levels;
social unrest and political instability, particularly in major oil and natural gas producing regions outside the United States, such
·
as northern Africa and the Middle East, and armed conflict or terrorist attacks, whether or not in oil or natural gas producing
regions;
· the level of consumer product demand;
·the growth of consumer product demand in emerging markets, such as China;
· labor unrest in oil and natural gas producing regions;
28
weather conditions, including hurricanes and other natural occurrences that affect the supply and/or demand of oil and natural
·
gas;
· the price and availability of alternative fuels;
·
the price of foreign imports;
· worldwide economic conditions; and
· the availability of liquid natural gas imports.
These external factors and the volatile nature of the energy markets make it difficult to estimate future prices of oil and natural
gas.
Yuma depends on computer and telecommunications systems and failures in its systems or cyber security attacks
could significantly disrupt its business operations.
Yuma has entered into agreements with third parties for hardware, software, telecommunications and other information
technology services in connection with its business. It is possible Yuma could incur interruptions from cyber security attacks,
computer viruses or malware. Yuma believes that it has positive relations with its related vendors and maintains adequate anti-
virus and malware software and controls; however, any interruptions to its arrangements with third parties to its computing and
communications infrastructure or its information systems could significantly disrupt its business operations.
Yuma may not be able to drill wells on a substantial portion of its acreage.
Yuma may not be able to drill on a substantial portion of its acreage for various reasons. Yuma may not generate or be able to
raise sufficient capital to do so. Future deterioration in commodities pricing may also make drilling some acreage uneconomic.
Yuma’s actual drilling activities and future drilling budget will depend on drilling results, oil and natural gas prices, the availability
and cost of capital, drilling and production costs, availability of drilling services and equipment, lease expirations, gathering
system and pipeline transportation constraints, regulatory approvals and other factors. In addition, any drilling activities Yuma is
able to conduct may not be successful or add additional proved reserves to its overall proved reserves, which could have a
material adverse effect on its future business, financial condition and results of operations.
Yuma’s ability to sell its production and/or receive market prices for its production may be adversely affected by
transportation capacity constraints and interruptions.
If the amount of natural gas, condensate or oil being produced by Yuma and others exceeds the capacity of the various
transportation pipelines and gathering systems available in its operating areas, it will be necessary for new transportation
pipelines and gathering systems to be built. Or, in the case of oil and condensate, it will be necessary for Yuma to rely more
heavily on trucks to transport its production, which is more expensive and less efficient than transportation via pipeline. Currently,
Yuma anticipates that additional pipeline capacity will be required in the Bakken / Three Forks formations area to transport oil
and condensate production, which increased substantially during 2012 and 2013 and is expected to continue to increase. The
construction of new pipelines and gathering systems is capital intensive and construction may be postponed, interrupted or
cancelled in response to changing economic conditions and the availability and cost of capital. In addition, capital constraints
could limit Yuma’s ability to build gathering systems to transport its production to transportation pipelines. In such event, costs to
transport Yuma’s production may increase materially or it might have to shut in its wells awaiting a pipeline connection or
capacity and/or sell its production at much lower prices than market or than it currently projects, which would adversely affect
Yuma’s results of operations.
A portion of Yuma’s production may also be interrupted, or shut in, from time to time for numerous other reasons, including as a
result of weather conditions, accidents, loss of pipeline or gathering system access, field labor issues or strikes, or it might
voluntarily curtail production in response to market conditions. If a substantial amount of Yuma’s production is interrupted at the
same time, it could adversely affect its cash flow.
29
Unless Yuma replaces its reserves, its reserves and production will decline, which would adversely affect Yuma’s
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Producing oil and natural gas reservoirs generally are characterized by declining production rates that vary depending upon
reservoir characteristics and other factors. Decline rates are typically greatest early in the productive life of a well. Estimates of
the decline rate of an oil or natural gas well are inherently imprecise, and are less precise with respect to new or emerging oil
and natural gas formations with limited production histories than for more developed formations with established production
histories. Yuma’s production levels and the reserves that it currently expects to recover from its wells will change if production
from Yuma’s existing wells decline in a different manner than it has estimated and can change under other circumstances. Thus,
Yuma’s future oil and natural gas reserves and production and, therefore, its cash flow and results of operations are highly
dependent upon Yuma’s success in efficiently developing and exploiting its current properties and economically finding or
acquiring additional recoverable reserves. Yuma may not be able to develop, find or acquire additional reserves to replace
current and future production at acceptable costs. If Yuma is unable to replace current and future production, cash flows and the
value of reserves may decrease, adversely affecting Yuma’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves involve assumptions and any material inaccuracies in these
assumptions will materially affect the quantities and the value of Yuma’s reserves.
This proxy statement/prospectus contains estimates of Yuma’s proved oil and natural gas reserves. These estimates are based
upon various assumptions, including assumptions required by the SEC relating to oil and natural gas prices, drilling and
operating expenses, capital expenditures, taxes and availability of funds. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves
is complex. This process requires significant decisions and assumptions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical,
engineering and economic data for each reservoir. Therefore, these estimates are inherently imprecise.
Actual future production, oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating expenses and
quantities of recoverable oil and natural gas reserves will vary from those estimated. Any significant variance could materially
affect the estimated quantities and the value of Yuma’s reserves. Yuma’s properties may also be susceptible to hydrocarbon
drainage from production by other operators on adjacent properties. In addition, Yuma may adjust estimates of proved reserves to
reflect production history, results of exploration and development, prevailing oil and natural gas prices and other factors, many of
which are beyond its control.
At December 31, 2013, approximately 81.6% of Yuma’s estimated reserves were classified as proved undeveloped. Recovery of
proved undeveloped reserves requires significant capital expenditures and successful drilling operations. The reserve data
assumes that Yuma will make significant capital expenditures to develop its reserves. The estimates of these oil and natural gas
reserves and the costs associated with development of these reserves have been prepared in accordance with SEC regulations;
however, actual capital expenditures will likely vary from estimated capital expenditures, development may not occur as
scheduled and actual results may not be as estimated.
Yuma depends substantially on the continued presence of key personnel for critical management decisions and
industry contacts.
Yuma’s success depends upon the continued contributions of its executive officers and key employees, particularly with respect
to providing the critical management decisions and contacts necessary to manage and maintain growth within a highly
competitive industry. Competition for qualified personnel can be intense, particularly in the oil and natural gas industry, and there
are a limited number of people with the requisite knowledge and experience. Under these conditions, Yuma could be unable to
attract and retain these personnel. The loss of the services of any of Yuma’s executive officers or other key employees for any
reason could have a material adverse effect on its business, operating results, financial condition and cash flows.
Yuma’s business is highly competitive.
The oil and natural gas industry is highly competitive in many respects, including identification of attractive oil and natural gas
properties for acquisition, drilling and development, securing financing for such activities and obtaining the necessary equipment
and personnel to conduct such operations and activities. In seeking suitable opportunities, Yuma competes with a number of
other companies, including large oil and natural gas companies and other independent operators with greater financial
resources, larger numbers of personnel and facilities, and, in some cases, with more expertise.
Yuma’s oil and natural gas activities are subject to various risks which are beyond its control.
Yuma’s operations are subject to many risks and hazards incident to exploring and drilling for, producing, transporting, marketing
and selling oil and natural gas. Although Yuma may take precautionary measures, many of these risks and hazards are beyond
its control and unavoidable under the circumstances. Many of these risks or hazards could materially and adversely affect its
revenues and expenses, the ability of certain of its wells to produce oil and natural gas in commercial quantities, the rate of
production and the economics of the development of, and its investment in the prospects in which Yuma has or will acquire an
interest. Any of these risks and hazards could materially and adversely affect Yuma’s financial condition, results of operations
and cash flows. Such risks and hazards include:
human error, accidents, labor force and other factors beyond Yuma’s control that may cause personal injuries or death to
·
persons and destruction or damage to equipment and facilities;
30
blowouts, fires, hurricanes, pollution and equipment failures that may result in damage to or destruction of wells, producing
·
formations, production facilities and equipment;
· unavailability of materials and equipment;
· engineering and construction delays;
· unanticipated transportation costs and delays;
· unfavorable weather conditions;
·hazards resulting from unusual or unexpected geological or environmental conditions;
· environmental regulations and requirements;
·accidental leakage of toxic or hazardous materials, such as petroleum liquids or drilling fluids, into the environment;
·hazards resulting from the presence of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) or other contaminants in natural gas Yuma produces;
changes in laws and regulations, including laws and regulations applicable to oil and natural gas activities or markets for the oil
·
and natural gas produced;
fluctuations in supply and demand for oil and natural gas causing variations of the prices Yuma receives for its oil and natural
·
gas production; and
·the availability of alternative fuels and the price at which they become available.
As a result of these risks, expenditures, quantities and rates of production, revenues and operating costs may be materially
adversely affected and may differ materially from those anticipated by Yuma.
Yuma’s exploration and development drilling efforts and the operation of its wells may not be profitable or achieve its
targeted returns.
Yuma requires significant amounts of undeveloped leasehold acreage to further its development efforts. Exploration,
development, drilling and production activities are subject to many risks, including the risk that commercially productive
reservoirs will not be discovered. Yuma invests in property, including undeveloped leasehold acreage, which it believes will
result in projects that will add value over time. Yuma’s leasehold acreage may not be profitably developed, new wells drilled by it
may not be productive and it may not recover all or any portion of its investment in such leasehold acreage or wells. Drilling for oil
and natural gas may involve unprofitable efforts, not only from dry wells but also from wells that are productive but do not produce
sufficient net reserves to return a profit after deducting operating and other costs. In addition, wells that are profitable may not
achieve Yuma’s targeted rate of return. Yuma’s ability to achieve its target results is dependent upon the current and future
market prices for oil and natural gas, costs associated with producing oil and natural gas and its ability to add reserves at an
acceptable cost.
In addition, Yuma may not be successful in controlling its drilling and production costs to improve its overall return. The cost of
drilling, completing and operating a well is often uncertain and cost factors can adversely affect the economics of a project. Yuma
cannot predict the cost of drilling and completing a well, and it may be forced to limit, delay or cancel drilling operations as a
result of a variety of factors, including:
· unexpected drilling conditions;
· pressure or irregularities in formations;
·equipment failures or accidents and shortages or delays in the availability of drilling and completion equipment and services;
· adverse weather conditions, including hurricanes; and
· compliance with governmental requirements.
31
Yuma is subject to complex federal, state, local and other laws and regulations that could adversely affect the cost,
manner or feasibility of doing business.
Companies that explore for and develop, produce, sell and transport oil and natural gas in the United States are subject to
extensive federal, state and local laws and regulations, including complex tax and environmental, health and safety laws and the
corresponding regulations, and are required to obtain various permits and approvals from federal, state and local agencies. If
these permits are not issued or unfavorable restrictions or conditions are imposed on Yuma’s drilling activities, it may not be able
to conduct operations as planned. Yuma may be required to make large expenditures to comply with governmental regulations.
Matters subject to regulation include:
· water discharge and disposal permits for drilling operations;
·
·
·
drilling bonds;
drilling permits;
reports concerning operations;
· air quality, noise levels and related permits;
·
spacing of wells;
·
rights-of-way and easements;
· unitization and pooling of properties;
·
pipeline construction;
· gathering, transportation and marketing of oil and natural gas;
·
taxation; and
· waste transport and disposal permits and requirements.
Failure to comply with these laws may result in the suspension or termination of operations and subject Yuma to liabilities under
administrative, civil and criminal penalties. Compliance costs can be significant. Moreover, these laws or the enforcement thereof
could change in ways that substantially increase the costs of doing business. Any such liabilities, penalties, suspensions,
terminations or regulatory changes could materially and adversely affect Yuma’s business, financial condition and results of
operations. Under these laws and other environmental health and safety laws and regulations, Yuma could be held liable for
personal injuries, property damage (including site clean-up and restoration costs) and other damages including the assessment
of natural resource damages. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may also result in the suspension or termination
of Yuma’s operations and subject it to administrative, civil and criminal penalties. Some laws and regulations may impose strict
as well as joint and several liability for environmental contamination, which could subject Yuma to liability for the conduct of
others or for its own actions that were in compliance with all applicable laws at the time such actions were taken. Environmental
and other governmental laws and regulations also increase the costs to plan, design, drill, install, operate and abandon oil and
natural gas wells. Moreover, public interest in environmental protection has increased in recent years, and environmental
organizations have opposed, with some success, certain drilling projects. Part of the regulatory environment in which Yuma
operates includes, in some cases, federal requirements for performing or preparing environmental assessments, environmental
impact studies and/or plans of development before commencing exploration and production activities. In addition, Yuma’s
activities are subject to regulation by oil and natural gas-producing states relating to conservation practices and protection of
correlative rights. These regulations affect Yuma’s operations and limit the quantity of oil and natural gas it may produce and sell.
Delays in obtaining regulatory approvals or necessary permits, the failure to obtain a permit or the receipt of a permit with
excessive conditions or costs could have a material adverse effect on Yuma’s ability to explore on, develop or produce its
properties. Additionally, the oil and natural gas regulatory environment could change in ways that might substantially increase
the financial and managerial costs to comply with the requirements of these laws and regulations and, consequently, adversely
affect Yuma’s profitability.
32
Federal, state and local legislation and regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing could result in increased
costs and additional operating restrictions or delays.
From time to time, legislation has been proposed in Congress to amend the federal Safe Drinking Water Act to require federal
permitting of hydraulic fracturing and the disclosure of chemicals used in the hydraulic fracturing process. Federal, state, tribal
and local governments have been adopting or considering restrictions on or prohibitions of fracturing in areas where Yuma has
non-operated working interests and the operator of such properties could be subject to additional levels of regulation, operational
delays or increased operating costs and could have regulatory burdens imposed upon it that could make it more difficult to
perform hydraulic fracturing and increase the costs of compliance and doing business.
At the Federal level, for example, the EPA is conducting a wide-ranging study on the effects of hydraulic fracturing on drinking
water resources. In December 2012, the EPA issued a progress report describing its ongoing study, and announcing its
expectation that a final draft report will be released for public comment and peer review in 2014. Other governmental reviews
have also been recently conducted or are under way that focus on environmental aspects of hydraulic fracturing, including for
example, a Federal Bureau of Land Management rulemaking for hydraulic fracturing practices on federal and Indian lands that
has resulted in a May 2013 proposal that would require public disclosure of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing on federal and
Indian lands, confirmation that the wells used in fracturing operations meet proper construction standards and development of
plans for managing flowback water from such activities. These activities could result in additional regulatory scrutiny that could
make it difficult to perform hydraulic fracturing and increase the costs of compliance and doing business with regard to Yuma’s
non-operated properties.
Certain states likewise have adopted, and other states are considering the adoption of regulations that impose new or more
stringent permitting, disclosure and well construction requirements on hydraulic fracturing operations. In addition to state laws,
local land use restrictions, such as city ordinances, may restrict or prohibit drilling in general or hydraulic fracturing in particular.
Such efforts have extended to bans on hydraulic fracturing.
In connection with its non-operated properties in the Williston Basin, as a working interest owner, Yuma uses a significant
amount of water with respect to hydraulic fracturing operations. The inability to locate sufficient amounts of water, or dispose of or
recycle water used in exploration and production operations, could adversely impact Yuma’s operations. Moreover, new
environmental initiatives and regulations could include restrictions on Yuma’s ability to participate in certain operations such as
hydraulic fracturing or disposal of waste, including, but not limited to, produced water, drilling fluids and other wastes associated
with the exploration, development or production of oil and natural gas. Compliance with environmental regulations and regulatory
permit requirements governing the withdrawal, storage and use of surface water or groundwater necessary for hydraulic
fracturing of wells may increase the operating costs of Yuma’s non-operated properties in the Williston Basin and cause delays,
interruptions or termination of operations, all of which could have an adverse effect on Yuma’s results of operations and financial
condition.
Hydraulic fracturing involves the injection of water, sand and various chemicals under pressure into geologic formations to
fracture the surrounding rock and stimulate production. This process may give rise to operational issues such as an underground
migration of water and chemicals to unintended areas, wellbore integrity, possible surface spillage and contamination caused by
mishandling of fracturing fluids, including chemical additives. Properly administering the hydraulic fracturing process entails
operational costs and a failure to properly administer the process could cause significant remedial and financial costs.
Regulation related to global warming and climate change could have an adverse effect on Yuma’s operations and
demand for oil and natural gas.
Studies over recent years have indicated that emissions of certain gases may be contributing to warming of the Earth’s
atmosphere. In response to these studies, governments have begun adopting domestic and international climate change
regulations that require reporting and reductions of the emission of greenhouse gases. Methane, a primary component of natural
gas, and carbon dioxide, a byproduct of the burning of oil, natural gas and refined petroleum products, are considered
greenhouse gases. Internationally, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and the Kyoto Protocol
address greenhouse gas emissions, and several countries, including those comprising the European Union, have established
greenhouse gas regulatory systems. In the United States, at the state level, many states, either individually or through multi-state
regional initiatives, have begun implementing legal measures to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, primarily through the
planned development of emission inventories, emission targets, greenhouse gas cap and trade programs or incentives for
renewable energy generation, while others have considered adopting such greenhouse gas programs.
33
The EPA has issued greenhouse gas monitoring and reporting regulations that went into effect January 1, 2010, and required
reporting by regulated facilities by March 2011 and annually thereafter. In November 2010, the EPA issued a final rule requiring
companies to report certain greenhouse gas emissions from oil and natural gas facilities. On July 19, 2011, the EPA amended
the oil and natural gas facility greenhouse gas reporting rule to require reporting beginning in September 2012. Beyond
measuring and reporting, the EPA issued an “Endangerment Finding” under section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act, concluding
greenhouse gas pollution threatens the public health and welfare of current and future generations. The finding served as the first
step to issuing regulations that require permits for and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions for certain facilities. Recently, the
EPA issued four new regulations for the oil and natural gas industry, including: a new source performance standard for volatile
organic compounds (“VOCs”); a new source performance standard for sulfur dioxide; an air toxics standard for oil and natural gas
production; and an air toxics standard for natural gas transmission and storage. The final rule includes the first federal air
standards for natural gas wells that are hydraulically fractured, or refractured, as well as requirements for several sources, such
as storage tanks and other equipment, and limits methane emissions from these sources. Compliance with these regulations will
impose additional requirements and costs on Yuma’s operations.
In the courts, several decisions have been issued that may increase the risk of claims being filed by governments and private
parties against companies that have significant greenhouse gas emissions. Such cases may seek to challenge air emissions
permits that greenhouse gas emitters apply for and seek to force emitters to reduce their emissions or seek damages for alleged
climate change impacts to the environment, people, and property.
Any laws or regulations that may be adopted to restrict or reduce emissions of greenhouse gases could require Yuma to incur
additional operating costs, such as costs to purchase and operate emissions or other compliance costs, and reduce demand for
its products.
The ongoing implementation of federal legislation enacted in 2010 could have an adverse impact on Yuma’s ability to
use derivative instruments to reduce the effects of commodity prices, interest rates and other risks associated with its
business.
Historically, Yuma has entered into a number of commodity derivative contracts in order to hedge a portion of its oil and natural
gas production and, periodically, interest expense. On July 21, 2010, President Obama signed into law the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, or the Dodd-Frank Act, which requires the SEC and the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (or CFTC), along with other federal agencies, to promulgate regulations implementing the new legislation.
The CFTC, in coordination with the SEC and various U.S. federal banking regulators, has issued regulations to implement the
so-called “Volcker Rule” under which banking entities are generally prohibited from proprietary trading of derivatives. Although
conditional exemptions from this general prohibition are available, the Volcker Rule may limit the trading activities of banking
entities that have been counterparties to Yuma’s derivatives trades in the past. Also, a provision of the Dodd-Frank Act known as
the “swaps push-out rule” may require some of the banking counterparties to Yuma’s commodity derivative contracts to “push out”
some of their derivatives activities to a separate entity, which may not be as creditworthy as the current counterparty.
The CFTC also has finalized other regulations implementing the Dodd-Frank Act’s provisions regarding trade reporting, margin
and position limits; however, some regulations remain to be finalized and it is not possible at this time to predict when the CFTC
will adopt final rules. For example, the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC regulations may require compliance with margin
requirements and with certain clearing and trade-execution requirements in connection with certain of Yuma’s derivative
activities. Also, the CFTC has re-proposed regulations setting position limits for certain futures and option contracts in the major
energy markets and for swaps that are their economic equivalents. Certain bona fide hedging transactions are expected to be
made exempt from these limits. It is possible that the CFTC, in conjunction with the U.S. federal banking regulators, may
mandate that financial counterparties entering into swap transactions with end-users must do so with credit support agreements
in place, which could result in negotiated credit thresholds above which Yuma would be required to post collateral.
The Dodd-Frank Act and any additional implementing regulations could significantly increase the cost of some commodity
derivative contracts (including through requirements to post collateral, which could adversely affect Yuma’s available liquidity),
materially alter the terms of some commodity derivative contracts, limit its ability to trade some derivatives to hedge risks, reduce
the availability of some derivatives to protect against risks it encounters, reduce its ability to monetize or restructure its existing
commodity derivative contracts, and potentially increase its exposure to less creditworthy counterparties. If Yuma reduces its use
of derivatives as a consequence, its results of operations may become more volatile and its cash flows may be less predictable,
which could adversely affect its ability to plan for and fund capital expenditures. Increased volatility may make Yuma less
attractive to certain types of investors. Finally, the Dodd-Frank Act was intended, in part, to reduce the volatility of oil and natural
gas prices, which some legislators attributed to speculative trading in derivatives and commodity instruments related to oil and
natural gas. If the implementing regulations result in lower commodity prices, Yuma’s revenues could be adversely affected. Any
of these consequences could adversely affect its business, financial condition and results of operations.
Yuma cannot be certain that the insurance coverage it maintains will be adequate to cover all losses that may be
sustained in connection with all oil and natural gas activities.
Yuma maintains general and excess liability policies, which it considers to be reasonable and consistent with industry standards.
These policies generally cover:
personal injury;
bodily injury;
·
·
34
·
third party property damage;
· medical expenses;
·
legal defense costs;
· pollution in some cases;
· well blowouts in some cases; and
· workers compensation.
As is common in the oil and natural gas industry, Yuma will not insure fully against all risks associated with its business either
because such insurance is not available or because it believes the premium costs are prohibitive. A loss not fully covered by
insurance could have a materially adverse effect on Yuma’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Title to the properties in which Yuma has an interest may be impaired by title defects.
Yuma generally obtains title opinions on significant properties that it drills or acquires. Additionally, undeveloped acreage has
greater risk of title defects than developed acreage. Generally, under the terms of the operating agreements affecting Yuma’s
properties, any monetary loss is to be borne by all parties to any such agreement in proportion to their interests in such property.
If there are any title defects or defects in assignment of leasehold rights in properties in which Yuma holds an interest, it will suffer
a financial loss.
The unavailability or high cost of drilling rigs, pressure pumping equipment and crews, other equipment, supplies,
water, personnel and oil field services could adversely affect Yuma’s ability to execute its exploration and development
plans on a timely basis and within its budget.
The oil and gas industry is cyclical and, from time to time, there is a shortage of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies, water or
qualified personnel. During these periods, the costs and delivery times of rigs, equipment and supplies are substantially greater.
In addition, the demand for, and wage rates of, qualified drilling rig crews rise as the number of active rigs in service increases.
Increasing levels of exploration and production may increase the demand for oilfield services and equipment, and the costs of
these services and equipment may increase, while the quality of these services and equipment may suffer. The unavailability or
high cost of drilling rigs, pressure pumping equipment, supplies or qualified personnel can materially and adversely affect
Yuma’s operations and profitability. In order to secure drilling rigs and pressure pumping equipment, Yuma has entered into
certain contracts that extend over several months. If demand for drilling rigs and pressure pumping equipment subside during the
period covered by these contracts, the price Yuma is required to pay may be significantly more than the market rate for similar
services.
Yuma depends on the skill, ability and decisions of third-party operators of the oil and natural gas properties in which it
has a non-operated working interest.
The success of the drilling, development and production of the oil and natural gas properties in which Yuma has or expects to
have a non-operating working interest is substantially dependent upon the decisions of such third-party operators and their
diligence to comply with various laws, rules and regulations affecting such properties. The failure of any third-party operator to
make decisions, perform their services, discharge their obligations, deal with regulatory agencies, and comply with laws, rules
and regulations, including environmental laws and regulations in a proper manner with respect to properties in which Yuma has
an interest could result in material adverse consequences to its interest in such properties, including substantial penalties and
compliance costs. Such adverse consequences could result in substantial liabilities to Yuma or reduce the value of its properties,
which could negatively affect its results of operations.
Hedging transactions may limit Yuma’s potential gains and increase its potential losses.
In order to manage Yuma’s exposure to price risks in the marketing of its oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids production,
Yuma has entered into oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids price hedging arrangements with respect to a portion of its
anticipated production and it may enter into additional hedging transactions in the future. While intended to reduce the effects of
volatile oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids prices, such transactions may limit its potential gains and increase its potential
losses if oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids prices were to rise substantially over the price established by the hedge. In
addition, such transactions may expose Yuma to the risk of loss in certain circumstances, including instances in which:
35
· Yuma’s production is less than expected;
·there is a widening of price differentials between delivery points for Yuma’s production; or
·the counterparties to Yuma’s hedging agreements fail to perform under the contracts.
Risks Relating to Pyramid’s Operations After Consummation of the Merger
We may not be able to successfully integrate the businesses of Pyramid and Yuma following the merger.
The success of the merger depends in large part upon our ability to integrate our organizations, operations, systems and
personnel. The integration of two previously independent companies is a challenging, time-consuming and costly process.
Pyramid and Yuma have operated and, until the effective time of the merger, will continue to operate, independently. It is possible
that the integration process could result in the loss of key employees, the disruption of each company’s ongoing businesses or
inconsistencies in standards, controls, procedures and policies that adversely affect our ability to maintain relationships with
suppliers, customers and employees or to achieve the anticipated benefits of the merger. In addition, successful integration of the
companies will require the dedication of significant management resources, which will temporarily detract attention from the day-
to-day businesses of the combined company. If we are not able to integrate our organizations, operations, systems and
personnel in a timely and efficient manner, the anticipated benefits of the merger may not be realized fully or at all or may take
longer to realize than expected.
Pyramid’s merger with Yuma, if completed, may not achieve its intended results.
Pyramid and Yuma entered into the merger agreement with the expectation that the merger would result in various benefits, cost
savings and operating efficiencies. Achieving the anticipated benefits of the merger is subject to a number of uncertainties,
including whether the business of Yuma is integrated in an efficient and effective manner. Failure to achieve these anticipated
benefits could result in increased costs, decreases in the amount of expected revenues generated by the combined company,
and diversion of management’s time and energy and could have an adverse effect on the combined company’s financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
Pyramid’s business plan after consummation of the merger includes substantial capital requirements which may require
additional debt or equity financing.
After consummation of the merger, Pyramid expects to make substantial capital expenditures for the acquisition, development,
production and exploration of its oil and gas properties in order to fully realize its business plan. Pyramid’s capital requirements
will depend on numerous factors, and it cannot predict accurately the exact timing and amount of its capital requirements.
Although Pyramid intends to finance a substantial portion of its future capital expenditures through cash flow from operations,
cash on hand, and its revolving credit facility, it may require additional funds which could come from debt or equity financing or
asset sales. A decrease in expected revenues or adverse change in market conditions could make obtaining financing
economically unattractive or impossible or reduce the value Pyramid expects to receive from asset divestitures.
A significant increase in Pyramid’s indebtedness, or an increase in its indebtedness that is proportionately greater than its
issuances of equity could negatively impact its ability to remain in compliance with the financial covenants under Pyramid’s
revolving credit facility which could force it to limit or defer its planned oil and gas leasing, exploration and development program.
Moreover, if Pyramid is unable to finance its growth as expected, it could be required to sell assets, seek alternative financing,
the terms of which may not be attractive to Pyramid, or reduce the scope of its business plan.
In addition, a significant increase in Pyramid’s indebtedness could cause it to be unable to obtain sufficient credit capacity with
counterparties to finance the hedging of its future crude oil and gas production which may limit its ability to manage price risk. As
a result of these factors, Pyramid may lack the capital necessary to fully pursue its drilling program, obtain credit necessary to
enter into derivative contracts to hedge its future crude oil and gas production or to capitalize on other business opportunities.
Risks Relating to Pyramid Common Stock After Consummation of the Merger
The trading price of Pyramid common stock may be volatile.
The trading price of shares of Pyramid common stock has from time to time fluctuated widely and in the future Pyramid common
stock may be subject to similar fluctuations. The trading price may be affected by a number of factors including the risk factors set
forth in this document, as well as Pyramid’s operating results, financial condition, drilling activities and general conditions in the
oil and natural gas exploration and development industry, the economy, the securities markets and other events.
36
The influx of such a substantial number of shares into the public market could have a significant negative effect on the trading
price of Pyramid common stock. In recent years broad stock market indices, in general, and smaller capitalization companies, in
particular, have experienced substantial price fluctuations. In a volatile market, Pyramid may experience wide fluctuations in the
market price of its common stock. These fluctuations may have an extremely negative effect on the market price of Pyramid
common stock.
The expected executive officers and directors after the closing of the merger of the combined company are expected to
collectively beneficially own approximately 60.1% of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock after the closing
of the merger and continue to have substantial control over Pyramid, which will limit Pyramid stockholders’ ability to
influence the outcome of important transactions, including a change in control.
The expected executive officers and directors after the merger of the combined company and their affiliates, in the aggregate,
beneficially will own approximately 60.1% of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock, based on the number of shares
anticipated to be outstanding at the closing of the merger. As a result, these stockholders, if acting together, will be able to
influence or control matters requiring approval by Pyramid’s stockholders, including the election of directors and the approval of
mergers, acquisitions or other extraordinary transactions. They may also have interests that differ from yours and may vote in a
way with which you disagree and which may be adverse to your interests. This concentration of ownership may have the effect of
delaying, preventing or deterring a change in control of Pyramid, could deprive its stockholders of an opportunity to receive a
premium for their Pyramid common stock as part of a sale of Pyramid and might ultimately affect the market price of Pyramid
common stock.
Offerings of debt by Pyramid, which would be senior to Pyramid’s common stock upon liquidation, and/or preferred
stock, which would be senior to Pyramid common stock for purposes of dividend distributions or upon liquidation, may
adversely affect the market price of Pyramid’s common stock.
Pyramid may from time to time issue debt securities in connection with any number of activities, including strategic acquisitions,
repayment of debt, capital expenditures and other uses. Upon liquidation, holders of such debt securities and lenders with
respect to other borrowings by Pyramid will receive distributions of Pyramid’s available assets prior to the holders of Pyramid’s
common stock.
Pyramid’s board of directors is authorized to issue one or more classes or series of preferred stock from time to time without any
action on the part of the stockholders. Pyramid’s board of directors also has the power, without stockholder approval, to set the
terms of any such classes or series of preferred stock that may be issued, including voting rights, dividend rights, and preferences
over Pyramid common stock with respect to dividends or upon Pyramid’s dissolution, winding-up and liquidation and other terms.
If Pyramid issues preferred stock in the future that has a preference over its common stock with respect to the payment of
dividends or upon its liquidation, dissolution, or winding-up, or if Pyramid issues preferred stock with voting rights that dilute the
voting power of the common stock, the rights of holders of Pyramid common stock or the market price of Pyramid common stock
could be adversely affected.
In addition, offerings of Pyramid common stock or of securities linked to Pyramid common stock may dilute the holdings of
Pyramid existing common stockholders or reduce the market price of Pyramid common stock. Holders of Pyramid common stock
are not entitled to preemptive rights.
37
THE COMPANIES
Pyramid Oil Company
Since Pyramid’s incorporation on October 9, 1909, it has been engaged in the business of the exploration, development and
production of crude oil and natural gas. Pyramid acquires interests in land and producing properties through acquisitions and
leases and then drills and/or operates crude oil or natural gas wells in efforts to discover and produce oil and gas. Crude oil and
natural gas produced from these properties are sold to various refineries and pipeline companies. The majority of the oil and gas
properties that Pyramid owns and operates are for its account. Pyramid also participates in joint ventures with other companies in
the development of oil and gas properties.
Although Pyramid owns some minor oil and gas interests in New York, Wyoming and Texas, all of its major revenue-producing
properties are in California. At December 31, 2013, Pyramid’s estimated total proved oil and natural gas reserves, as prepared by
its independent reserve engineering firm, MHA Petroleum Consultants, Inc. (“MHA”), were approximately 452 MBoe, consisting
of 449 MBbls of oil, and 14 MMcf of natural gas. Approximately100% of Pyramid’s proved reserves were classified as proved
developed. Pyramid maintains operational control of approximately 98.5% of its proved reserves. Full year 2013 production
averaged 121 Boe/d compared to 126 Boe/d in 2012. Pyramid’s total operating revenues for 2013 were approximately $5.2
million compared to $5.0 million in 2012.
Pyramid’s principal executive offices are located at 2008 – 21st Street, Bakersfield, California 93301 and its mailing address is P.
O. Box 832, Bakersfield, California 93302, and its telephone number is (661) 325-1000. Pyramid’s website address is
www.pyramidoil.com, although the information on its website is not deemed to be part of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc.
Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation, is a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid and was formed solely
for the purpose of consummating the merger. Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc. has not carried on any activities to date, except for
activities incidental to formation and activities undertaken in connection with the merger. Its principal offices are located at 2008 –
21st Street, Bakersfield, California 93301, its mailing address is P. O. Box 832, Bakersfield, California 93302, and its telephone
number is (661) 325-1000.
38
Yuma Energy, Inc.
Yuma Energy, Inc. is a U.S.-based oil and gas company focused on the exploration for, and development of, conventional and
unconventional oil and gas prospects. Yuma’s predecessor was established in 1983. Yuma was originally incorporated under
the name “The Yuma Companies, Inc.,” and subsequently changed its name to Yuma Energy, Inc. in August 2013. Yuma has
employed a 3-D seismic-based strategy to build a multi-year inventory of development and exploration prospects. Yuma’s current
operations are focused on onshore central Louisiana, where Yuma is targeting the Austin Chalk, Tuscaloosa, Wilcox, Frio, Marg
Tex and Hackberry formations. In addition, Yuma has a non-operated position in the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Yuma’s core
competencies in generating oil and gas prospects include: unconventional oil plays; onshore liquids-rich projects; and high
impact deep onshore prospects located beneath known producing trends, identified through the use of 3-D seismic surveys.
At December 31, 2013, Yuma’s estimated total proved oil and natural gas reserves, as prepared by its independent reserve
engineering firm, Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”), were approximately 20,777 MBoe, consisting of 11,615 MBbls
of oil, 2,767 MBbls of natural gas liquids, and 38,372 MMcf of natural gas. Approximately 18.4% of Yuma’s proved reserves were
classified as proved developed. Yuma maintains operational control of approximately 79% of its proved reserves. For the year
ended December 31, 2013, Yuma’s production averaged 1,369 Boe/d compared to 685 Boe/d for the year ended December 31,
2012. Yuma’s total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2013 were $29,142,572 compared to $21,883,909 for the year
ended December 31, 2012. For the three months ended March 31, 2014, production averaged 2,632 Boe/d compared to 875
Boe/d for the three months ended March 31, 2013. Yuma’s total revenues for the first three months of 2014 were $10,596,932
compared to $4,756,590 for the first three months of 2013.
Yuma’s principal executive offices are located at 1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825, Houston, Texas 77027, and its telephone
number is (713) 968-7000. Yuma’s website address is www.yumaenergyinc.com, although the information on its website is not
deemed to be part of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Recent Developments
Yuma spudded its second operated Austin Chalk well, the Crosby 14-1, in the Greater Masters Creek Field on March 27, 2014.
This well is located in Section 14 Township 2 South, Range 7 West in Vernon Parish, Louisiana. The Crosby 14-1 will be drilled
vertically to approximately 15,000 feet to the top of the Austin Chalk formation and then up to 6,000 feet horizontally in the Austin
Chalk pay interval. Yuma expects this well will be drilled and tested during August 2014. If successful, Yuma expects to have the
well on production in late September 2014.
Plans are underway to drill a development well offsetting Yuma’s 2013 Wilcox formation discovery on its Musial prospect located
in Livingston Parish, Louisiana. Yuma’s discovery, the Starns 38-1, was drilled to a measured total depth of 10,119 feet and was
put on production in late April 2013, and averaged 101 Bbl/d and 229 barrels of water per day while on pump. By December
2013 the production rate had declined to 30 Bbl/d. The downhole pump was re-configured and the producing interval was treated
for paraffin and asphaltene buildup in January 2014. The well began producing on its own and water production dropped
significantly. During July 2014, the well flowed at an average rate of 125 barrels of oil and eight barrels of water per day. Yuma
spudded an offset well, the Nettles 39-1, on July 2, 2014. Yuma reached a total depth of 10,051 feet during July 2014 and logged
18 feet of net pay in the primary objective, the First Wilcox sand. The Starns 38-1 also had 18 net feet of pay in the First Wilcox
sand. Below the First Wilcox sand, the logs indicated 12 net feet of pay in the Fourth Wilcox sand which was not productive in the
Starns 38-1 well. Yuma has run production casing and will begin by testing the Fourth Wilcox sand and, if productive, will
produce the well from that sand and will recomplete the well in the First Wilcox sand at a later date. If the completion efforts are
successful, Yuma expects to have the well on production during August 2014.
Yuma participated for an 18.9% working interest in a successful infill development well in the Ringwood Field located in Major
County, Oklahoma. The Bertha No. 8-3 was completed in early April 2014 in the Hunton formation at a depth of 8,010 feet at an
initial production rate of 150 barrels of oil per day.
39
PYRAMID SPECIAL MEETING
General
This proxy statement/prospectus is being furnished to Pyramid stockholders in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the
Pyramid board of directors to be used at the special meeting of stockholders to be held at [-], on [-], 2014, at [-] a.m., local time,
and at any adjournment or postponement of that meeting. This proxy statement/prospectus and the enclosed form of proxy card
are first being sent to Pyramid stockholders on or about [-], 2014.
Purpose of the Pyramid Special Meeting
At the Pyramid special meeting, holders of Pyramid common stock as of the record date of [-], 2014 will be asked to consider and
vote on:
Proposal
1:
Proposal
2:
Proposal
3:
 
Proposal
4:
the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby which are further
 
described in the sections of this proxy statement/prospectus entitled “The Merger” and “The Merger Agreement”;
  
the proposals to approve certain amendments to Pyramid’s restated articles of incorporation, each to take effect only
 
upon consummation of the merger, as follows (as further described herein under the section entitled “Restated articles
of incorporation of Pyramid Oil Company Proposals”):
  
Proposal
 
2A:
  
Proposal
 
2B:
  
Proposal
 
2C:
  
Proposal
 
2D:
a provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that increases the authorized shares of Pyramid
 
common stock from 50,000,000 shares to 300,000,000 shares;
  
a provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that provides for the classification of the board
 
of directors of Pyramid into two classes with staggered terms;
  
a provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that eliminates cumulative voting in the election
 
of directors;
  
a provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that changes the name of the combined
 
company to “Yuma Energy, Inc.” after the merger;
the proposal to approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan; and
the proposal to adjourn the Pyramid special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies if there are
 
not sufficient votes to approve and adopt the proposals listed above.
Recommendation of the Pyramid Board of Directors
Pyramid’s board of directors has unanimously (i) determined that the merger agreement, the merger and the other transactions
contemplated thereby are advisable, fair to, and in the best interests of Pyramid and its stockholders, (ii) approved the merger
agreement, the merger and the other transactions contemplated thereby, (iii) approved the restated articles of incorporation of
Pyramid, (iv) approved the Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, and (v) approved the proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board
of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies.
The Pyramid board of directors unanimously recommends that Pyramid stockholders vote:
· “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement;
·“FOR” the proposal to amend the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid to increase the authorized shares of
common stock from 50,000,000 shares to 300,000,000 shares;
·“FOR” the proposal to amend the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid to provide for the classification of the
board of directors of Pyramid into two classes with staggered terms;
40
·“FOR” the proposal to amend the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid to eliminate cumulative voting in the
election of directors; and
·“FOR” the proposal to amend the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid to change the name of the Pyramid to
“Yuma Energy, Inc.” after the merger;
·“FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan; and
· “FOR” any adjournment proposal.
Record Date and Voting
The Pyramid board of directors has fixed the close of business on [-], 2014 as the record date for determining the holders of
shares of Pyramid common stock entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Pyramid special meeting and any adjournments
or postponements thereof. Only holders of record of shares of Pyramid common stock at the close of business on that date will be
entitled to vote at the Pyramid special meeting and at any adjournment or postponement of that meeting. At the close of business
on the record date, there were [-] shares of Pyramid common stock outstanding, held by approximately [-] holders of record.
Each holder of shares of Pyramid common stock outstanding on the record date will be entitled to one vote for each share held of
record upon each matter properly submitted at the Pyramid special meeting and at any adjournment or postponement thereof. In
order for Pyramid to satisfy its quorum requirements, the holders of at least a majority of the total number of outstanding shares of
Pyramid common stock entitled to vote at the meeting must be present. You will be deemed to be present if you attend the
meeting or if you submit a proxy (including through the mail or by telephone or the Internet) that is received at or prior to the
meeting (and not revoked).
If your proxy is properly executed and received by Pyramid in time to be voted at the Pyramid special meeting, the shares
represented by your proxy (including those given through the mail or by telephone or the Internet) will be voted in accordance
with your instructions. If you execute your proxy but do not provide Pyramid with any instructions, your shares will be voted “FOR”
the proposals set forth in the notice of special meeting.
The only matters that we expect to be presented at the Pyramid special meeting are set forth in the notice of special meeting. If
any other matters properly come before the Pyramid special meeting, the persons named in the proxy card will vote the shares
represented by all properly executed proxies on such matters in their best judgment.
Quorum
If you vote in person or by proxy at the Pyramid special meeting, you will be counted for purposes of determining whether there is
a quorum at the meeting. Shares of Pyramid common stock present in person or by proxy at the Pyramid special meeting that are
entitled to vote will be counted for the purpose of determining whether there is a quorum for the transaction of business at the
Pyramid special meeting. The Pyramid bylaws provide that a majority of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock
entitled to vote at the meeting, represented in person or by proxy, constitutes a quorum at a meeting of its stockholders.
As of the record date:
Pyramid directors and executive officers and their affiliates owned and were entitled to vote [-] shares of Pyramid common stock,
·
representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock;
Pyramid directors and executive officers and their affiliates did not own any shares of Yuma common stock or Yuma preferred
·
stock; and
Michael D. Herman, Pyramid’s Chairman of the Board of Directors and Interim President and Chief Executive Officer, has
entered into a voting agreement with Yuma pursuant to which he has agreed, among other things, to vote all shares of Pyramid
common stock owned by him in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the proposals related to
·
the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation and to grant an irrevocable proxy to Sam L. Banks empowering him to vote all such
shares of Pyramid common stock at any meeting of Pyramid stockholders called for the purpose of voting on the merger
agreement and the provisions of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid. As of [-], 2014, Mr. Herman owned
approximately [-]% of the issued and outstanding common stock of Pyramid.
41
Pyramid currently expects that its directors and executive officers will vote their shares of Pyramid common stock “FOR” all of the
proposals set forth in the notice of special meeting.
Vote Required
Approval and adoption of the merger agreement (Proposal 1). Approval of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock.
Approval of the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation proposals (Proposals 2A, 2B, 2C and 2D). Approval of each of
the proposals related to the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and
outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock.
Approval and adoption of the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (Proposal 3). Approval of the proposal
to approve and adopt the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the
shares of Pyramid common stock represented in person or by proxy at the special meeting and voting on the proposal, provided
that such shares voting affirmatively must also constitute a majority of the required quorum for the meeting.
Approval of the adjournment of the Pyramid special meeting (Proposal 4). Approval of the proposal to authorize Pyramid’s
board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor
of the proposals listed above requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Pyramid common stock represented in
person or by proxy at the special meeting and voting on the proposal, provided that such shares voting affirmatively must also
constitute a majority of the required quorum for the meeting.
Abstentions will be counted in determining the presence of a quorum, and broker non-votes will be counted in determining the
presence of a quorum. Broker non-votes will not be counted as votes cast with regard to the proposal to approve and adopt the
merger agreement or the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid and, as such, broker non-votes
could result in there not being sufficient votes cast for these proposals. With respect to the proposal to approve and adopt the
Pyramid 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan and the proposal to authorize Pyramid’s board of directors, in its discretion, to adjourn
the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposals listed above, broker non-
votes and abstentions could prevent these proposals from receiving the required affirmative vote of (i) a majority of the shares
represented in person or by proxy and voting on each proposal and (ii) a majority of the shares required to constitute a quorum.
Revocability of Proxies
The presence of a stockholder at the Pyramid special meeting will not automatically revoke that stockholder’s proxy. However, a
stockholder may revoke a proxy at any time prior to its exercise by:
submitting a written revocation prior to the special meeting to the Corporate Secretary, Pyramid Oil Company, P.O. Box 832,
·
Bakersfield, California 93302;
submitting another signed and later dated proxy card and returning it by mail in time to be received before Pyramid’s special
·
meeting or by submitting a later dated proxy by the Internet or telephone prior to the special meeting; or
· attending the Pyramid special meeting and voting in person.
Voting Methods
A Pyramid stockholder of record may vote by attending the special meeting in person. You may also complete and mail your
proxy card in the return envelope enclosed or authorize the individuals named on your proxy card to vote your shares by calling
the toll-free telephone number or by using the Internet as described in the instructions included with your proxy card or voting
instruction card.
Solicitation of Proxies
In addition to solicitation by mail, directors, officers and employees of Pyramid may solicit proxies for the special meeting from
Pyramid stockholders personally or by telephone and other electronic means without additional remuneration for soliciting such
proxies. Pyramid and Yuma will equally share the expenses incurred in connection with the printing and mailing of this proxy
statement/prospectus.
42
YUMA SPECIAL MEETING
General
This proxy statement/prospectus is being furnished to Yuma stockholders in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the
Yuma board of directors to be used at the special meeting of stockholders to be held at [-], on [-], 2014 at [-] a.m., local time, and at
any adjournment or postponement of that meeting. This proxy statement/prospectus and the enclosed form of proxy are first being
sent to Yuma stockholders on or about [-], 2014.
Purpose of the Yuma Special Meeting
At the Yuma special meeting, holders of Yuma common stock and preferred stock as of the record date will be asked to consider
and vote on:
Proposal
 
1:
  
Proposal
 
2:
the proposal to approve the merger, the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
 
agreement, which are further described in the sections entitled “The Merger” and “The Merger Agreement”; and
  
the proposal to adjourn the Yuma special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies if there are
 
not sufficient votes to approve the foregoing proposal regarding the merger.
Recommendation of the Yuma Board of Directors
The Yuma board of directors has unanimously (i) determined that the merger is fair to and in the best interests of Yuma and its
stockholders, (ii) declared the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby advisable, and (iii) approved the
merger and the merger agreement (and the forms of exhibits thereto) and the transactions contemplated thereby.
The Yuma board of directors unanimously recommends that Yuma stockholders vote:
·“FOR” the proposal to approve the merger, the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement; and
· “FOR” any adjournment proposal.
Record Date and Voting
The Yuma board of directors has fixed the close of business on [-], 2014 as the record date for determining the holders of shares
of Yuma common stock and preferred stock entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Yuma special meeting and any
adjournments or postponements thereof. Only holders of record of shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock at the close
of business on that date will be entitled to vote at the Yuma special meeting and at any adjournment or postponement of that
meeting. At the close of business on the record date, there were [-] shares of Yuma common stock outstanding, held by
approximately [-] holders of record, and [-] shares of Yuma preferred stock outstanding, held by approximately [-] holders of
record.
Each holder of shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock outstanding on the record date will be entitled to one vote for
each share held of record upon each matter properly submitted at the Yuma special meeting and at any adjournment or
postponement thereof. In order for Yuma to satisfy its quorum requirements, the holders of at least a majority of the total number
of outstanding shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock entitled to vote at the meeting must be present. You will be
deemed to be present if you attend the meeting or if you submit a proxy card (including through the mail) that is received at or
prior to the meeting (and not revoked).
If your proxy card is properly executed and received by Yuma in time to be voted at the Yuma special meeting, the shares
represented by your proxy card (including those given through the mail) will be voted in accordance with the instructions that you
mark on your proxy card. If you execute your proxy but do not provide Yuma with any instructions, your shares will be voted
“FOR” the proposals set forth in the notice of special meeting.
The only matters that we expect to be presented at the Yuma special meeting are set forth in the notice of special meeting. If any
other matters properly come before the Yuma special meeting, the persons named in the proxy card will vote the shares
represented by all properly executed proxies on such matters in their best judgment.
43
Quorum
If you vote in person or by proxy at the Yuma special meeting, you will be counted for purposes of determining whether there is a
quorum at the meeting. Shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock present in person or by proxy at the Yuma special
meeting that are entitled to vote will be counted for the purpose of determining whether there is a quorum for the transaction of
business at the Yuma special meeting. The Yuma bylaws provide that a majority of the outstanding shares of Yuma common
stock and preferred stock entitled to vote, represented in person or by proxy, constitutes a quorum at a meeting of its
stockholders.
As of the record date:
Yuma directors and executive officers and their affiliates owned and were entitled to vote approximately [-] shares of Yuma
·
common stock, representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma common stock and approximately [-] shares
of Yuma preferred stock, representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma preferred stock;
Pyramid directors and executive officers and their affiliates did not own any shares of Yuma common stock or Yuma preferred
·
stock; and
Sam L. Banks, James W. Christmas, Frank A. Lodzinski, Ben T. Morris, Richard K. Stoneburner, Richard W. Volk and certain of
their affiliates have entered into a voting agreement with Pyramid pursuant to which these individuals have agreed, among other
things, to vote all shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock owned by each of them in favor of the transactions
·
contemplated in the merger agreement and to grant an irrevocable proxy to Michael D. Herman or any other designee of
Pyramid empowering him to vote all such shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock at any meeting of Yuma
stockholders called for the purpose of voting on the merger. As of [-], 2014, these stockholders owned approximately [-]% of the
issued and outstanding common stock of Yuma and [-]% of the issued and outstanding Yuma preferred stock.
Yuma currently expects that its executive officers will vote their shares of Yuma common stock and its directors will vote their
shares of Yuma preferred stock “FOR” all proposals set forth in the notice of special meeting.
Vote Required
Adoption of merger agreement (Proposal 1). The affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Yuma
common stock and two-thirds or 66⅔% of the outstanding shares of Yuma Series A and Series B preferred stock, voting together
but as a separate class, entitled to vote at the Yuma special meeting are required to approve and adopt the merger agreement.
The required vote of Yuma stockholders on the merger agreement is based upon the number of outstanding shares of Yuma
common stock and preferred stock entitled to vote at the Yuma special meeting, and not the number of shares that are actually
voted. The failure to submit a proxy card by mail or in person at the Yuma special meeting of any Yuma stockholder or the
abstention from voting by any Yuma stockholder, will have the same effect as a vote against the approval and adoption of the
merger agreement by the Yuma stockholder.
Approval of the adjournment of the Yuma special meeting (Proposal 2). The affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast by
holders of Yuma common stock and preferred stock voting together at the Yuma special meeting is required to approve the
proposal to adjourn the Yuma special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies if there are insufficient
votes at the time of the Yuma special meeting to adopt the merger agreement. The required vote of holders of Yuma common
stock and preferred stock to approve the proposal to adjourn the special meeting of Yuma stockholders, if necessary, to solicit
additional proxies is based on the number of shares that are actually voted, not on the number of outstanding shares of Yuma
common stock and preferred stock. The failure to submit a proxy card by mail or in person at the special meeting of Yuma
stockholders or the abstention from voting by holders of Yuma common stock will have no effect on this proposal. In accordance
with the Yuma bylaws, a vote to approve the proposal to adjourn the Yuma special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit
additional proxies if there are insufficient votes at the time of the Yuma special meeting to adopt the merger agreement may be
taken in the absence of a quorum. Yuma does not intend to call a vote on this proposal if Proposal 1 has been approved at the
Yuma special meeting.
Revocability of Proxies
The presence of a stockholder at the Yuma special meeting will not automatically revoke that stockholder’s proxy. However, a
stockholder may revoke a proxy at any time prior to its exercise by:
submitting a written revocation prior to the special meeting to Kirk F. Sprunger, Corporate Secretary, Yuma Energy, Inc., 1177
·
West Loop South, Suite 1825, Houston, Texas, 77090;
44
·submitting another proxy prior to the special meeting by mail that is dated later than the original proxy; or
· attending the Yuma special meeting and voting in person.
Voting by Mail
Yuma stockholders of record may submit their proxy cards by mail with the postage-paid envelope provided.
Solicitation of Proxies
In addition to solicitation by mail, directors, officers and employees of Yuma may solicit proxies for the special meeting from
Yuma stockholders personally or by telephone and other electronic means without additional remuneration for soliciting such
proxies. Yuma and Pyramid will equally share the expenses incurred in connection with the printing and mailing of this proxy
statement/prospectus.
45
THE MERGER
The following is a description of the material aspects of the merger. While Pyramid and Yuma believe that the following
description covers the material terms of the merger, the description may not contain all of the information that is important to
Pyramid stockholders and Yuma stockholders. Pyramid and Yuma encourage Pyramid stockholders and Yuma stockholders to
carefully read this entire proxy statement/prospectus, including the merger agreement attached to this proxy
statement/prospectus as Annex A and incorporated herein by reference, for a more complete understanding of the merger.
General
The Pyramid board of directors and the Yuma board of directors each have approved the merger agreement, which provides for
Merger Subsidiary, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid, to be merged with and into Yuma, with Yuma surviving this merger as
a wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid. We expect to complete the merger in the third quarter of 2014.
Each share of Pyramid common stock issued and outstanding at the effective time of the merger will remain issued and
outstanding as one share of common stock of Pyramid. Each share of Yuma common stock (including the shares of Yuma
preferred stock converted into shares of Yuma common stock) expected to be issued and outstanding at the effective time of the
merger will be converted into the right to receive 756.34 shares of Pyramid common stock, subject to adjustment if the Yuma
board of directors grant restricted stock awards to employees between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the
effective time of the merger and in the event of dissenting shares, other than issued and outstanding unvested shares of Yuma
restricted common stock and Yuma restricted stock units issued to employees under the Yuma stock plan that will be assumed
by Pyramid.
Background of the Merger
Yuma’s predecessor was established in 1983 and Yuma has operated as a privately-held independent oil and gas exploration,
development and production company since 1996. It has financed its activities through a combination of internally generated
funds and industry participations in projects that it has originated. In 2010, sensing growing opportunities in the U.S. oil and gas
industry, management of Yuma began to explore various strategic avenues to increase the level of Yuma’s activity and its oil and
gas production, revenues and reserves.
Pyramid has been in the oil and gas business since 1909. Except for some minor interests in New York, Texas and Wyoming, its
properties and operations are located in Kern and Santa Barbara Counties in California. However, it has only limited financial
and other resources and therefore has not been able to expand its oil and gas operations, revenues, production or reserves or
otherwise take advantage of emerging opportunities in the oil and gas industry.
Yuma placed approximately $30.5 million (net of offering costs) of its preferred stock with accredited investors in 2011 and 2012.
As part of the placements, Yuma undertook to create a liquidity event for its investors through (1) an initial public offering of its
securities, (2) merging with an existing public company, (3) registering its preferred stock and underlying common stock, or (4)
otherwise. In the fall of 2012, Alex Montano currently with ROTH, and Sam L. Banks, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
Yuma, began discussing the advantages and disadvantages of Yuma becoming a reporting and trading company through a
reverse merger with an existing public entity. In January 2013, Mr. Montano contacted Michael D. Herman, then Chairman and
principal stockholder of Pyramid, to introduce Yuma and the reverse merger concept. Several telephonic discussions were held
among Mr. Herman, Mr. Banks and Mr. Montano, again considering advantages and disadvantages of a possible merger
transaction which culminated in an in-person meeting in Houston, Texas in April 2013. At the conclusion of the meeting the
parties decided not to pursue a transaction.
During the past two years, Yuma had no relationship with ROTH other than as described herein and during the past two years
there was no compensation agreement, plan, arrangement or understanding between ROTH and Yuma and there are none
presently contemplated for the future.
During the past two years, Pyramid’s only relationship and compensation arrangements with ROTH are as described herein and
under “Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors—General” beginning on page [—].
Beginning in early 2013, Yuma spent several months exploring reverse mergers with Australian companies and the placement
and listing of its common stock on the Australian Stock Exchange. For various reasons, it became unclear whether the
undertaking on a foreign stock exchange would meet the short term and long term objectives of Yuma, a U.S. company, and its
U.S. stockholders.
46
In October of 2013, John H. Alexander, President and Chief Executive Officer and a Director of Pyramid, resigned his positions.
Michael D. Herman, the then Chairman of Pyramid assumed the role as Interim President and Chief Executive Officer of Pyramid.
Based upon the relative size of Pyramid and the capital requirements necessary to acquire or continue to develop its oil
properties, the Pyramid board of directors determined to consider options to enhance stockholder value. This was not a formal
process, but an informal approach to evaluation of options. Maintaining the status quo was not deemed to be in the best long
term interests of Pyramid stockholders. Therefore, over the following months, Mr. Herman had conversations with ROTH about
possible joint ventures, business combinations and mergers. Based upon the conversations with Mr. Herman, ROTH made an
introduction to Yuma and arranged meetings between both companies. The Pyramid board of directors determined this to be the
best option for Pyramid stockholders based in part on the operating history of Yuma, its current portfolio of oil and gas properties,
its current reserve base and production, and the quality of Yuma’s management team and board of directors.
November 5, 2013. During a visit to Houston, representatives of ROTH visited the offices of Yuma. During the course of the
meeting, ROTH suggested that it might be timely to revisit a possible merger with Pyramid since John H. Alexander, the long
time President, Chief Executive Officer and director of Pyramid had resigned from such positions as of September 30, 2013, and
Pyramid was operating with an Interim President and Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Herman. Subsequently, Mr. Banks contacted
Mr. Herman to see if there was an interest on the part of Pyramid to resume discussions regarding a merger of the two
companies.
After an expression of interest by Mr. Herman in Mr. Bank’s overture, the following occurred and is a chronological discussion of
events leading up to the filing of a Registration Statement on Form S-4 of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part. In
almost all discussions including the December 23, 2013 conference call summarized below, Pyramid was represented by its
Chairman and Interim President and Chief Executive Officer, Michael D. Herman and Richard D. Kasch, a director, and advised
by its counsel TroyGould PC; Yuma was represented by its Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Sam L. Banks, James J.
Jacobs, Vice President Corporate and Business Development and Kirk F. Springer, Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer and
Corporate Secretary. Yuma was advised by its counsel Jones & Keller, P.C. ROTH was not formally engaged by Pyramid until
December 20, 2013. Prior to this engagement, ROTH was the primary driver of the concept of a business combination between
Yuma and Pyramid. ROTH’s efforts included arranging for meetings, facilitating the exchange of information and providing
discussion points orally for the merits of such a transaction to each party. Once the decision was made to proceed with the
transaction, Pyramid engaged ROTH as its exclusive financial advisor.
November 11, 2013. Messrs. Banks and Herman called Mr. Montano of ROTH to inform him that both Yuma and Pyramid had
renewed interest in pursuing a combination of the two companies and asked ROTH if it could advise Pyramid as to the course of
action to be taken.
November 18, 2013. ROTH contacted Yuma and Pyramid and informed them that it would review information on both companies
and discuss, at a high level, the substantive and procedural aspects of a possible combination of the two companies.
November 22, 2013 through November 26, 2013. Yuma began to assemble information leading to a corporate presentation it had
indicated it would make available to ROTH and Pyramid’s management and board in their analyses of Yuma, its business
operations, financial condition and future prospects. Several emails requesting and providing information were exchanged by
Yuma and ROTH. Yuma completed its 38 page corporate presentation dated November 2013 and forwarded a copy to ROTH for
its use in advising Pyramid. The corporate presentation described Yuma’s oil and gas business, primarily its key producing oil
and gas properties, acreage positions, financial position and management backgrounds. The presentation did not mention
Pyramid or the proposed merger; hence, it did not contain any opinions or appraisals of relative values. Yuma also provided
ROTH with interim summary reserve information as of July 31, 2013 and Yuma’s audited historical financial information.
December 3, 2013. As part of the ongoing information process mentioned above, Yuma provided ROTH, an Independent
Technical Expert’s Report prepared by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”) which estimated reserves and future
revenue as of July 31, 2013 relating to certain of Yuma’s oil and gas properties located in Louisiana, North Dakota, Oklahoma
and Texas.
December 4, 2013 through December 11, 2013. ROTH prepared a valuation analysis of Yuma based in part on certain
information provided by Yuma including, audited financial statements, third-party reserve reports and the corporate presentation
referred to above, encompassing its corporate history, management and board of directors, existing properties and an asset
summary. ROTH requested that Yuma review the information contained in the analysis to address any errors or inconsistencies.
ROTH made revisions in its valuations and then sent a complete presentation to Mr. Herman including its estimated value of
Yuma and the potential impact a combination with Yuma might have on Pyramid. The valuation included data provided by the
management team of Yuma. The revisions made were primarily based on the Pyramid closing stock price for each day, which
affected the valuation. ROTH reviewed its presentation with Mr. Herman who determined to call a special meeting of Pyramid’s
board of directors to begin to consider a merger with Yuma.
December 12, 2013. A conference call was held between Pyramid’s board of directors and representatives of ROTH to review
ROTH’s presentation. During the course of the conversation, ROTH discussed a wide range of options available to accomplish a
business combination. As part of these conversations, ROTH was asked by Mr. Herman to suggest relative valuations of both
Pyramid and Yuma. ROTH advised the board as to how it viewed the proposed value for Yuma and the resultant valuation for
Pyramid. ROTH’s presentation included an analysis of each of Yuma and Pyramid as a stand-alone entity and then as a
combined company together with the relative values of Yuma and Pyramid contributed thereto. During this presentation, ROTH
explained the manner in which it valued Yuma, including its inferred values based upon:
47
Oil and Gas Reserves
Net Asset Value
1.
2.
3. Mergers and Acquisitions Comparable Transactions
4.
Comparable Public Companies
Likewise, ROTH applied the same manner of value to Pyramid, (utilizing appropriate comparable transactions and companies) to
suggest a range of value for Pyramid. Based upon these separate analyses, ROTH then discussed the relative contribution by
each of Yuma and Pyramid to a combined company based primarily on:
1.
2.
3.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
Current Production
Net Asset Value
In addition, ROTH provided to the board of Pyramid an analysis taking into consideration the premium paid by acquirers in recent
transactions that ROTH believed were comparable to a Yuma/Pyramid combination. Based upon this analysis, ROTH suggested
that should Pyramid command a similar premium, that it should be based upon the relative contributions of value to a combined
company, Pyramid should retain 7% ownership on a post-merger basis.
In addition, ROTH provided an analysis on how a combined company would compare to certain publicly traded companies that
ROTH believed were comparable to the combined company. In particular, based upon the board’s familiarity with Synergy
Resources Corporation, ROTH conducted a side-by-side comparison to Synergy Resources Corporation taking into
consideration, current rates of production, reserve volumes, net present value and projected EBITDA for 2013 and 2014.
Based upon this analysis, ROTH recommended that Pyramid tentatively propose the acquisition of Yuma based upon a 93/7
equity split with 7% being allocated to Pyramid. It was agreed that in the event the parties moved forward with a transaction,
Pyramid would engage ROTH as its financial advisor. The Pyramid board then instructed ROTH and management to arrange a
meeting with representatives from Yuma to discuss this proposal. This valuation analysis along with the analysis prepared earlier
by ROTH was relied upon primarily by the Pyramid board in its decisions regarding the valuation used for the merger.
December 13, 2013. ROTH contacted Yuma and Pyramid, and arranged a meeting to be held between the two companies’
management teams on December 18, 2013 in Denver, Colorado. Yuma also provided a form of confidentiality agreement to
ROTH for Pyramid’s review.
December 17, 2013. ROTH returned the confidentiality agreement reflecting Pyramid’s comments to Yuma for its consideration
and it was signed on December 27, 2013.
December 18, 2013. Mr. Banks and James J. Jacobs, Yuma’s Vice President of Corporate and Business Development, traveled
to Denver, Colorado to meet with Mr. Herman and Rick D. Kasch, a member of Pyramid’s board of directors, and Mr. Montano.
ROTH began the meeting with a discussion of various aspects of a potential business combination of Yuma and Pyramid,
including its determination that an appropriate business combination would result in a 93/7 post ownership structure, as
discussed on the December 12th conference call between ROTH and Pyramid’s board of directors. Thereafter, the meeting
continued with the representatives of each company gathering information and asking specific questions about the other
company’s business, assets, financial condition and future prospects and general questions about the other company’s future
plans, motivations and interest in pursuing a combination of the two companies. At the outset, both parties agreed that this should
be an all-stock transaction that would most closely align the interest of the respective stockholders and provide them with future
upside potential. A cash purchase by Yuma of Pyramid assets would not achieve the longer range strategies of either company.
Furthermore, given the anticipated capital requirements to continue to develop the oil and gas assets of Yuma, it was agreed that
all available cash should be utilized for asset development.
Discussions of the foregoing and Yuma’s near and long-term strategy ensued and included:
· Yuma’s future plans for acreage, asset and/or company acquisitions;
a more detailed examination of the key aspects of future targeted areas for Yuma’s growth, including oil/liquids bias,
·
conventional/unconventional prospects and geographic areas of focus;
48
a more detailed examination of Yuma’s processes for identifying areas to lease within new prospective plays, including the
·
geologic, geophysical and technical information and processes underlying its target areas;
· Yuma’s plans to finance its acquisition strategy and growth;
·the status and nature of any acquisition discussions Yuma has had with other companies and industry partners;
·details of Yuma’s management, technical and operational staff and information regarding their ability to execute Yuma’s
strategy;
Yuma’s expectations regarding the effect that the mergers and acquisitions market and commodity prices might have on its
·
strategy;
·information regarding Yuma’s current liquidity and near-term capital plans and financing strategies;
·further details regarding the process and timing of a possible transaction between the companies; and
·information regarding the current ownership structure of Yuma as between common and preferred stockholders.
December 19, 2013. Yuma management advised its board of directors that Mr. Banks and Mr. Jacobs had business combination
discussions with Pyramid and requested authorization to make or accept an offer to Pyramid looking to merge the two
companies. After Messrs. Banks and Jacobs provided their summaries and assessment of the discussions with Mr. Herman and
ROTH, including the proposed 93/7 post-transaction ownership split, valuation of ROTH and Yuma’s own internal analysis of
value (upon which Yuma management used primarily in its decisions regarding valuation for the merger), the Yuma board
expressed its interest in the benefits that a combination with Pyramid might bring to Yuma and its stockholders. These benefits
primarily included advantages that might accrue as a result of Yuma’s assuming Pyramid’s role as a fully reporting SEC
company with securities listed on a national stock exchange. Yuma’s board of directors unanimously agreed that management
should pursue the opportunity with Pyramid management and ROTH. In accordance with the board’s instructions later the same
day Yuma sent a proposal to Pyramid in-line with the ROTH presentation suggesting a combination of the two companies with a
post-transaction ownership of 93% and 7% as between Yuma stockholders and Pyramid stockholders, respectively.
December 20, 2013. Pyramid formally engaged ROTH for the purposes of serving as its exclusive advisor in connection with,
among other possible transactions (i) any merger, consolidation, reorganization or other business combination, or (ii) acquisition
of assets, acquisition of stock, sale, transfer or other disposition of all or a significant portion of the capital stock or assets of
Pyramid, tender or exchange offer, leveraged buyout, joint venture formation or partnership, or any other business disposition.
December 23, 2013. A board meeting was held by Pyramid to discuss the December 18th meeting in Denver. A representative of
ROTH was present at the meeting and responded to questions from the Pyramid board of directors. Next steps were discussed
and the board authorized management and its representatives to undertake the necessary steps towards concluding a form of
business combination with Yuma. Pyramid’s board of directors considered and ultimately determined that a special committee of
its board of directors to negotiate and oversee the transaction on behalf of the entire board was not necessary or warranted under
the circumstances. In reaching its determination, the board considered that Mr. Herman had no current intention of entering into
an employment agreement or remaining employed with Pyramid beyond any reasonable transition period after the merger and
that he was by far the largest holder of Pyramid common stock, which directly aligned his interests with other stockholders. Also,
Mr. Herman had no change-in-control or similar payment that would be triggered by the merger. Moreover, substantial business
and financial experience and unique perspectives of each member of Pyramid’s board coupled with the active involvement of
each of the independent members of the board supported the decision not to form a special committee of the board.
December 23, 2013. After a favorable indication of interest from Pyramid, a conference call was held among Yuma, Pyramid and
ROTH to discuss the next steps to be taken. All agreed that a non-binding term sheet should be prepared by counsel so that both
companies and ROTH would have a clear understanding of the basic structure, terms and conditions of the proposed transaction.
Counsel for each company was contacted and work on the term sheet was commenced.
December 26, 2013. Counsel to Pyramid forwarded the first draft of a preliminary non-binding term sheet. Among other things,
the term sheet set forth: (i) the proposed structure of the transaction (a reverse triangular merger); (ii) an exclusivity or non-
solicitation period until January 31, 2014 at which time the term sheet would expire unless a definitive, contractually binding,
agreement had been reached; and (iii) conditions to the closing of any such transaction. The term sheet was signed on
December 27, 2013.
49
December 28, 2013 through February 4, 2014. Management teams of Yuma and Pyramid, counsel to Yuma and counsel to
Pyramid, began the process of negotiating the merger agreement, including the mutual representations and warranties of the
companies, covenants and conditions to closing, non-solicitation provisions and exceptions, fiduciary outs for alternative and
superior proposals, and termination fees and expenses. Also during this period, management of Pyramid and Yuma exchanged
due diligence checklists and continued their analyses of each other’s business, assets, financial condition and future prospects,
which process had begun in preceding weeks. ROTH assisted in these activities giving both parties insight into market customs
and practices in transactions of the same general nature or contemplated by Yuma and Pyramid. Many drafts of the merger
agreement were exchanged, revised, again exchanged until a near final draft was agreed to by management of Pyramid, its
counsel, and management of Yuma and its counsel. The drafts reflected the addition of information which was being provided by
the parties, a provision for reincorporation of Pyramid from California to Delaware (which was later abandoned), the treatment of
stock options and restricted stock awards, treatment of dissenting shares of Yuma, procedure for the exchange of shares, the
nature and extent of representations and warranties of both companies and the amount of “fiduciary out” breakup fees. These
drafts resulted in a near final draft which became the final draft of the merger agreement as included in this proxy
statement/prospectus as Annex A.
January 7, 2014 through January 9, 2014. Members of Yuma’s management team held due diligence meetings in Pyramid’s
Bakersfield offices.
January 27, 2014 through January 29, 2014. Members of Yuma’s management team held additional due diligence meetings in
Pyramid’s Bakersfield offices.
February 1, 2014 and February 3, 2014. The board of directors of Pyramid met telephonically with counsel to discuss terms and
conditions of the draft merger agreement and related issues for the board to consider. The board also met telephonically with
Pyramid's independent auditor, SingerLewak LLP, to discuss financial statement and related matters concerning the proposed
merger.
February 4, 2014. The board of directors of Yuma met telephonically with management and counsel. At the meeting,
management of Yuma provided an overview of the transaction process and timing; Yuma’s management and counsel provided a
comprehensive report on diligence activities and findings; and Yuma’s counsel provided a status report on the final negotiations
of significant terms of the draft merger agreement. The Yuma board of directors then considered and unanimously approved the
proposed combination with Pyramid on the terms and conditions set forth in the final draft of the merger agreement. Management
was authorized to execute the merger agreement and the related voting agreement and take all actions necessary to carry out its
terms and conditions of both agreements.
February 4, 2014. Pyramid’s board of directors met telephonically with counsel and representatives of ROTH to engage in further
discussions regarding the proposed transaction structure with Yuma and associated issues. All directors were present. The terms
of the merger agreement draft of February 3, 2014 were discussed including treatment of stock options of Pyramid, tax treatment
of the merger consideration, procedures for the exchange of shares, the desire of Yuma to have Pyramid reincorporated from
California to Delaware, representations, warranties and conditions in the merger agreement, the “fiduciary out” section of the
merger agreement, and Pyramid’s and Yuma’s conduct of activities prior to closing of the merger. Counsel to Pyramid provided
an overview of the proposed merger transaction and process for the Pyramid board to consider the reincorporation which was
later abandoned, the merger and the merger agreement.
Pyramid’s board of directors also received ROTH’s financial analyses of the proposed transaction. ROTH provided a written
presentation relating to its proposed fairness opinion, which presentation included an overview of Pyramid and Yuma, and each
method of valuation analysis utilized by ROTH, as well as financial analyses of both companies. More information regarding
ROTH’s financial analyses and fairness opinion is set forth herein under “The Merger—Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the
Pyramid Board of Directors.” ROTH delivered its oral opinion that the exchange ratio of the merger was fair to Pyramid and its
stockholders, from a financial point of view, and ROTH stated that its written opinion, confirming its oral opinion, which was
based on and subject to various assumptions made, procedures followed and matters considered in connection with such
opinion, would be forthcoming on February 5, 2014.
Thereafter the Pyramid board of directors unanimously: (i) approved the merger, the merger agreement and each of the
transactions contemplated therein which include, among other things, the reincorporation from California to Delaware (which was
later abandoned), approval of the issuance of shares to Yuma stockholders and the change of name of the combined entity to
“Yuma Energy, Inc.”; (ii) authorized management to execute the merger agreement in substantially the form presented to the
Pyramid board and the related voting agreement and take all actions necessary to carry out its terms and conditions of both
agreements; and (iii) recommended that the merger agreement be submitted to Pyramid stockholders for approval in accordance
with the terms of the merger agreement.
February 6, 2014. Pyramid and Yuma issued a joint press release announcing the proposed merger and Pyramid filed a Current
Report on Form 8-K with the SEC regarding the execution of the merger agreement.
50
Late July 2014. During late July, Pyramid and Yuma negotiated the form of the amended and restated agreement and plan of
merger and reorganization. Under the new structure a proposed reincorporation of Pyramid from California to Delaware was
eliminated. The economics of the transaction remained the same.
August 1, 2014. The Yuma board of directors unanimously approved the amended and restated agreement and plan of merger
and reorganization and the amended and restated voting agreements. Also on August 1, 2014, Pyramid’s board of directors met
telephonically with counsel and representatives of ROTH to engage in discussions regarding the new proposed transaction
structure with Yuma and associated issues. All directors were present. The terms of the amended and restated agreement and
plan of merger and reorganization draft of July 31, 2014 were discussed, including the amendments to the restated articles of
incorporation of Pyramid. Counsel to Pyramid provided an overview of the revised merger transaction and process for the
Pyramid board to consider the merger and the amended and restated agreement and plan of merger and reorganization.
Thereafter the Pyramid board of directors unanimously: (i) approved the merger, the amended and restated agreement and plan
of merger and reorganization and each of the transactions contemplated therein which include, among other things, approval of
the issuance of shares to Yuma stockholders and approval of the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation; (ii) authorized
management to execute the merger agreement in substantially the form presented to the Pyramid board and the related voting
agreement and take all actions necessary to carry out its terms and conditions of both agreements; and (iii) recommended that
the merger agreement be submitted to Pyramid stockholders for approval in accordance with the terms of the merger agreement.
Recommendation of Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger
Pyramid’s board of directors has determined that the merger is fair to, and in the best interests of, Pyramid and its stockholders. In
deciding to approve the merger agreement and to recommend that Pyramid’s stockholders vote to approve the issuance of
shares of Pyramid common stock in connection with the merger, Pyramid’s board of directors consulted with Pyramid’s
management and legal and financial advisors and considered a variety of factors, including the following material factors:
the combination will greatly diversify Pyramid’s oil and gas operations which are presently concentrated in a small area in
·
California;
· the combination will increase estimated proved reserves;
the combined entity’s market capitalization and its expected enhanced access to debt and equity capital markets, which the
·
Pyramid board of directors believes will enhance the ability to finance development and production of the combined entity’s
increased scale of operations;
the merger will provide Pyramid with participation in a larger portfolio of exploitation and exploration opportunities in liquids
·
prone resource plays within areas targeted by Yuma;
the merger will create a larger company that is expected to have more liquidity in its common stock and better access to capital
·
markets, which should provide greater financial flexibility;
the merger agreement generally prohibits Pyramid, its management employees, directors and advisors from taking any action to
seek or solicit an alternative transaction or takeover proposal and from recommending, participating in discussions regarding or
·
furnishing information with respect to an alternative takeover proposal, except in each case in limited circumstances, which
permit the members of the Pyramid board to comply with their fiduciary duties; and
in the event that the merger is not consummated, the failed transaction costs, including costs of potential litigation, arising from
·
the failed merger agreement, will be significant to a company the size of Pyramid.
Pyramid’s board of directors considered other information and a number of additional factors in reaching its decision including:
information concerning the financial condition, results of operations, prospects and businesses of Pyramid and Yuma, including
·
the respective companies’ reserves, production volumes, cash flows from operations, performance of common stock of
Pyramid’s common stock price over various periods, as well as current industry, economic and market conditions;
the results of business, legal and financial due diligence investigations of Yuma conducted by Pyramid’s management and its
·
legal and financial advisors;
51
the presentation and opinion of ROTH to the effect that, as of the date of the opinion and based on the assumptions, limitations,
·
qualifications and conditions stated in the opinion letter, from a financial point of view, the merger exchange ratio is fair to
Pyramid and its stockholders, from a financial point of view;
the provisions that allow Pyramid to engage in negotiations with, and provide information to, third parties in response to
·
unsolicited, bona fide, written acquisition proposals from such third parties that may be superior to the Yuma proposed merger;
and
unless an alternative superior merger proposal received from a third party is matched by Yuma, the merger agreement allows
·
Pyramid to terminate the merger agreement prior to the receipt of Pyramid’s stockholder approval of the merger and to enter into
a written agreement with a third party to effectuate a superior proposal.
Pyramid’s board of directors also considered a variety of risks and other potentially negative factors concerning the merger and
the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including:
because Pyramid will be issuing a large number of new shares of common stock to Yuma’s stockholders in the merger, each
·
outstanding share of Pyramid common stock immediately prior to the merger will represent a much smaller percentage of
Pyramid’s total shares of common stock after the merger;
·if oil or gas prices decrease, the combined assets will be less desirable from a financial point of view;
there are significant risks inherent in combining and integrating two companies, including that the companies may not be
·
integrated successfully and that successful integration of the companies will require the dedication of management resources,
which will temporarily detract attention from the day-to-day businesses of the combined company;
the capital requirements necessary to achieve the expected growth of the combined company’s businesses will be significant,
·
and there can be no assurance that the combined company will be able to fund all of its capital requirements from operating
cash flows;
the merger might not be completed as a result of a failure to satisfy the conditions contained in the merger agreement. Neither
·
Pyramid nor Yuma is obligated to consummate the merger unless the conditions in the merger agreement are satisfied or, in
some cases, waived; and
·other matters described under the caption “Risk Factors” beginning on page [—].
This discussion of the information and factors considered by Pyramid’s board of directors in reaching its conclusions and
recommendations includes all of the material factors considered by the board but is not intended to be exhaustive. In view of the
wide variety of factors considered by Pyramid’s board of directors in evaluating the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by it, including the merger, and the complexity of these matters, Pyramid’s board of directors did not find it
practicable to, and did not attempt to, quantify, rank or otherwise assign relative weight to those factors. In addition, different
members of Pyramid’s board of directors may have given different weight to different factors.
It should be noted that this explanation of the reasoning of Pyramid’s board of directors and all other information presented in this
section is forward-looking in nature and, therefore, should be read in light of the factors discussed under the heading “Cautionary
Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” beginning on page [—] of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Recommendation of the Pyramid Board of Directors
Pyramid’s board of directors determined that the merger, the merger agreement and the other transactions contemplated in the
merger agreement are fair to, and in the best interests of Pyramid and its stockholders. Accordingly, the Pyramid board of
directors unanimously adopted resolutions (i) determining that the merger agreement and the merger, in accordance with the
terms of the merger agreement, and the other transactions contemplated thereby are fair to, advisable and in the best interests of
Pyramid and its stockholders, (ii) approving and adopting the merger agreement and approving the merger and the other
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, (iii) directing that the merger agreement be submitted to a vote of the
Pyramid stockholders at the Pyramid special meeting and (iv) recommending that the Pyramid stockholders vote “FOR” the
approval and adoption of the merger agreement.
52
Recommendation of Yuma’s Board of Directors and Reasons for the Merger
After careful consideration, the Yuma board of directors unanimously approved and adopted the merger agreement, the merger
and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and determined that the merger agreement, the merger and
the other transactions contemplated by the merger, taken as a whole, are advisable, fair to and in the best interests of Yuma and
its stockholders. The Yuma board of directors unanimously recommends that Yuma stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to
approve and adopt the merger agreement.
In reaching its decision that the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, taken as a whole, are
advisable, fair to and in the best interests of Yuma and its stockholders, Yuma’s board of directors consulted with Yuma’s
management and its third party legal advisors and considered a variety of factors, including the following material factors:
•
the fact that there is no public trading market for Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock and that shares of the combined
company’s common stock will be registered and listed for trading on the NYSE MKT;
•
•
the public nature of the combined company’s common stock may facilitate future capital raising, acquisitions of assets or
companies for shares of common stock, and a means through stock options and similar incentives to attract high caliber officers
and employees and align their interests with those of stockholders;
through their receipt of Pyramid common stock as part of the merger consideration, Yuma stockholders have the opportunity to
participate in the combined company’s growth and share appreciation in the future (including share appreciation resulting from
further exploitation and development of Yuma assets) should they determine to retain their Pyramid common stock after the
merger;
•
Yuma’s board of directors also considered that the structure of the merger consideration would be desirable to its stockholders
in that the common stock is issuable in the merger would not be a taxable transaction for Yuma’s stockholders;
•
•
the combined entity’s market capitalization and its expected enhanced access to debt and equity capital markets, which the
Yuma board of directors believes will enhance the ability to finance development and production of the combined entity’s
increased scale of operations;
the importance of increased operating scale and size in successfully growing, developing and operating a large geographically
diverse “resource play” focused company in today’s oil and gas industry. Yuma’s board recognized that scale and size have
become increasingly important in securing access to services and equipment, sourcing acquisitions, developing infrastructure,
attracting necessary debt and equity capital and attracting and retaining quality technical and operating personnel. The board
believes the merger and subsequent public reporting visibility and trading of its securities will provide the opportunity for growth
and related benefits of scale faster than Yuma could attain if it were to continue growing as a private entity;
•the financial position of Pyramid in that it has cash and generates positive cash flow on a monthly basis;
•Yuma’s management believes the Pyramid assets have reserve growth potential with lower cost to grow production;
•
current industry, economic and market conditions and the understanding of the Yuma board of directors of the present and
anticipated environment in the independent exploration and production sector of the energy industry, including the continuing
consolidation within the sector; and
•
the results of the business, petroleum engineering, legal, environmental and financial due diligence investigations of Pyramid
conducted by Yuma’s management and outside advisors.
In addition to the merger consideration, Yuma’s board of directors considered additional terms and conditions of the merger
agreement that it believes are favorable, including:
•
•
the exchange ratio for the Pyramid shares to be received in the merger is fixed so that the Yuma stockholders will have the
continued opportunity to benefit from any appreciation in the share price of Pyramid common stock between the announcement
of the merger agreement and completion of the merger;
the provisions that allow Yuma to engage in negotiations with, and provide information to, third parties in response to
unsolicited, bona fide, written acquisition proposals from such third parties that may be superior to the Pyramid merger
consideration;
53
unless an alternative superior merger proposal received from a third party is matched by Pyramid, the merger agreement allows
Yuma to terminate the merger agreement prior to the receipt of Yuma’s stockholder approval of the merger and to enter into a
written agreement with a third party to effectuate a superior proposal; and
•
•
the merger agreement requires the approval of the holders of at least a majority of Yuma’s common stock and two-thirds or
66⅔% of its preferred stock.
The Yuma board of directors also considered certain risks associated with the merger including, among others, the following
risks:
•that the merger might not be completed as a result of a failure to satisfy one or more conditions to the merger;
• that the operations of the two companies may not be integrated successfully;
• that any anticipated synergies may not be fully realized;
•
•
that the trading value of the shares of Pyramid on the date the merger agreement was signed might be less at the time the
merger is consummated as a result of market fluctuations in the price of Pyramid common stock due to the fixed exchange ratio
of the Pyramid common stock to be issued for the Yuma common stock and preferred stock;
that the merger agreement generally prohibits Yuma, its management employees, directors and advisors from taking any action
to seek or solicit an alternative transaction or takeover proposal and from recommending, participating in discussions regarding
or furnishing information with respect to an alternative takeover proposal, except in each case in limited circumstances, which
permit the members of the Yuma board to comply with their fiduciary duties;
•
that in the event of the termination of the merger agreement in certain instances Yuma could be responsible for payment to
Pyramid of a termination fee of $1.0 million;
•
in the event that the merger is not consummated, the failed transaction costs, including costs of potential litigation, arising from
the failed merger agreement, will be significant to Yuma; and
• other matters described under the caption “Risk Factors” beginning on page [—].
The foregoing discussion of the factors considered by the Yuma board of directors in making its decision is not exhaustive, but
includes the material factors considered by the Yuma board of directors. In view of the variety of material factors considered in
connection with its evaluation of the merger, the Yuma board of directors did not find it practicable to, and did not, quantify or
otherwise assign relative or specific weight to any of these factors, and individual directors may have given different weight to
different factors. Rather, Yuma’s board of directors made its determination based on the totality of the information presented to it.
The above description of the Yuma board of directors’ considerations relating to the merger is forward-looking in nature. This
information should be read in light of the factors discussed above under “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking
Statements” beginning on page [—] of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Recommendation of the Yuma Board of Directors
At its meeting on February 4, 2014, after due consideration, the Yuma board of directors unanimously adopted resolutions (i)
determining that the merger agreement and the merger, in accordance with the terms of the merger agreement, and the other
transactions contemplated thereby are fair to, advisable and in the best interests of Yuma and its stockholders, (ii) approving and
adopting the merger agreement and approving the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, (iii)
directing that the merger agreement be submitted to a vote of the Yuma stockholders at the Yuma special meeting and (iv)
recommending that the Yuma stockholders vote “FOR” the approval and adoption of the merger agreement.
54
Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners to the Pyramid Board of Directors
Pyramid’s board of directors retained ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, or ROTH, to deliver an opinion as to the fairness of the
exchange ratio in the merger as to Pyramid and its stockholders. At a meeting of Pyramid’s board of directors on February 4,
2014, ROTH issued its oral opinion to the board of directors, later confirmed in a written opinion dated February 5, 2014, that,
based upon and subject to the assumptions, procedures, considerations and limitations set forth in the written opinion and based
upon such other factors as ROTH considered relevant, the exchange ratio in the merger is fair to Pyramid and its stockholders,
from a financial point of view, as of the date of the opinion.
The full text of the ROTH written opinion dated February 5, 2014, confirming its oral opinion issued to Pyramid’s board of
directors on February 4, 2014, sets forth, among other things, the assumptions made, procedures followed, matters
considered and limitations on the scope of the review undertaken by ROTH in rendering its opinion, is attached to this
proxy statement/prospectus as Annex D and is incorporated in its entirety herein by reference. You are urged to, and
should, carefully read the ROTH opinion in its entirety and this summary is qualified by reference to the written opinion.
The ROTH opinion addresses only the fairness, from a financial point of view and as of the date of the opinion, of the
exchange ratio in the merger. ROTH’s opinion was provided to Pyramid’s board of directors in connection with its
consideration of the merger and does not address Pyramid’s underlying business decision to proceed with or effect the
merger or the structure of the merger, or the relative merits of the merger compared to any alternative business strategy
or transaction in which Pyramid might otherwise engage. The ROTH opinion was not approved by an internal
committee.
In connection with rendering the opinion described above and performing its financial analyses, ROTH, among other things:
·reviewed and analyzed the financial terms of the unsigned execution draft of the merger agreement, dated February 4, 2014;
reviewed certain publicly available business and financial information of Pyramid that ROTH believed to be relevant to its
·
inquiry;
reviewed certain internal financial statements and other financial and operating data concerning Pyramid and Yuma,
·
respectively;
·reviewed certain financial forecasts relating to Yuma prepared by the management of Yuma;
·reviewed the reported prices and trading activity for Pyramid common stock;
compared the financial performance of Yuma and Pyramid, respectively, and the prices and trading activity of Pyramid common
·
stock with that of certain publicly traded companies ROTH deemed relevant;
compared certain financial terms of the merger to financial terms, to the extent publicly available, of certain other business
·
combination transactions ROTH deemed relevant; and
·performed such other analyses and considered such other factors as ROTH deemed appropriate.
In addition, ROTH held multiple conversations with senior management and the board of directors of Pyramid, including, in
particular, regarding the course of discussions of the merger. These conversations also entailed recent developments in the
business operations of Pyramid, including a review of business opportunities and anticipated oil and natural gas production
schedules prepared by management along with the corresponding financial projections.
The preparation of an opinion is a complex analytical process involving various determinations as to the most appropriate and
relevant methods of financial analyses and the application of those methods to particular circumstances. Therefore, such an
opinion is not readily susceptible to partial analysis or summary description. In arriving at its opinion, ROTH did not attribute any
particular weight to any analysis or factor considered by it, or make any conclusion as to how the results of any given analysis,
taken alone, supported its opinion. Accordingly, ROTH believes that its analyses must be considered as a whole and that
selecting portions of its analyses and the factors considered by it, without considering all of the factors and analyses, would
create a misleading view of the processes underlying ROTH’s opinion. In addition, in certain of its analyses ROTH derived a
value for Yuma and compared the consideration being paid by Pyramid to certain other companies and other transactions that
ROTH deemed comparable. No public companies and/or transaction utilized by ROTH, as a comparison, are identical to Yuma
or Pyramid or to the proposed transaction with Pyramid. An analysis of the results of such comparison is not mathematical; rather,
it involves complex considerations and judgments concerning differences in financial and operating characteristics of the
comparable companies and transactions and other factors that could affect the public trading value of the comparable companies
or enterprise value of the comparable transactions to which Yuma and the transaction with Pyramid were being compared.
55
In performing its analyses, ROTH made certain assumptions with respect to industry performance, general business, economic,
market and financial conditions and other matters, many of which are beyond the control of ROTH, Yuma and Pyramid. Any
estimates contained in the analyses performed by ROTH are not necessarily indicative of actual values or future results, which
may be significantly more or less favorable than suggested by such analyses. Additionally, estimates of the value of businesses
or securities do not purport to be appraisals or to reflect the prices at which such businesses or securities might actually be sold.
Accordingly, such analyses and estimates are inherently subject to substantial uncertainty. The ROTH opinion and ROTH’s
presentation to the Pyramid board were among several factors taken into consideration by the Pyramid board in making its
determination to approve the merger agreement. Consequently, the ROTH analyses described herein should not be viewed as
determinative of the decision of the Pyramid board or the Pyramid management to engage in the merger.
The following is a summary of the material financial analyses that ROTH prepared and relied on in delivering its opinion to the
Pyramid board of directors. This summary includes information presented in tabular format, which tables must be read together
with the text of each analysis summary and considered as a whole in order to understand fully the financial analyses presented
by ROTH. The tables alone do not constitute a complete summary of the financial analyses. The order in which these analyses
are presented below, and the results of those analyses, should not be taken as any indication of the relative importance or weight
given to these analyses by ROTH or Pyramid’s board of directors. Except as otherwise noted, the following quantitative
information, to the extent that it is based upon market data, is based upon market data as it existed on or before February 3, 2014,
and is not necessarily indicative of current market conditions.
Financial Analyses
ROTH utilized a series of financial analyses whereby it, among other things, compared Yuma to certain transactions and peer
companies to determine a range of values for Yuma. ROTH also valued Yuma’s assets using a net asset value and discounted
cash flow analysis. The mean of these values was then compared to the enterprise value of Pyramid as of February 3, 2014,
which was calculated by ROTH to be $20,225,000.
Comparable Transaction Analysis
ROTH conducted a comparable transactions analysis by examining the terms of selected transactions in the U.S. Gulf Coast
region that ROTH believed are comparable to Yuma based upon varying factors including size, geographic location, and/or
market perception. Based upon its initial review, ROTH considered 234 transactions and removed all the transactions prior to
December 28, 2012, resulting in 105 transactions. ROTH further reduced the sampling group to 33 comparable transactions
based upon a specific review of the transactions compared to Yuma. ROTH reduced the number of comparable transactions
down to 33 based upon the available information on each specific transaction. In certain cases, there was not sufficient
information available on a particular transaction to allow a proper comparative analysis. ROTH compared the purchase price
being paid, versus the amount of proved reserves being purchased to determine an inferred price being paid per proved barrel of
oil equivalent (“Boe”) in dollars per one million barrels of oil equivalent (“MMBoe”) (the “Proved Reserves Value”). ROTH also
compared the purchase price being paid, versus the amount of daily production being purchased to determine an inferred price
being paid per BOE produced each day (the “Production Value”). In reviewing these transactions, ROTH took into consideration
various factors including total transaction value, geographic location and diversity of the proven assets and the relative mix of
reserves broken down into proved developed and proved un-developed categories.
ROTH conducted a review of the valuation of Yuma based upon comparable transactions in the U.S. Gulf Coast region since
December 28, 2012 and found that the mean Proved Reserves Value was $20.67 per BOE and that the mean per flowing barrel
was $109,937 per Boe/d. The mean Proved Reserves Value and the mean Production Value were applied to Yuma’s reserve
report as of July 31, 2013 of approximately 19.8 MMBoe, Yuma’s current rate of production of 2,850 Boe/d, and reduced by
Yuma’s asset retirement obligation ($14,855,000), working capital deficit ($1,086,000), and long term debt ($24,950,000). Yuma’s
additional assets of $19,430,000 were added to the valuation.
Transaction Value / Proved 
Transaction Value 
Transaction Value / 
  
  
 
 
Flowing Barrel (MBoe/d)
Reserves Value (MMBoe)
($MM)
 $ 768.00
  $
  $ 293,333.33
 
High
 
  $ 16,605.26
  $
Low
 $ 26.25
Mean  $ 272.45
  $
  $ 109,937.10
57.21
7.03
20.67
Median $ 235.60
$
18.79
$ 97,237.25
56
Using the mean Proved Reserves Value, the mean inferred value for Yuma resulted in $388,032,578 as adjusted for the items
above the table. Using the mean price paid per flowing barrel value, the mean inferred value for Yuma resulted in a value of
$291,859,742 as adjusted for the items above the table.
Comparable Company Analysis
ROTH performed a separate analysis of the implied value of Yuma using a selected group of publicly traded oil and gas
companies primarily focused on exploration or early stage appraisal assets. Based on its review of the applicable metrics for
each of the selected sector relevant peer companies that it believes are comparable to Yuma based upon varying factors
including size, geographic location, and/or market perception. ROTH determined the total enterprise value per EBITDA (earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization) for the year ended December 31, 2013 and management projections for the
year ending December 31, 2014. ROTH utilized: (i) enterprise value (“EV”) (which is defined as market value of equity plus book
value of debt and liquidation value of preferred stock, less excess cash and cash equivalents); and (ii) Yuma management’s
estimated EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2013 ($12 million) and management projections for EBITDA for the year
ending December 31, 2014 ($50 million). These estimates and projections were prepared by Yuma based upon assumptions
which at the time included additional drilling of wells, estimates of oil and gas prices, LOE assumptions, corporate assumptions
(including general and administrative), capital assumptions, and assumptions regarding working interests that would be realized
in 2013 and 2014. In addition, ROTH had discussions with management of Yuma to discuss the estimates and projections for
EBITDA in 2013 and 2014 and in particular the increase in estimates for 2014 versus 2013. Key factors addressed included
continued growth in production volumes from new wells, and the full impact of certain reversionary working interests that would
be realized in 2013 and 2014. In addition to these EBITDA assumptions, ROTH relied on information including, current rates of
production, provided by Yuma’s management and the net present value of Yuma’s oil and natural gas reserves.
Based on these criteria, ROTH identified and analyzed the following selected companies:
Company Name
Goodrich Petroleum, Corp.
Bonanza Creek Energy, Inc.
Diamondback Energy, Inc.
Gulfport Energy Corp.
Synergy Resources Corp.
Contango Oil & Gas Company MCF
Approach Resources, Inc.
 AREX
Ticker
 GDP
 BCEI
 FANG
 GPOR
 SYRG
For the selected companies the analysis indicated the following criteria:
EV/EBITDA
 
FY2013
   24.2
Max
Min
   8.2
Mean    13.6
Median   12.3
EV/EBITDA
FY2014
x   24.4
x   5.8
x   12.1
x   9.1
x
x
x
x
ROTH then determined an EBITDA multiple based upon the mean value of the peer companies. ROTH then applied the mean
value multiples to Yuma’s EBITDA projections resulting in FY2013 and FY2014 enterprise values of $158,800,000 and
$613,700,000, respectively, for Yuma. The difference in Yuma’s estimated enterprise value in 2013 and 2014 is the mathematical
difference between the projected 2013 EBITDA multiplied by the peer group multiple calculated for 2013 and the 2014 projected
EBITDA multiplied by the peer group multiple calculated for 2014.
Net Asset Valuation Analysis
Based upon management information, ROTH estimated the net asset value (“NAV”) based on Yuma’s existing base of proved
developed producing, proved developed non-producing and proved undeveloped reserves per Yuma’s reserve report prepared
by Netherland Sewell & Associates dated July 31, 2013 and Yuma’s management field estimates as of July 31, 2013. The NAV
was determined using PV-10 (as defined below) and risking factors based on reserve category and location, as discussed with
Yuma management. ROTH estimated NAV by adding (i) the PV-10 of the proved developed producing, proved developed non-
producing and proved undeveloped reserves, which were discounted at varying rates to reflect the relative certainty of the
individual reserve categories, plus (ii) the book value or estimated market value of other assets, less (iii) outstanding debt, asset
retirement obligation and working capital deficit. The term “PV-10” means the present value of estimated future revenues to be
generated from the production of proved reserves calculated in accordance with SEC guidelines, net of estimated lease
operating expense, production taxes and future development costs, using prices, as prescribed in the SEC rules, and costs as of
the date of estimation without future escalation, without giving effect to non-property related expenses such as general and
administrative expenses, debt service, depreciation, depletion and amortization, or federal income taxes and discounted using
and annual discount rate of 10%. PV-10 is considered a non-GAAP financial measure as defined by the SEC.
57
Based on this analysis, the Net Asset Value for Yuma was calculated by ROTH to be $404,542,130.
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
ROTH performed discounted cash flow analysis on the proved reserves of Yuma. A discounted cash flow analysis is a traditional
valuation methodology used to derive the valuation of an asset by calculating the “present value” of estimated future cash flows
of the asset. The term “present value” refers to the current value of future cash flows or amounts and is obtained by discounting
those future cash flows or amounts by a range of discount rates that takes into account macroeconomic assumptions and
estimates of risk, the opportunity cost of capital, expected returns and other appropriate factors. To calculate the estimated
enterprise value of the oil and gas assets of Yuma (the “Assets”) using discounted cash flow analysis, ROTH used (a)
management-furnished assumptions regarding the Assets’ production volumes on a per well basis and for the life of the field; (b)
management-furnished assumptions regarding the Assets’ capital expenditures required to develop and produce such volumes;
(c) management-furnished operational assumptions and estimates of expenditure for the Assets; and (d) the fiscal terms as
provided by management. ROTH used a discount rate of 10.0%. The discount rates were based on ROTH’s analysis of how
similar projects are evaluated in the market and across the selected sector relevant peer companies. The assumptions utilized by
ROTH in the discounted cash flow analysis were: West Texas Intermediate oil price starting in 2013 with $107.108 per barrel and
ending 2027 with a price of $102.609 per barrel; Henry Hub gas price starting 2013 with $3.874 per cubic feet and ending 2027
with a price of $3.213 per cubic feet; tax expenses of $162.352 million; capital cost expenses of $414.382 million; and operating
expenses of $104.936 million.
Based upon this discounted cash flow analysis, Yuma has a value of $443,000,000 as calculated by ROTH.
Contribution Analysis
ROTH utilized various analyses to determine a range of value of Yuma, and then applied that value in a contribution analysis
with the enterprise value of Pyramid as of February 3, 2014. ROTH undertook a review of the relative values being contributed by
Pyramid and Yuma on a combined, post transaction basis. In particular, ROTH focused on the contribution of value related to
total proved reserves, daily production in Boe and discounted cash flow at 10%. ROTH compared this contribution of value to the
proposed ownership breakdown of the combined entity on a post transaction basis, on average Yuma’s contribution will result in
96.8% and Pyramid’s contribution will result in 3.2% compared to an exchange ratio that will result in 93.0% of the post
transaction company being owned by the stockholders of Yuma and 7.0% of the post transaction company being owned by the
stockholders of Pyramid.
Relative Values
Production
 
(Boe/d)
Reserves
 
(Boe)
Discounted Cash
 
Flow 10%
Pyramid   4.2
Yuma    95.8
Total
   100.0
%   3.2
%  2.4
%  97.6
%   96.8
%  100.0 %   100.0
%
%
%
ROTH determined the value for Yuma of $371,400,000 using the mean of the values derived from the above financial analyses
and compared that to the enterprise value of Pyramid. This comparison showed that on a combined basis, Yuma’s assets were
contributing 96.8% of the value on a post-merger basis and Pyramid’s assets were contributing 3.2% of the value on a post-
merger basis.
General
For purposes of its opinion, ROTH relied upon and assumed the accuracy and completeness of the financial statements and
other information provided by Yuma and Pyramid or otherwise made available to ROTH and did not assume responsibility to
independently verify such information. ROTH further relied upon the assurances of management of Yuma and Pyramid that the
information provided was prepared on a reasonable basis in accordance with industry practice, and, with respect to financial
planning data, reflects the best currently available estimates and judgment of management of Yuma and Pyramid, and
management was not aware of any information or facts that would make the information provided to ROTH incomplete or
misleading. ROTH expressed no opinion regarding such financial planning data or the assumptions on which it is based. ROTH
expresses no opinion as to any such financial forecasts, estimates or forward-looking information or the assumptions on which
they were based. ROTH has relied, with the consent of Yuma and Pyramid, on advice of the outside counsel, the third party
engineering firm, and the independent accountants to Yuma, and on the assumptions of the management of Yuma as to all
accounting, legal, tax and financial reporting matters with respect to Yuma and the merger agreement.
58
For the purposes of its opinion, ROTH assumed that neither Yuma nor Pyramid are party to any material pending transaction,
including any external financing, recapitalization, acquisition or transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, other than
the merger. ROTH also assumed the merger will be consummated pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement without
amendments thereto and without waiver by any party of any conditions or obligations thereunder. In arriving at its opinion, ROTH
assumed that all the necessary regulatory approvals and consents required for the merger will be obtained in a manner that will
not adversely affect Yuma or Pyramid or alter the terms of the merger agreement.
In arriving at its opinion, ROTH did not perform any appraisals or valuations of any specific assets or liabilities of Yuma or
Pyramid and was not furnished with any such appraisals or valuations. ROTH expressed no opinion regarding the liquidation
value of Yuma or Pyramid or any other entity. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, ROTH undertook no independent
analysis of any pending or threatened litigation, possible un-asserted claims or other contingent liabilities, to which Yuma, or any
of its respective affiliates was a party or may be subject and, at the discretion of Yuma, and with its consent, ROTH’s opinion
makes no assumption concerning, and therefore does not consider, the possible assertions of claims, outcomes or damages
arising out of any such matters.
ROTH’s opinion is necessarily based upon the information available to ROTH and facts and circumstances as they existed and
were subject to evaluation on the date of the opinion. Events occurring after that date could materially affect the assumptions
used in preparing the opinion.
ROTH was engaged to render its opinion on the basis of its experience with mergers and acquisitions in the energy industry in
general, and on the basis of its experience with small companies in the exploration and production sector of the energy industry.
ROTH is a nationally recognized investment banking firm regularly engaged in the valuation of businesses and their securities in
connection with mergers and acquisitions, corporate restructurings, negotiated underwritings, secondary distributions of listed
and unlisted securities, private placements and valuations for corporate and other purposes. In the ordinary course of its
business, ROTH and its affiliates may actively trade in the equity securities of Pyramid for their own account and for the accounts
of customers and, accordingly, may at any time hold a long or short position in such securities. ROTH may in the future provide
investment banking and financial services to Pyramid or Yuma for which ROTH would expect to receive compensation.
Pursuant to the terms of the engagement of ROTH, Pyramid paid ROTH a fee of $150,000 plus reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses. No portion of the fee is based upon whether ROTH delivered a favorable opinion with respect to the merger exchange
ratio. Pyramid also agreed to reimburse ROTH for reasonable expenses and to indemnify ROTH and related parties against
certain liabilities, including liabilities under the federal securities laws, arising out of its engagement. In addition, ROTH will be
paid a financial advisory fee upon closing of the merger of 1.5% of the merger consideration, not to be less than $300,000 nor
more than $450,000 of which $75,000 was paid upon execution of the engagement agreement. The amount and timing of the
payment of fees to ROTH was determined based upon negotiations between Pyramid and ROTH.
Interests of Yuma’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
In considering the recommendation of the Yuma board of directors with respect to adopting the merger agreement, Yuma
stockholders should be aware that members of the board of directors and executive officers of Yuma have interests in the merger
that may be different from, or in addition to, interests they may have as Yuma stockholders. For example, following the
consummation of the merger, all of the directors of Yuma will become the directors of Pyramid and all of the executive officers of
Yuma will become the executive officers of Pyramid.
Yuma’s board of directors was aware of these potential conflicts of interest and considered them, among other matters, in
reaching its decision to approve the merger agreement including the merger and transactions contemplated thereby and to
recommend that its stockholders approve and adopt the merger agreement proposal contemplated by this proxy
statement/prospectus.
Interests of Pyramid’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
In considering the recommendation of the Pyramid board of directors with respect to approving and adopting the merger
agreement, Pyramid stockholders should be aware that members of the board of directors and executive officers of Pyramid have
interests in the merger that may be different from, or in addition to, interests they may have as Pyramid stockholders. For
example, following the consummation of the merger, all of the directors of Pyramid shall receive continued indemnification and
Pyramid will purchase a “tail” insurance policy of directors’ and officers’ liability insurance after the merger.
59
Pyramid’s board of directors was aware of this potential conflict of interest and considered it, among other matters, in reaching its
decision to approve the merger agreement including the merger and transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend that
its stockholders approve and adopt the merger agreement proposal contemplated by this proxy statement/prospectus.
Pyramid’s Board of Directors and Management After Consummation of the Merger
Pyramid has agreed to take all necessary action to cause, effective at the effective time of the merger, the number of directors on
the Pyramid board of directors to be set at six. In addition, Yuma will nominate six members to serve as the board of directors of
Pyramid. In the event that the merger is not completed, the directors and officers of Pyramid will continue in office.
Following completion of the merger, Yuma executive officers will retain their current roles with Pyramid.
Regulatory Filings and Approvals Required For Completion of the Merger
Neither Pyramid nor Yuma is aware of any material governmental or regulatory approval required for the completion of the
merger, other than filings and compliance with the applicable corporate law of the States of California and Delaware.
Treatment of Yuma Restricted Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Units
Each restricted stock award which was issued pursuant to Yuma’s stock plans and is outstanding immediately prior to the
effective time of the merger, and that has not then vested with the closing of the merger, shall be assumed by Pyramid through
the issuance to each holder thereof of a restricted stock award by Pyramid.
Each restricted stock unit which was issued pursuant to Yuma’s stock plans and is outstanding immediately prior to the effective
time of the merger, and that has not then vested and been settled, shall be assumed by Pyramid through the issuance to each
holder thereof of a restricted stock unit award by Pyramid.
Treatment of Pyramid Restricted Stock Awards
Each restricted stock award which was issued pursuant to Pyramid's stock plan and is outstanding immediately prior to the
effective time of the merger, shall vest upon closing of the merger.
Dividends
The merger agreement provides that, prior to the effective time:
Yuma or any of its subsidiaries may not declare, set aside or pay any dividend or other distribution, whether payable in cash,
·
stock or any other property or right, with respect to its capital stock, except with respect to the Yuma preferred stock and Yuma
may permit any direct or indirect wholly-owned subsidiary to do any of the foregoing; and
Pyramid or any of its subsidiaries may not declare, set aside or pay any dividend or other distribution, whether payable in cash,
·
stock or any other property or right, with respect to its capital stock, except that Pyramid may permit any direct or indirect wholly-
owned subsidiary to do any of the foregoing.
Corporate Name Following the Completion of the Merger
In connection with the completion of the merger, Pyramid will change its registered name to “Yuma Energy, Inc.”
Listing of Pyramid Shares
It is a condition to completion of the merger that the shares of Pyramid common stock issuable in the merger be authorized for
listing on the NYSE MKT, subject to official notice of issuance.
60
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
The following section summarizes material provisions of the Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and
Reorganization referred to herein as the “merger agreement.” This summary does not purport to be complete and may not contain
all of the information about the merger agreement that is important to you. This summary is subject to, and qualified in its entirety
by reference to, the merger agreement, which is attached as Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus and is incorporated by
reference herein. The rights and obligations of the parties are governed by the express terms and conditions of the merger
agreement and not by this summary or any other information contained in this proxy statement/prospectus. You are urged to read
the merger agreement carefully and in its entirety before making any decisions regarding the merger.
The merger agreement summary is included in this proxy statement/prospectus only to provide you with information regarding the
terms and conditions of the merger agreement, and not to provide any other factual information about Pyramid or Yuma or their
respective businesses. Accordingly, the representations and warranties and other provisions of the merger agreement should not
be read alone, but instead should be read together with the information provided elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
The representations, warranties and covenants contained in the merger agreement and described in this proxy
statement/prospectus were made only for purposes of the merger agreement and as of specific dates and may be subject to more
recent developments and to limitations agreed upon by the parties, including being qualified by reference to confidential
disclosures which may modify, qualify or create exceptions to the representations and warranties, for the purposes of allocating
risk between the parties to the merger agreement instead of establishing these matters as facts, and may apply standards of
materiality in a way that is different from what may be viewed as material by you or other investors. The representations and
warranties contained in the merger agreement do not survive the effective time of the merger. Moreover, information concerning
the subject matter of the representations, warranties and covenants may change after the date of the merger agreement.
Merger Consideration
The merger agreement provides that at the effective time of the merger each share of Yuma common stock (including the shares
of Yuma preferred stock converted into shares of Yuma common stock) issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective
time will be converted into the right to receive 756.34 shares of Pyramid common stock, which is subject to adjustment if Yuma
grants restricted stock awards between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the effective time of the merger and in the
event of dissenting shares. This will include the shares of common stock to which holders of Yuma preferred stock are entitled
upon conversion of their shares of preferred stock into shares of common stock.
In the merger, Pyramid will issue 66,336,701 shares of its common stock which will be allocated as follows:
Shares of Pyramid 
 
 
common stock
Based on shares expected to outstanding at the effective time of the merger as of August 6, 2014   
Holders of Yuma common stock
Holders of Yuma Series A preferred stock
Holders of Yuma Series B preferred stock
TOTAL:
43,484,014
  15,091,925
  7,760,762
  66,336,701
The current fair market value of Pyramid common stock may not be equivalent to the fair market value of Pyramid common stock
on the date that the merger consideration is received by a Yuma stockholder or at any other time. The actual fair market value of
the Pyramid common stock received by Yuma stockholders depends upon the fair market value of Pyramid common stock upon
receipt, which may be higher or lower than the market price of Pyramid common stock on the date the merger agreement was
announced, on the date that this proxy statement/prospectus is mailed to Yuma’s stockholders, or on the date of the special
meeting of Yuma stockholders.
If, between the date of the merger agreement and the effective time of the merger, the shares of Pyramid common stock are
changed into a different number or class of shares by reason of reclassification, split-up, combination, exchange of shares or
similar readjustment, or a stock dividend is declared with a record date within that period, appropriate adjustments will be made
to the exchange ratio.
No fractional shares of Pyramid common stock will be issued to any stockholder of Yuma in connection with the merger. For each
fractional share that would otherwise be issued, Pyramid will pay cash in an amount equal to the fraction multiplied by the
average of the closing sale prices of Pyramid common stock on the NYSE MKT for the five trading days’ preceding the date on
which the merger occurs. No interest will be paid or accrued on cash payable in lieu of fractional shares of Pyramid common
stock.
61
Conversion of Shares; Exchange of Certificates
General
The conversion of Yuma common stock and preferred stock into the right to receive the merger consideration will occur
automatically at the effective time of the merger. As soon as reasonably practicable after the effective time of the merger, [-], as
exchange agent, will exchange certificates formerly representing shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock for the
merger consideration to be received in the merger pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement.
Letter Of Transmittal
Soon after the effective time of the merger, the exchange agent will send a letter of transmittal to each person who was a Yuma
stockholder at the effective time of the merger who has not previously and properly surrendered certificates representing shares
of Yuma common stock or preferred stock to the exchange agent. This mailing will contain instructions on how to surrender
certificates formerly representing shares of Yuma common stock or preferred stock (if these certificates have not already been
surrendered) in exchange for the merger consideration the holder is entitled to receive under the merger agreement.
If certificates formerly representing shares of Yuma common stock or preferred stock are presented for transfer after the effective
time of the merger, they will be exchanged for the merger consideration into which the shares of Yuma common stock or
preferred stock formerly represented by that certificate shall have been converted.
If a certificate formerly representing shares of Yuma common stock or preferred stock has been lost, stolen or destroyed, the
exchange agent will issue the consideration properly payable under the merger agreement upon receipt of appropriate evidence
as to that loss, theft or destruction, appropriate evidence as to the ownership of that certificate by the claimant, and appropriate
and customary indemnification.
Dividends and Distributions
Until Yuma stockholders surrender their Yuma stock certificates for exchange, any dividends or other distributions declared after
the effective time of the merger with respect to Pyramid common stock into which any shares could have been converted will
accrue, but will not be paid. When such Yuma stockholder surrenders his or her certificates, Pyramid will pay any unpaid
dividends or other distributions, without interest. After the effective time of the merger, there will be no transfers on the stock
transfer books of Pyramid.
Withholding
Pyramid and the exchange agent will be entitled to deduct and withhold from the merger consideration payable to any Yuma
stockholder the amounts it is required to deduct and withhold under the Code or any state, local or foreign tax law. Withheld
amounts will be treated for all purposes of the merger as having been paid to the Yuma stockholders from whom they were
withheld.
Effective Time
The merger will be completed when a statement of merger is filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, which is
the effective time of the merger.
Subject to satisfaction of the other conditions to the merger, it is anticipated that the closing of the merger will occur promptly after
approval and adoption of the merger agreement by the requisite vote of the Yuma stockholders and the approval of Pyramid
stockholders of the approval and adoption of the merger agreement and approval of the proposals related to the restated articles
of incorporation of Pyramid. However, the effective time of the merger could be delayed if there is a delay in satisfying any
conditions to the merger. There can be no assurances as to whether, or when, Pyramid and Yuma will obtain any required
approvals or complete the merger. If the merger is not completed on or before December 31, 2014, either Pyramid or Yuma may
terminate the merger agreement, unless the failure to complete the merger by that date is due to the failure of the party seeking to
terminate the merger agreement to fulfill any material obligations under the merger agreement or a material breach of the merger
agreement by such party. See “—Conditions to the Completion of the Merger” below.
Conditions to the Completion of the Merger
The completion of the merger is subject to various conditions. While it is anticipated that all of these conditions will be satisfied,
there can be no assurance as to whether or when all of the conditions will be satisfied or, where permissible, waived.
62
Conditions to Each Party’s Obligations
Each party’s obligation to complete the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the following conditions:
· approval and adoption by Yuma’s stockholders of the merger agreement;
·approval and adoption by Pyramid’s stockholders of the merger agreement;
·approval by Pyramid’s stockholders of the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid;
absence of any statute, rule, order, decree or regulation, and of any action taken by any court or other governmental entity of
·
competent jurisdiction, which temporarily, preliminarily or permanently restrains, precludes, enjoins or otherwise prohibits the
consummation of the merger or makes the merger illegal;
other than the filing of the certificate of merger in accordance with Delaware law, the receipt of all authorizations, consents and
approvals of all governmental entities required to be obtained prior to consummation of the merger, except for such
·
authorizations, consents and approvals the failure of which to be obtained individually or in the aggregate has not had, and
would not be reasonably likely to have or result in, a material adverse effect on any party to the merger agreement;
effectiveness of the registration statement, of which this proxy statement/prospectus constitutes a part, and absence of any stop
·
order or proceedings for such purpose pending before or threatened by the SEC; and
approval by the NYSE MKT of listing of the shares of Pyramid common stock to be issued in the merger, subject to official notice
·
of issuance.
Additional Conditions to Yuma’s Obligations
The obligation of Yuma to complete the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the following conditions:
accuracy of Pyramid’s representations and warranties contained in the merger agreement both at and as of the date of the
merger agreement and at and as of the closing date of the merger, as if made at and as of the closing date of the merger (except
to the extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except where, in the case of all
·
representations and warranties except those regarding Pyramid’s capitalization, corporate power and authority, tax matters, and
validity of the merger agreement, the failure to be accurate individually or in the aggregate has not had, and would not be
reasonably likely to have or result in, a material adverse effect on Pyramid;
·the performance in all material respects by Pyramid of its obligations contained in the merger agreement;
absence of any suit, action or proceeding by any court or other governmental entity seeking to restrain, preclude, enjoin or
·
prohibit the merger or any of the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement; and
during the period from the execution of the merger agreement until the effective time there shall not have occurred a material
·
adverse effect, as defined in the merger agreement, on Pyramid.
Additional Conditions to Pyramid’s Obligations
The obligations of Pyramid to complete the merger are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the following conditions:
accuracy of Yuma’s representations and warranties contained in the merger agreement both at and as of the date of the merger
agreement and at and as of the closing date of the merger, as if made at and as of the closing date of the merger (except to the
extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except where, in the case of all representations and
·
warranties except those regarding Yuma’s capitalization, corporate power and authority, tax matters and validity of the merger
agreement, the failure to be accurate individually or in the aggregate has not had, and would not be reasonably likely to have or
result in, a material adverse effect on Yuma;
·the performance in all material respects by Yuma of its obligations contained in the merger agreement;
63
absence of any suit, action or proceeding by any court or other governmental entity seeking to (1) restrain, preclude, enjoin or
prohibit the merger or any of the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, or (2) prohibit or limit in any material
respect the ownership or operation of any of the parties to the merger agreement or any of their respective affiliates of a
·
substantial portion of the business or assets of Yuma, or to require any person to dispose of or hold separate any material
portion of the business or assets of Yuma, taken as a whole, as a result of the merger or any of the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement;
the number of dissenting shares not exceeding 1% of the outstanding shares of common stock of Yuma or 5% of Yuma’s Series
·
A preferred stock or 5% of Yuma’s Series B preferred stock;
receipt of all material consents and approvals of any person that Yuma or Pyramid or any of their respective subsidiaries are
required to obtain in connection with the consummation of the merger, including consents and approvals from parties to loans,
·
contracts, leases or other agreements, except for such consents and approvals the failure of which to be obtained individually or
in the aggregate would not be reasonably likely to have or result in a material adverse effect on Yuma or Pyramid, as applicable;
the board of directors of Yuma shall have a good faith belief that as of the date on which the registration statement on Form S-4
is filed and on the closing of the merger, that (i) the merger will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a)
·
of the Code and (ii) Yuma, Pyramid and Pyramid’s subsidiary will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of
Section 368 of the Code (which is a condition to the merger and such belief will be based on the tax opinion of TroyGould PC
discussed under “Material Federal U.S. Tax Consequences”); and
at closing of the merger, all of the directors and officers of Pyramid shall have resigned in writing from their positions as directors
and officers effective upon the election of the persons designated by Yuma, or the appointment of persons designated by Yuma,
·
each to hold office in accordance with the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid until their respective successors are duly
elected or appointed and qualified; provided that the designated board shall have a sufficient number of “independent directors”
to satisfy applicable SEC and NYSE MKT rules.
Representations and Warranties
The merger agreement contains representations and warranties made by each of the parties regarding aspects of their respective
businesses, financial condition and structure, as well as other facts pertinent to the merger. Each of Pyramid and Yuma has
made representations and warranties to the other in the merger agreement with respect to the following subject matters:
·corporate existence, good standing and qualification to conduct business;
capitalization, including ownership of subsidiary capital stock and the absence of restrictions or encumbrances with respect to
·
capital stock of any subsidiary;
corporate power and authorization to enter into and carry out the obligations of the merger agreement and the enforceability of
·
the merger agreement;
absence of any conflict or violation of organizational documents, third party agreements or law or regulation as a result of
·
entering into and carrying out the obligations of the merger agreement;
·governmental, third party and regulatory approvals or consents required to complete the merger;
· filings and reports with the SEC, and financial information;
· absence of certain changes, events or circumstances;
· absence of undisclosed liabilities;
·accuracy of the information supplied for inclusion in this proxy statement/prospectus;
· employee benefit plans;
· litigation, government orders, judgments and decrees;
·
·
· material contracts;
·
· environmental matters;
· real property and operating equipment;
·
·
·
· derivative and hedging transactions;
· disclosure controls and procedures;
· oil and gas reserves, assets and operations;
·
64
labor and employment matters;
transactions with affiliates;
compliance with laws;
intellectual property;
investment company status;
insurance;
taxes;
required vote;
receipt of fairness opinions;
· recommendation of merger by boards of directors;
·
·
· fees payable to brokers in connection with the merger;
·
·
· no other representations or warranties.
tax matters relating to the merger;
no agents; and
The representations and warranties contained in the merger agreement will not survive beyond the effective time of the merger.
Conduct of Business Pending the Merger
Operations of Yuma
Yuma has agreed that it will, and will cause its subsidiaries to, during the period from the date of the merger agreement until the
effective time of the merger or the date, if any, on which the merger agreement is terminated, except as expressly contemplated or
permitted by the merger agreement, required by applicable law, or agreed to in writing by Pyramid:
·conduct its business in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice;
·use its commercially reasonable efforts to mitigate or compromise the liabilities of Yuma from time to time;
not (i) amend or propose to amend its certificate of incorporation or its bylaws, except as agreed to by the parties hereto, (ii) split,
combine, subdivide or reclassify any shares of outstanding capital stock, (iii) declare, set aside or pay any dividend or
distribution payable in cash, stock, property or otherwise, or make any other distribution in respect of any shares of its capital
·
stock, except for dividends by a direct or wholly-owned subsidiary of Yuma to its parent, or a semi-annual (or pro-rated) cash or
in-kind dividend on the Yuma preferred stock, or (iv) repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, or modify or amend, any shares
of its capital stock or any other securities or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such shares or other securities;
except as agreed, not issue, sell, pledge, grant or dispose of, or agree to issue, sell, pledge, grant or dispose of, any Yuma
restricted shares, Yuma restricted stock units, or any additional shares of, or any options, warrants or rights of any kind to acquire
·
any shares of, its capital stock of any class or any debt or equity securities convertible into or exchangeable for its capital stock,
except that Yuma may issue shares upon conversion of Yuma preferred stock outstanding on the date of the merger agreement;
not (i) redeem, purchase, acquire or offer to purchase or acquire any shares of its capital stock or any options, warrants or rights
to acquire any of its capital stock or any security convertible into or exchangeable for its capital stock, (ii) make any acquisition of
any capital stock, assets or businesses of any other person other than expenditures for current assets in the ordinary course of
business consistent with past practice and expenditures for fixed or capital assets in the ordinary course of business consistent
·
with past practice, (iii) sell, pledge, dispose of or encumber any assets or businesses that are material to Yuma, except (A) sales,
leases, rentals and licenses in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice, (B) pursuant to contracts that are in
force at the date of the merger agreement (C) dispositions of obsolete or worthless assets or, or (iv) enter into any contract with
respect to any of the foregoing;
use all reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organization and goodwill, keep available the services of its present
·
officers and key employees, and preserve the goodwill and business relationships with customers and others having business
relationships with it, other than as expressly permitted by the terms of the merger agreement;
not make capital expenditures or enter into any binding commitment or contract to make capital expenditures, except (i) capital
expenditures which Yuma is currently committed to make, (ii) capital expenditures in the ordinary course of Yuma’s business,
·
(iii) capital expenditures for repairs and other capital expenditures necessary in light of circumstances not anticipated as of the
date of the merger agreement which are necessary to avoid significant disruption to Yuma’s business or operations consistent
with past practice, and (iv) repairs and maintenance in the ordinary course of business;
·not adopt a plan or agreement of complete or partial liquidation or dissolution;
65
not pay, discharge or satisfy any material claims, material liabilities or material obligations (absolute, accrued, asserted or
unasserted, contingent or otherwise), other than the payment, discharge or satisfaction (i) of any such material claims, material
·
liabilities or material obligations in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice or (ii) of material claims, material
liabilities or material obligations reflected or reserved against in, or contemplated by, the Yuma financial statements (or the notes
thereto);
not enter into any contract that restrains, limits or impedes the ability of Yuma to compete with or conduct any business or line of
·
business, including geographic limitations on the activities of Yuma;
except in the ordinary course of Yuma’s business, not materially modify or amend, or terminate any Yuma material contract, or
·
waive, relinquish, release or terminate any material right or material claim, or enter into any contract that would have been a
Yuma material contract if it had been in existence at the time of the execution of the merger agreement; and
· not agree to take any of the foregoing actions.
Operations of Pyramid
Pyramid has agreed that it will, and will cause its subsidiaries to, during the period from the date of the merger agreement until
the effective time of the merger or the date, if any, on which the merger agreement is terminated, except as expressly
contemplated or permitted by the merger agreement, required by applicable law, or agreed to in writing by Yuma:
·conduct its business in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice;
not (i) amend or propose to amend its restated articles of incorporation or its amended and restated bylaws, (ii) split, combine,
·
subdivide or reclassify any shares of its common stock, or (iii) declare, set aside or pay any dividend or distribution payable in
cash, stock, property or otherwise, or make any other distribution in respect of any shares of its common stock;
use all reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organization and goodwill, keep available the services of its present
·
officers and key employees, and preserve the goodwill and business relationships with customers and others having business
relationships with it, other than as expressly permitted by the terms of the merger agreement;
·not adopt a plan or agreement of complete or partial liquidation or dissolution;
not pay, discharge or satisfy any material claims, material liabilities or material obligations (absolute, accrued, asserted or
unasserted, contingent or otherwise), other than the payment, discharge or satisfaction (i) of any such material claims, material
·
liabilities or material obligations in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice or (ii) of material claims, material
liabilities or material obligations reflected or reserved against in, or contemplated by, Pyramid financial statements (or the notes
thereto);
not enter into any contract that restrains, limits or impedes its ability to compete with or conduct any business or line of business,
·
including geographic limitations on its activities;
not make any changes in financial or tax accounting methods, principles or practices (or change an annual accounting period),
·
except insofar as may be required by a change in generally accepted accounting principles or applicable law;
not enter into, amend, modify or renew any employment, consulting, severance or similar contract with, pay any bonus or grant
any increase in salary, wage or other compensation or any increase in any employee benefit to, any of its directors, officers or
·
employees, except in each such case (i) as may be required by applicable law or (ii) to satisfy obligations existing as of the date
hereof pursuant to the terms of contracts that are in effect on the date hereof;
not enter into, establish, adopt, amend or modify any pension, retirement, stock purchase, savings, profit sharing, deferred
compensation, consulting, bonus, group insurance or other employee benefit, incentive or welfare plan, agreement, program or
·
arrangement, in respect of any of its directors, officers or employees, except, in each such case (i) as may be required by
applicable law or pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, (ii) to satisfy obligations existing as of the date hereof pursuant
to the terms of contracts that are in effect on the date hereof or
66
except to the extent required under existing employee and director benefit plans, agreements or arrangements as in effect on the
·
date hereof or as expressly provided by the merger agreement, not accelerate the payment, right to payment or vesting of any
bonus, severance, profit sharing, retirement, deferred compensation, stock option, insurance or other compensation or benefits;
·not agree to the settlement of any claim, litigation, investigation or other action that is material to it;
except in the ordinary course of its business, not materially modify or amend, or terminate any Pyramid material contract, or
·
waive, relinquish, release or terminate any material right or material claim, or enter into any contract that would have been a
Pyramid material contract if it had been in existence at the time of the execution of the merger agreement; and
· not agree to take any of the foregoing actions.
No Solicitation
General
Each party to the merger agreement has agreed that it shall not, nor shall it authorize or permit any of the officers, directors,
investment bankers, attorneys or accountants retained by it to, and that it shall use commercially reasonable efforts to cause its
non-officer employees and other agents not to (and shall not authorize any of them to) directly or indirectly:
(i)           solicit, initiate, encourage, induce or knowingly facilitate the communication, making, submission or announcement of
any acquisition proposal (as defined below) or acquisition inquiry (as defined below) or take any action that could reasonably be
expected to lead to an acquisition proposal or acquisition inquiry;
(ii)          furnish any information regarding such party to any person in connection with or in response to an acquisition proposal
or acquisition inquiry;
(iii)         engage in discussions or negotiations with any person with respect to any acquisition proposal or acquisition inquiry;
(iv)         approve, endorse or recommend any acquisition proposal; or
(v)           execute or enter into any letter of intent or similar document or any contract contemplating or otherwise relating to any
acquisition proposal; provided, however, that, notwithstanding anything contained in these subsections, prior to obtaining Yuma
stockholders’ approval, Yuma may, and prior to obtaining Pyramid stockholder approval, Pyramid may, furnish nonpublic
information regarding such party to, and enter into discussions or negotiations with, any person in response to a bona fide written
acquisition proposal, which such party’s board of directors determines in good faith, after consultation with a nationally
recognized independent financial advisor and its outside legal counsel, constitutes, or is reasonably likely to result in, a superior
offer as defined below (and is not withdrawn) if: (A) such acquisition proposal was not solicited in violation of these subsections;
(B) the board of directors of such party concludes in good faith based on the advice of outside legal counsel, that the failure to
take such action is reasonably likely to result in a breach of the fiduciary duties of the board of directors of such party under
applicable laws; (C) at least two business days prior to furnishing any such nonpublic information to, or entering into discussions
with, such person, such party gives the other parties written notice of the identity of such person and of such party’s intention to
furnish nonpublic information to, or enter into discussions with, such person; (D) such party receives from such person an
executed confidentiality agreement containing provisions at least as favorable to such party as those contained in applicable
confidentiality agreements; and (E) prior to furnishing any such nonpublic information to such person, such party furnishes such
nonpublic information to the other parties hereto (to the extent such nonpublic information has not been previously furnished by
such party to the other parties). Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each party acknowledges and agrees that, in the
event any representative of such party (whether or not such representative is purporting to act on behalf of such party) takes any
action that, if taken by such party, would constitute a breach of these subsections by such party, the taking of such action by such
representative shall be deemed to constitute a breach of these subsections by such party for purposes of the merger agreement.
67
For purposes of the merger agreement, the term: (i) “acquisition inquiry” means, with respect to Pyramid or Yuma, an inquiry,
indication of interest or request for information that could reasonably be expected to lead to an acquisition proposal with such
party; (ii) “acquisition proposal” means, with respect to Pyramid or Yuma, any offer or proposal, whether written or oral, from any
person or group (as defined in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) (a “third party”) to acquire beneficial ownership (as defined
in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act) of (a) 15% or more of any class of the equity securities of such party or (b) 15% or more of
the fair market value of the assets of such party, in each case pursuant to any merger, consolidation, amalgamation, share
exchange, business combination, issuance of securities, acquisition of securities, reorganization, recapitalization, tender offer,
exchange offer or other similar transaction or series of related transactions, which is structured to permit a third party to acquire
beneficial ownership of (y) 15% or more of any class of equity securities of the party or (z) 15% or more of the fair market value of
the assets of the party; provided, however, that, for purposes of determining whether termination fees are payable (as discussed
below), all such references to “15%” shall be deemed to be “50%”; and (iii) “superior offer” means an unsolicited bona fide written
offer by a third party to enter into (a) a merger, consolidation, amalgamation, share exchange, business combination, issuance of
securities, acquisition of securities, reorganization, recapitalization, tender offer, exchange offer or other similar transaction as a
result of which either (A) the stockholders of a party prior to such transaction in the aggregate cease to own at least 50% of the
voting securities of the entity surviving or resulting from such transaction (or the ultimate company entity thereof) or (B) in which a
person or “group” (as defined in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) directly or indirectly acquires beneficial ownership of
securities representing 50% or more of the voting power of the party’s capital stock then outstanding or (b) a sale, lease,
exchange transfer, license, acquisition or disposition of any business or other disposition of at least 50% of the assets of the
party, taken as a whole, in a single transaction or a series of related transactions that: (A) was not obtained or made as a direct or
indirect result of a breach of (or in violation of) the merger agreement; and (B) is on terms and conditions that the board of
directors of Pyramid or Yuma, as applicable, determines, in its reasonable, good faith judgment, after obtaining and taking into
account such matters that its board of directors deems relevant following consultation with its outside legal counsel and financial
advisor: (x) is reasonably likely to be more favorable, from a financial point of view, to Pyramid’s stockholders or Yuma’s
stockholders, as applicable, than the merger and the other transactions contemplated thereby; and (y) is reasonably capable of
being consummated.
Notice of Proposal or Inquiry
If any party or any representative of such party receives an acquisition proposal or acquisition inquiry at any time during the
period prior to closing the merger, then such party shall promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after such party becomes
aware of such acquisition proposal or acquisition inquiry) advise the other parties hereto orally and in writing of such acquisition
proposal or acquisition inquiry (including the identity of the person making or submitting such acquisition proposal or acquisition
inquiry, and the terms thereof). Such party shall keep the other parties informed in all material respects with respect to the status
and terms of any such acquisition proposal or acquisition inquiry and any modification or proposed modification thereto.
Cessation of Current Discussions
Each party agreed to immediately cease and cause to be terminated any existing discussions with any person that relate to any
acquisition proposal or acquisition inquiry as of the date of the merger agreement.
Termination of the Merger Agreement
The merger agreement may be terminated, and the merger may be abandoned, at any time prior to the effective time of the
merger (whether before or after the Pyramid stockholder approval or any approval of the merger agreement by the stockholders of
Yuma):
(a)             by mutual written consent of Pyramid and Yuma duly authorized by each of their respective boards of directors; or
(b)            by either Pyramid or Yuma, if the merger has not been consummated by December 31, 2014; provided, however, that
the right to terminate the merger agreement shall not be available to (i) Pyramid, if the failure of Pyramid to fulfill any of its
material obligations under the merger agreement caused the failure of the merger to occur on or before such date, or (ii) Yuma, if
the failure of Yuma to fulfill any of its material obligations under the merger agreement caused the failure of the merger to occur
on or before such date, or (iii) Pyramid or Yuma, if the failure of the merger to occur on or before such date is due solely to the
failure to obtain effectiveness of the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part, notwithstanding the
performance by Pyramid of any of its obligations to do so; or
(c)            by either Pyramid or Yuma, if (i) there has been a breach by the other of any representation or warranty contained in the
merger agreement which would reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on Pyramid or Yuma, as the case may
be, and which breach is not curable or, if curable, the breaching party shall not be using on a continuous basis its reasonable
best efforts to cure in all material respects such breach after written notice of such breach by the terminating party or such breach
has not been cured within ten business days after written notice of such breach by the terminating party, or (ii) there has been a
breach of any of the covenants or agreements set forth in the merger agreement on the part of the other party, which would
reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on Pyramid or Yuma, as the case may be, and which breach is not
curable or, if curable, the breaching party shall not be using on a continuous basis its reasonable best efforts to cure such breach
after written notice of such breach by the terminating party or such breach has not been cured within twenty business days after
written notice of such breach by the terminating party; or
68
(d)             by either Pyramid or Yuma after ten days following the entry of any final and non-appealable judgment, injunction,
order or decree by a court or governmental agency or authority of competent jurisdiction restraining or prohibiting the
consummation of the merger; or
(e)             by Yuma if, notwithstanding the existence of the voting agreement with Yuma, prior to receipt of the Yuma
stockholders’ approval, Yuma receives a superior offer, resolves to accept such superior offer, complies with Yuma’s termination
fee payment obligations described below and gives Pyramid at least four business days’ prior written notice of its intention to
terminate; provided, however, that such termination shall not be effective until such time as the payment shall have been
received by Pyramid; or
(f)             by Yuma, if the board of directors of Pyramid shall have failed to recommend, or shall have withdrawn, modified or
amended in a manner adverse to Yuma in any material respect Pyramid’s board recommendation, or shall have resolved to do
any of the foregoing, or shall have recommended another acquisition proposal or if the board of directors of Pyramid shall have
resolved to accept a superior offer; or
(g)             by Pyramid if, notwithstanding the existence of the voting agreement with Pyramid, prior to receipt of the Pyramid
stockholders’ approval, Pyramid receives a superior offer, resolves to accept such superior offer, complies with Pyramid’s
termination fee payment obligations described below and gives Yuma at least four business days’ prior written notice of its
intention to terminate; provided, however, that such termination shall not be effective until such time as the payment shall have
been received by Yuma; or
(h)             by Pyramid, if the board of directors of Yuma shall have failed to recommend, or shall have withdrawn, modified or
amended in a manner adverse to Pyramid in any material respect Yuma’s board recommendation, or shall have resolved to do
any of the foregoing, or shall have recommended another acquisition proposal or if the board of directors of Yuma shall have
resolved to accept a superior offer; or
(i)             (x) by Pyramid, if the stockholders of Yuma fail to approve the merger, or (y) by Yuma, if the stockholders of Pyramid fail
to approve the matters to be voted upon at the Pyramid stockholders’ meeting (including any adjournment or postponement
thereof).
Termination Fees
Payment of Termination Fee by Yuma. Yuma shall pay to Pyramid a termination fee in an amount in cash equal to $1.0 million
(the “Yuma Termination Fee”) in the event that (i) Yuma terminates the merger agreement because it accepts a superior offer; (ii)
Pyramid terminates the merger agreement (as a result of a breach of a covenant by Yuma) or because Yuma changes or fails to
make its recommendation of the merger; or (iii) Pyramid terminates the merger agreement because Yuma stockholders fail to
approve the merger, provided, in the case of this clause (iii), that (A) after the date of the merger agreement and prior to the date
Yuma solicits the approval of Yuma’s stockholders at a meeting or by written consent, an acquisition proposal has been publicly
announced and not withdrawn or abandoned at the time of termination, and (B) within one year after such termination, Yuma
enters into a definitive agreement with respect to or consummates such acquisition proposal. Payment of the Yuma Termination
Fee shall be paid to Pyramid within five business days following the date of termination of the merger agreement; provided,
however, that in the event of payment pursuant to clause (iii) above, on the date of the execution and delivery by Yuma of the
definitive agreement regarding such acquisition proposal.
Payment of Termination Fee by Pyramid. Pyramid shall pay to Yuma a termination fee in an amount in cash equal to $1.0 million
(the “Pyramid Termination Fee”) in the event that (i) Pyramid terminates the merger agreement because it accepts a superior
offer; (ii) Yuma terminates the merger agreement (as a result of a breach of a covenant by Pyramid); or (iii) Yuma terminates the
merger agreement because Pyramid’s stockholders fail to approve the issuance of stock necessary to effect the merger,
provided, in the case of this clause (iii), that (A) after the date of the merger agreement and prior to the Pyramid special meeting,
an acquisition proposal has been publicly announced and not withdrawn or abandoned at the time of termination, and (B) within
one year after such termination, Pyramid enters into a definitive agreement with respect to or consummates such acquisition
proposal. Payment of the Pyramid Termination Fee shall be paid to Yuma within five business days following the date of
termination of the merger agreement; provided, however, that in the event of payment pursuant to clause (iii) above, on the date
of the execution and delivery by Pyramid of the definitive agreement regarding such acquisition proposal.
Effect of Termination
In the event of termination of the merger agreement by either Pyramid or Yuma, written notice thereof shall be given to the other
party or parties, specifying the provision hereof pursuant to which such termination is made, and there shall be no liability or
further obligation on the part of Yuma, Pyramid or their respective officers, directors or affiliates (except as otherwise specifically
set forth in the merger agreement such as the payment of termination fees, all of which shall survive the termination). Nothing in
the merger agreement relieves any party from liability for fraud or any willful breach of the merger agreement.
69
Amendment of the Merger Agreement
Subject to compliance with applicable law, Pyramid and Yuma may amend the merger agreement at any time before or after
approval and adoption of the merger agreement by Pyramid and Yuma stockholders. However, after any approval and adoption
of the merger agreement by Yuma stockholders there may not be, without their further approval, any amendment of the merger
agreement that alters or changes, in a way that adversely affects the holders of any shares of Pyramid or Yuma capital stock or
alters or changes the merger consideration to be received by the Yuma stockholders in the merger.
Expenses
The merger agreement provides that each of Pyramid and Yuma will pay its own costs and expenses in connection with the
transactions contemplated in the merger agreement, except as described above in “—Termination of the Merger Agreement—
Termination Fees.”
No Third Party Beneficiaries
The merger agreement is not intended to, and does not, confer upon you or any person other than Pyramid and Yuma and their
permitted assigns any rights or remedies, except that Pyramid’s directors and officers will have the right to enforce the covenant
to continue to provide indemnification and liability insurance coverage to them after the completion of the merger.
Specific Performance
The parties are entitled to specific performance of the terms of the merger agreement in addition to any other remedy to which
they are entitled at law or in equity.
70
VOTING AGREEMENTS
The following summary describes specified aspects of voting agreements, as amended and restated, entered into in connection
with the proposed and the merger. This discussion does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to
the voting agreements, which are attached as Annex B and Annex C and incorporated herein by reference. We urge you to read
the voting agreements carefully and in their entirety.
Pyramid Significant Stockholder
As an inducement to Yuma to enter into the merger agreement, Michael D. Herman entered into a voting agreement with Yuma.
As of the record date for the Pyramid special meeting, Mr. Herman directly and indirectly owned an aggregate of approximately [-]
shares of Pyramid common stock representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock.
Pursuant to the terms of the voting agreement, Mr. Herman agreed to vote in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the
merger agreement and the proposals related to the Pyramid restated articles of incorporation. Mr. Herman appointed Sam L.
Banks, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Yuma, as his proxy and attorney-in-fact to vote its shares of Pyramid common
stock in accordance with the provisions of the voting agreement and revoked all prior proxies. Mr. Herman also agreed not to sell,
transfer or otherwise dispose of its shares of Pyramid common stock, subject to certain exceptions provided in the voting
agreement.
The voting agreement terminates upon the earlier to occur of (1) the completion of the merger or (2) the termination of the merger
agreement in accordance with its terms. See “The Merger Agreement—Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on page
[—].
Yuma Stockholders
As an inducement to Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to enter into the merger agreement, certain of Yuma’s directors (and certain
of their affiliates) entered into a voting agreement with Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary. As of the record date for the Yuma special
meeting, these stockholders directly and indirectly owned an aggregate of approximately [-] shares of Yuma common stock
representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma common stock, approximately [-] shares of Yuma Series A
preferred stock representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma Series A preferred stock, and approximately [-]
shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock representing approximately [-]% of the outstanding shares of Yuma Series B preferred
stock.
Pursuant to the terms of the voting agreement, each stockholder agreed to vote in favor of the merger, the adoption of the merger
agreement and the approval of any other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement. Each stockholder appointed
Michael D. Herman, Chairman and Interim President and Chief Executive Officer of Pyramid, as such stockholder’s proxy and
attorney-in-fact to vote such stockholder’s shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock in accordance with the provisions
of the voting agreement and revoked all prior proxies. Each stockholder also agreed not to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of
such stockholder’s shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock, subject to certain exceptions provided in the voting
agreement.
The voting agreement terminates upon the earlier to occur of (1) the completion of the merger or (2) the termination of the merger
agreement in accordance with its terms. See “The Merger Agreement—Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on page
[—].
71
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
General
The following discussion, which is based upon the opinion of TroyGould PC, counsel to Pyramid, summarizes the material U.S.
federal income tax consequences of the merger of Merger Subsidiary with and into Yuma (which we refer to as the merger). The
discussion is limited to the material U.S. federal income tax consequences to (1) U.S. holders (as defined below) of Yuma
common stock and/or preferred stock, and (2) Pyramid and Yuma.
This summary is not exhaustive of all possible tax considerations. The discussion is based on the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended (the “Code”), regulations promulgated under the Code by the U.S. Treasury Department (including proposed
and temporary regulations), rulings, current administrative interpretations and official pronouncements of the Internal Revenue
Service (the “IRS”), and judicial decisions, all as in effect on the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and all of which are
subject to differing interpretations or to change, possibly with retroactive effect. Such change could materially and adversely
affect the tax consequences described below. No assurance can be given that the IRS would not assert, or that a court would not
sustain, a position contrary to any of the tax consequences described below. Neither the summary of the tax consequences set
forth below nor the opinion of TroyGould PC is binding on the IRS or any court. We have not requested a ruling from the IRS
regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger.
This summary does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be important to a particular holder in light of
the holder’s investment or tax circumstances or to holders subject to special tax rules such as partnerships, subchapter S
corporations or other pass-through entities, banks, financial institutions, tax-exempt entities, insurance companies, regulated
investment companies or mutual funds, real estate investment trusts, controlled foreign corporations, passive foreign investment
companies, trusts and estates, dealers or brokers in stocks, securities or currencies, traders in securities that have elected to use
the mark-to-market method of accounting for their securities, persons holding their stock as part of an integrated transaction
(including a straddle, hedge, constructive sale or conversion transaction), persons whose functional currency for tax purposes is
not the U.S. dollar, persons subject to the alternative minimum tax provisions of the Code, non-U.S. holders, U.S. expatriates or
holders of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock who received their stock through the exercise of employee stock options,
through tax qualified retirement plans or otherwise as compensation. This summary does not address any tax consequences
arising under the laws of any state, local or foreign jurisdiction or under any U.S. federal laws other than those pertaining to the
income tax.
This summary addresses only those U.S. holders of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock who hold their stock, and who
will hold their shares of Pyramid common stock that they receive in the merger, as capital assets within the meaning of Section
1221 of the Code, which generally means property held for investment. In addition, the following discussion addresses only “U.S.
holders” for U.S. federal income tax purposes. As used in this summary, a “U.S. holder” means a beneficial owner of Yuma
common stock and/or preferred stock who is:
· an individual who is a citizen or resident of the United States;
a corporation (or any other entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes) created or organized in or under
·
the laws of the United States or of any state of the United States or the District of Columbia;
·an estate, the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
a trust (1) the substantial decisions of which are controlled by one or more U.S. persons and which is subject to the primary
·
supervision of a U.S. court or (2) that has validly elected under applicable Treasury regulations to be treated as a U.S. person for
U.S. federal income tax purposes.
If an entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes holds Yuma common stock and/or
preferred stock, the U.S. federal income tax consequences to a partner in such partnership (or owner of such entity) generally will
depend on the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership (or other entity). Any entity treated as a partnership for
U.S. federal income tax purposes that holds such stock, and any partners in such partnership, should consult their own tax
advisors with respect to the tax consequences of the merger.
72
In connection with providing its opinion expressed below regarding the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the
merger, TroyGould PC made and relied upon the following assumptions, without any independent investigation or inquiry, and its
opinion is subject to, and limited and qualified by the effect of, such assumptions: (1) all corporate records furnished to TroyGould
PC by the parties to the merger agreement are accurate and complete; (2) the merger will be effected in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the merger agreement and as described in the registration statement of which this proxy
statement/prospectus is a part, and no transaction or condition described in the merger agreement and affecting the opinion of
TroyGould PC will be waived by any party to the merger; (3) all statements as to factual matters, including those concerning the
merger, that are set forth in the merger agreement and the registration statement are accurate and complete and will remain
accurate and complete at all times up to and including the effective time of the merger; (4) each representation or warranty that is
made in the merger agreement based upon the knowledge or belief of a party to the merger agreement, or that is similarly
qualified, is accurate and complete and will remain accurate and complete at all times up to and including the effective time of the
merger, in each case without such qualification; (5) the parties to the merger agreement have complied with and, if applicable,
will continue to comply with, their respective covenants that are contained in the merger agreement; and (6) with respect to
documents that TroyGould PC reviewed in connection with its opinion, all documents submitted to such counsel as originals are
authentic; all documents submitted to it as certified, facsimile, or photostatic copies conform to the originals of such documents,
and such original documents are authentic; the signatures on all documents are genuine; and all natural persons who have
executed any of such documents have the legal capacity to do so.
If any of the assumptions described in the preceding paragraph is untrue for any reason or if the merger is consummated in a
manner that is different from the manner in which it is described in the merger agreement or the registration statement, the
opinion of TroyGould PC may be adversely affected and may not be relied upon.
This summary is not a complete analysis or description of all of the tax consequences that may be relevant to U.S.
holders. We urge you to consult your own tax advisor regarding your particular circumstances and the U.S. federal
income and estate tax consequences to you of the merger, as well as (1) any tax consequences arising under the
alternative minimum tax and the laws of any applicable state, local, foreign or other tax jurisdiction, (2) the possible
effects of changes in U.S. federal or other tax laws, (3) the requirement to retain records pertaining to your receipt of
Pyramid common stock, and (4) the requirement in certain cases to file with your federal income tax return a statement
setting forth certain facts relating to your receipt of such stock.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger
Subject to the qualifications, limitations and assumptions described above in this section, the opinion of TroyGould PC regarding
the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger is as follows:
the merger, that is, the merger of Merger Subsidiary with and into Yuma, will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of
·
Section 368(a) of the Code;
no gain or loss will be recognized by a U.S. holder of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock on receipt of Pyramid common
·
stock pursuant to the merger;
the aggregate tax basis of the Pyramid common stock received by each U.S. holder of Yuma common stock and/or preferred
·
stock will equal the aggregate tax basis of the Yuma stock surrendered by such holder in exchange for Pyramid common stock;
the holding period of the Pyramid common stock received by each U.S. holder will include the period during which such holder
·
held the Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock surrendered in exchange for Pyramid common stock; and
·no gain or loss will be recognized by Pyramid, Yuma or the U.S. holders of Pyramid common stock by reason of the merger.
Holders of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock may be entitled to appraisal rights under Delaware law in connection with
the merger. If a U.S. holder of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock receives cash pursuant to the exercise of appraisal
rights, such holder generally will recognize gain or loss, measured by the difference between the amount received (other than
any amount relating to interest, which will be taxable as ordinary income) and such holder’s tax basis in the holder’s Yuma stock.
Such gain or loss generally will constitute capital gain or loss and will be long-term capital gain or loss if the U.S. holder’s
holding period for the Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock exchanged by such U.S. holder for cash is greater than one
year as of the effective time of the merger. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations. A holder of Yuma common
stock and/or preferred stock who exercises appraisal rights is urged to consult with the holder’s tax advisor regarding the tax
consequences of the exercise of appraisal rights.
A U.S. holder of Yuma common stock and/or preferred stock who receives cash instead of a fractional share of Pyramid common
stock will be treated as having received the fractional share of Pyramid common stock pursuant to the merger and then as having
exchanged the fractional share of Pyramid common stock for cash in a redemption by Pyramid. In general, this deemed
redemption will be treated as a sale or exchange and a U.S. holder will recognize gain or loss equal to the difference between (1)
the amount of cash received by such U.S. holder and (2) the portion of the basis of the shares of Yuma stock allocable to such
fractional interest. Such gain or loss generally will constitute capital gain or loss and will be long-term capital gain or loss if the
U.S. holder’s holding period for the Yuma stock exchanged by such U.S. holder is greater than one year as of the effective time.
The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations.
73
Cash payments received in the merger by a U.S. holder may, under certain circumstances, be subject to information reporting
and backup withholding at a rate of 31% of the cash payable to the U.S. holder, unless the U.S. holder provides proof of an
applicable exemption, furnishes the holder’s taxpayer identification number (which, in the case of an individual, is his or her
social security number) and otherwise complies with all applicable requirements of the backup withholding rules. Any amounts
withheld from payments to a U.S. holder under the backup withholding rules are not additional tax and will be allowed as a
refund or credit against the U.S. holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, provided the required information is timely furnished to
the IRS.
74
DISSENTERS’ RIGHTS OF APPRAISAL
Under Section 262 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, referred to as the DGCL, holders of Yuma’s common stock and
preferred stock as of [-], 2014, the record date, who do not wish to accept the merger consideration as described in this proxy
statement/prospectus may dissent and elect to have the fair value of their shares of Yuma common stock and preferred stock
(exclusive of any element of value arising from the accomplishment or expectation of the merger) judicially determined and paid
to the holder in cash (together with interest, if any) in the amount determined to be the fair value, provided that the holder
complies with the provisions of Section 262 of the DGCL.
The following discussion is not a complete statement of the law pertaining to appraisal rights under the DGCL, and is qualified in
its entirety by the full text of Section 262, which is provided in its entirety as Annex E to this proxy statement/prospectus. All
references in Section 262 and in this summary to a “stockholder” are to the record holder of the shares of Yuma’s common stock
and preferred stock as to which appraisal rights are asserted. A person having a beneficial interest in shares of Yuma’s
common stock and preferred stock held of record in the name of another person, such as a broker or nominee, must act
promptly to cause the record holder to follow properly the steps summarized below in a timely manner to perfect
appraisal rights.
Under Section 262, where a proposed merger is to be submitted for approval and adoption at a meeting of stockholders, as in the
case of the special meeting, the corporation, not less than 20 days before the meeting, must notify each of its stockholders
entitled to appraisal rights that appraisal rights are available and include in that notice a copy of Section 262. This proxy
statement/prospectus constitutes such notice, and the applicable statutory provisions of the DGCL are attached to this proxy
statement/prospectus as Annex E. Any stockholder who wishes to exercise appraisal rights or who wishes to preserve the right to
do so should review carefully the following discussion and Annex E to this proxy statement/prospectus. Failure to comply with
the procedures specified in Section 262 timely and properly will result in the loss of appraisal rights. Moreover, because
of the complexity of the procedures for exercising the right to seek appraisal of Yuma’s common stock and preferred stock, Yuma
believes that its stockholders who consider exercising such appraisal rights should seek the advice of counsel.
Any holder of Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock wishing to exercise the right to demand appraisal under Section 262 of
the DGCL must satisfy each of the following conditions:
as more fully described below, the holder must deliver to Yuma a written demand for appraisal of the holder’s shares before the
·
vote on the merger agreement at the Yuma special meeting, which demand will be sufficient if it reasonably informs Yuma of the
identity of the holder and that the holder intends to demand the appraisal of the holder’s shares;
the holder must not vote the holder’s shares of Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock in favor of the merger agreement; a
proxy which does not contain voting instructions will, unless revoked, be voted in favor of the merger agreement and, therefore, a
·
stockholder who votes by proxy and who wishes to exercise appraisal rights must vote against the merger agreement or abstain
from voting on the merger agreement; and
the holder must continuously hold the shares from the date of making the demand through the effective date of the merger; a
stockholder who is the record holder of shares of Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock on the date the written demand for
·
appraisal is made but who thereafter transfers those shares before the effective date of the merger will lose any right to appraisal
in respect of those shares.
Neither voting (in person or by proxy) against, abstaining from voting on or failing to vote on the proposal to adopt and approve
the merger agreement will constitute a written demand for appraisal within the meaning of Section 262. The written demand for
appraisal must be in addition to and separate from any such proxy or vote.
Only a holder of record of shares of Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock issued and outstanding immediately before the
effective time of the merger is entitled to assert appraisal rights for the shares in that holder’s name. A demand for appraisal
should be executed by or on behalf of the stockholder of record, fully and correctly, as the stockholder’s name appears on the
stock certificates, and should specify the stockholder’s name and mailing address, the number of shares of common stock or
preferred stock owned and that the stockholder intends to demand appraisal of the stockholder’s common stock or preferred
stock. If the shares are owned of record in a fiduciary capacity, such as by a trustee, guardian or custodian, execution of the
demand should be made in that capacity. If the shares are owned of record by more than one person, as in a joint tenancy or
tenancy in common, the demand should be executed by or on behalf of all owners. An authorized agent, including one or more
joint owners, may execute a demand for appraisal on behalf of a stockholder; however, the agent must identify the record owner
or owners and expressly disclose the fact that, in executing the demand, the agent is acting as agent for such owner or owners. A
record holder such as a broker who holds shares as nominee for several beneficial owners may exercise appraisal rights with
respect to the shares held for one or more beneficial owners while not exercising appraisal rights with respect to the shares held
for one or more other beneficial owners. In such case, the written demand should set forth the number of shares as to which
appraisal is sought, and where no number of shares is expressly mentioned the demand will be presumed to cover all shares
held in the name of the record owner. Stockholders who hold their shares in brokerage accounts or other nominee forms
and who wish to exercise appraisal rights are urged to consult with their brokers to determine appropriate procedures
for the making of a demand for appraisal by the nominee.
75
A Yuma stockholder who elects to exercise appraisal rights under Section 262 should mail or deliver a written demand to:
Yuma Energy, Inc.
Attention: Corporate Secretary
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Houston, Texas 77027
Within ten days after the effective date of the merger, Pyramid, as the surviving corporation, must send a notice as to the
effectiveness of the merger transaction to each of Yuma’s former stockholders who has made a written demand for appraisal in
accordance with Section 262 and who has not voted to adopt the merger agreement. Within 120 days after the effective date of
the merger, but not thereafter, either Pyramid or any dissenting stockholder who has complied with the requirements of Section
262 may commence an appraisal proceeding by filing a petition in the Delaware Court of Chancery demanding a determination
of the value of the shares of common stock or preferred stock held by all dissenting stockholders. Yuma and Pyramid have no
obligation to, and have no present intention to file, a petition for appraisal, and stockholders seeking to exercise appraisal rights
should not assume that Pyramid or Yuma will file such a petition. Accordingly, stockholders who desire to have their shares
appraised should initiate any petitions necessary for the perfection of their appraisal rights within the time periods and in the
manner prescribed in Section 262. Inasmuch as Pyramid and Yuma have no obligation to file such a petition, the failure of a
stockholder to do so within the period specified could nullify the stockholder’s previous written demand for appraisal.
Within 120 days after the effective date of the merger, any stockholder who has complied with the provisions of Section 262 to
that point in time will be entitled to receive from Pyramid, upon written request, a statement setting forth the aggregate number of
shares not voted in favor of the merger agreement and with respect to which demands for appraisal have been received and the
aggregate number of holders of such shares. Pyramid must mail that statement to the stockholder within 10 days after receipt of
the request or within 10 days after expiration of the period for delivery of demands for appraisals under Section 262, whichever is
later. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person who is the beneficial owner of shares of Yuma common stock or preferred stock
held either in a voting trust or by a nominee on behalf of such person may, in such person’s own name, file a petition or request
from Pyramid the statement described in this paragraph.
A stockholder timely filing a petition for appraisal with the Delaware Court of Chancery must deliver a copy to Pyramid, and it will
then be obligated within 20 days to provide the Delaware Court of Chancery with a duly verified list containing the names and
addresses of all stockholders who have demanded appraisal of their shares. After notice to those stockholders, the Delaware
Court of Chancery is empowered to conduct a hearing on the petition to determine which stockholders are entitled to appraisal
rights. The Delaware Court of Chancery may require stockholders who have demanded an appraisal for their shares and who
hold stock represented by certificates to submit their certificates to the Register in Chancery for notation thereon of the pendency
of the appraisal proceedings, and if any stockholder fails to comply with the requirement, the Delaware Court of Chancery may
dismiss the proceedings as to that stockholder.
In the event that the Delaware Court of Chancery determines the holders of Yuma’s common stock or preferred stock entitled to
appraisal, an appraisal proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the Delaware Court of Chancery, including
any rules specifically governing appraisal proceedings. Through this proceeding, the Delaware Court of Chancery will determine
the “fair value” of the shares, exclusive of any element of value arising from the accomplishment or expectation of the merger,
together with interest, if any, to be paid upon the amount determined to be the fair value. The costs of the action may be
determined by the Delaware Court of Chancery and taxed upon the parties as the Delaware Court of Chancery deems equitable.
Upon application of a dissenting stockholder, the Delaware Court of Chancery may also order that all or a portion of the
expenses incurred by any stockholder in connection with the appraisal proceeding, including, without limitation, reasonable
attorneys’ fees and the fees and expenses of experts, be charged pro rata against the value of all of the shares entitled to
appraisal. Stockholders considering seeking appraisal should be aware that the fair value of their shares as determined
under Section 262 could be more than, the same as or less than the value of Pyramid shares they would receive under
the merger agreement if they did not seek appraisal of their shares.
In determining fair value, the Delaware Court of Chancery is to take into account all relevant factors. In Weinberger v. UOP, Inc.,
the Delaware Supreme Court discussed the factors that could be considered in determining fair value in an appraisal
proceeding, stating that “proof of value by any techniques or methods which are generally considered acceptable in the financial
community and otherwise admissible in court” should be considered, and that “[f]air price obviously requires consideration of all
relevant factors involving the value of a company.” The Delaware Supreme Court stated that, in making this determination of fair
value, the court must consider “market value, asset value, dividends, earnings prospects, the nature of the enterprise and any
other facts which were known or which could be ascertained as of the date of the merger and which throw any light on future
prospects of the merged corporation.” In Weinberger, the Delaware Supreme Court stated that “elements of future value,
including the nature of the enterprise, which are known or susceptible of proof as of the date of the merger and not the product of
speculation, may be considered.” However, Section 262 provides that fair value is to be “exclusive of any element of value
arising from the accomplishment or expectation of the merger.”
76
Any of Yuma’s stockholders who have duly demanded an appraisal in compliance with Section 262 will not, after the effective
date of the merger, be entitled to vote the shares subject to that demand for any purpose or be entitled to the payment of
dividends or other distributions on those shares (except dividends or other distributions payable to holders of record of shares as
of a record date before the effective date of the merger).
At any time within 60 days after the effective date of the merger, any of Yuma’s stockholders who have not commenced an
appraisal proceeding or joined that proceeding as a named party may withdraw its demand for appraisal and accept the merger
consideration by delivering to Pyramid a written withdrawal of the stockholder’s demand for appraisal. However, any such
attempt to withdraw made more than 60 days after the effective date of the merger will require Pyramid’s written approval. No
appraisal proceeding in the Delaware Court of Chancery will be dismissed as to any stockholder without the approval of the
Delaware Court of Chancery, and such approval may be conditioned upon such terms as the Delaware Court of Chancery
deems just; provided, however, that any stockholder who has not commenced an appraisal proceeding or joined that proceeding
as a named party may withdraw its demand for appraisal and accept the merger consideration offered pursuant to the merger
agreement within 60 days after the effective date of the merger. If Pyramid does not approve a stockholder’s request to withdraw
a demand for appraisal when that approval is required or, except with respect to a stockholder that withdraws its right to appraisal
in accordance with the proviso in the immediately preceding sentence, if the Delaware Court of Chancery does not approve the
dismissal of an appraisal proceeding, the stockholder would be entitled to receive only the appraised value determined in any
such appraisal proceeding, which value could be more than, the same as or less than the value of the Pyramid shares being
offered pursuant to the merger agreement.
Failure to comply strictly with all of the procedures set forth in Section 262 of the DGCL may result in the loss of a
stockholder’s statutory appraisal rights. Consequently, any stockholder wishing to exercise appraisal rights is urged to
consult legal counsel before attempting to exercise appraisal rights.
Holders of Pyramid common stock do not have any appraisal or dissenter’s rights with respect to the merger.
77
ACCOUNTING TREATMENT
The merger will be accounted for as a reverse acquisition under the purchase method of accounting. Pyramid will be treated as
the acquired corporation for accounting and financial reporting purposes. Pyramid’s assets, liabilities and other items will be
adjusted to their estimated fair value on the closing date of the merger and combined with the historical book values of the assets
and liabilities of Yuma. Applicable income tax effects of these adjustments will be included as a component of Pyramid’s
deferred tax asset or liability. The difference between the estimated fair value of the assets (including separately identifiable
intangible assets), liabilities and other items (adjusted as discussed above) and the purchase price will be recorded as goodwill.
Financial statements of Yuma issued after the merger will reflect the values and will not be restated retroactively to reflect the
historical financial position or results of operations of Pyramid.
78
INFORMATION ABOUT YUMA
General
Yuma Energy, Inc. is a U.S.-based oil and gas company focused on the exploration for, and development of, conventional and
unconventional oil and gas prospects. Yuma’s predecessor was established in 1983. Yuma has employed a 3-D seismic-based
strategy to build a multi-year inventory of development and exploration prospects. Yuma’s current operations are focused on
onshore central Louisiana, where Yuma is targeting the Austin Chalk, Tuscaloosa, Wilcox, Frio, Marg Tex and Hackberry
formations. In addition, Yuma has a non-operated position in the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Yuma’s core competencies in
generating oil and gas prospects include: unconventional oil plays; onshore liquids-rich projects; and high impact deep onshore
prospects located beneath known producing trends, identified through the use of 3-D seismic surveys. There is no trading market
for the common equity of Yuma.
Yuma’s corporate strategy involves the execution of a structured four stage plan. The key elements of this plan are:
· Transition existing inventory of reserves into production.
· Further development and appraisal of existing projects.
Acquisition of additional working interests within drilling units in existing operated proved undeveloped locations through infield
·
leasing while retaining a greater percentage working interest in, and operatorship of, its projects going forward.
·Add to project inventory through ongoing prospect generation, exploration and strategic acquisitions.
Yuma’s core competencies include generating:
· Unconventional oil resource plays;
·Onshore liquids-rich projects, through the use of 3-D seismic surveys; and
Identification of high impact deep onshore prospects located beneath known producing trends through the use of 3-D seismic
·
surveys.
Yuma’s key strengths and competitive advantages:
Extensive technical knowledge and history of operations in the Gulf Coast region. Since 1983 Yuma or its predecessor has
operated in the Gulf Coast region, which is an area that extends through Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi. Yuma’s extensive
understanding of the geology and experience in interpreting well control, core and 3-D seismic data in this area provides Yuma
·
a competitive advantage in exploring and developing projects in the Gulf Coast region. Yuma has cultivated amicable and
mutually beneficial relationships with acreage owners in this region and adjacent oil and gas operators, which generally
provides for effective leasing and development activities.
In-house technical expertise in 3-D seismic programs. Yuma designs and generates in-house 3-D seismic survey programs on
·
many of its projects. By controlling the 3-D seismic program from field acquisition through seismic processing and interpretation,
Yuma gains a competitive advantage through proprietary knowledge of the project.
Liquids-rich, quality assets with attractive economics. Yuma’s reserves and drilling locations are primarily oil plays with
·
associated liquids-rich natural gas. As at December 31, 2013, Yuma’s proved reserves comprised approximately 56% oil, 31%
natural gas and 13% natural gas liquids.
Existing well diversified portfolio of producing and non-producing assets. Yuma’s current portfolio of producing and non-
·
producing assets covers a large area within the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Significant inventory of oil and gas assets. Yuma has a significant inventory of both proved reserves and significant growth
assets that can be developed over the near to medium term. In addition, Yuma has the ability to organically generate new oil and
gas prospects and projects through techniques utilized by its experienced management team, which include (1) analyzing
subsurface data and 2-D seismic data to identify areas where a 3-D seismic survey could be acquired for the generation of oil
·
and gas prospects, (2) negotiating mineral rights with large landowners in prospective areas, and (3) reprocessing of older 3-D
seismic surveys utilizing new technology. Once that is determined, the technical team surveys prospective areas for new oil and
gas deposits and what methods might be employed to identify those likely locations.  In recent years, the predominant method
used has been to conduct 3-D seismic surveys.  Once a survey has been acquired, the team evaluates the seismic data.
79
Yuma operated assets. In order to maintain better control over its assets, Yuma has established a leasehold position comprised
·
primarily of assets where Yuma is the operator. By controlling operations, Yuma is able to dictate the pace of development and
better manage the cost, type and timing of exploration and development activities.
Experienced management team. Yuma has a highly qualified management team with an average of approximately 30 years
industry experience, including extensive experience in the Gulf Coast region. The Yuma team has substantial expertise in the
·
design, acquisition, processing and interpretation of new 3-D seismic surveys, and its experienced operations staff allows for
efficient turnaround from project identification to drilling to production.
Experienced Yuma board of directors. Yuma’s directors have substantial experience managing successful public companies
·
and realizing value for investors through the development, acquisition and monetization of both conventional and
unconventional oil and gas assets in the Gulf Coast region.
Recent Developments
Yuma spudded its second operated Austin Chalk well, the Crosby 14-1, in the Greater Masters Creek Field on March 27, 2014.
This well is located in Section 14 Township 2 South, Range 7 West in Vernon Parish, Louisiana. The Crosby 14-1 will be drilled
vertically to approximately 15,000 feet to the top of the Austin Chalk formation and then up to 6,000 feet horizontally in the Austin
Chalk pay interval. Yuma expects this well will be drilled and tested during August 2014. If successful, Yuma expects to have the
well on production in late September 2014.
Plans are underway to drill a development well offsetting Yuma’s 2013 Wilcox formation discovery on its Musial prospect located
in Livingston Parish, Louisiana. Yuma’s discovery, the Starns 38-1, was drilled to a measured total depth of 10,119 feet and was
put on production in late April 2013, and averaged 101 Bbl/d and 229 barrels of water per day while on pump. By December
2013 the production rate had declined to 30 Bbl/d. The downhole pump was re-configured and the producing interval was treated
for paraffin and asphaltene buildup in January 2014. The well began producing on its own and water production dropped
significantly. During July 2014, the well flowed at an average rate of 125 barrels of oil and eight barrels of water per day. Yuma
spudded an offset well, the Nettles 39-1, on July 2, 2014. Yuma reached a total depth of 10,051 feet during July 2014 and logged
18 feet of net pay in the primary objective, the First Wilcox sand. The Starns 38-1 also had 18 net feet of pay in the First Wilcox
sand. Below the First Wilcox sand, the logs indicated 12 net feet of pay in the Fourth Wilcox sand which was not productive in the
Starns 38-1 well. Yuma has run production casing and will begin by testing the Fourth Wilcox sand and, if productive, will
produce the well from that sand and will recomplete the well in the First Wilcox sand at a later date. If the completion efforts are
successful, Yuma expects to have the well on production during August 2014.
Yuma participated for an 18.9% working interest in a successful infill development well in the Ringwood Field located in Major
County, Oklahoma. The Bertha No. 8-3 was completed in early April 2014 in the Hunton formation at a depth of 8,010 feet at an
initial production rate of 150 barrels of oil per day.
Competition
In addition to being highly volatile, the domestic oil and gas business is highly competitive among many independent operators
and major oil companies in the industry. Yuma’s competitors may possess financial resources and technical capabilities which
are greater than those available to Yuma and they may, therefore, be able to pay more for desirable properties or more effectively
exploit productive prospects due to their size and ability to secure better service contracts.
Environmental Regulations
Yuma conducts its operations according to high industry standards and in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
Yuma’s operations are generally subject to numerous stringent federal, state and local environmental regulations under various
acts including the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, and the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act. For example, Yuma’s operations are affected by diverse
environmental regulations including those regarding the disposal of produced oilfield brines, other oil-related wastes, and
additional wastes not directly related to oil and gas production. Additional regulations exist regarding the containment and
handling of crude oil as well as preventing the release of oil into the environment. It is not possible to estimate future
environmental compliance costs due in part, to the uncertainty of continually changing environmental initiatives. Future
environmental costs can be expected to be significant to the entire oil and gas industry and such regulatory compliance costs
may have a material adverse effect on Yuma’s capital expenditures, earnings and competitive position.
80
Employees
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Yuma had 31 full-time employees. All of Yuma’s employees are in the United
States. Yuma also utilizes temporary employees, independent contractors, and part-time employees as needed. None of Yuma’s
employees are represented by a labor union and Yuma considers its employee relations to be good.
Properties
Offices
Yuma leases property as detailed in the following table.
Approximate Size Lease Expiration Date Intended Use
Location
Houston, Texas 15,180 sq. ft.
Houston, Texas 3,195 sq. ft.
December 31, 2017
 April 30, 2017
Office
 Storage
Aggregate annual rental payments for Yuma’s facilities are approximately $508,633. Yuma’s current facilities are generally
adequate for anticipated needs over the next 24 months.
Oil, Gas and Natural Gas Liquids Reserve Information
All of Yuma’s oil and gas reserves are located in the United States. Unaudited information concerning the estimated net
quantities of all of Yuma’s proved reserves and the standardized measure of future net cash flows from the reserves is presented
in Note Y – “Supplementary Information on Oil and Natural Gas Exploration, Development and Production Activities
(Unaudited),” in the Notes to the Historical Consolidated Financial Statements of Yuma for the three years ended December 31,
2013 in this proxy statement/prospectus. Yuma’s reserve estimates have been prepared by Netherland, Sewell & Associates,
Inc. (“NSAI”), an independent petroleum engineering firm. Yuma does not have any long-term supply or similar agreements with
foreign governments or authorities.
Set forth below is a summary of Yuma’s oil, gas and natural gas liquid reserves as of December 31, 2013 and based on the
reserve report prepared by NSAI. Yuma did not provide any reserve information to any federal agencies in 2013.
Oil 
NGL 
Gas 
  
  
 
(MMcf)
(MBbls)
(MBbls)
Proved developed
  1,607    493
   10,317   3,819   $ 102,105
Proved undeveloped  10,008    2,275    28,056   16,958  $ 329,144
Total proved
  11,615    2,767    38,372   20,777  $ 431,248
Present Value Discounted
at 10% ($ in thousands) (1)
Total 
  
(Mboe)
Oil, Gas and Natural Gas Liquids Reserve Quantities
Oil 
 
(MBbl)
Gas 
  
(MMcf)
NGL 
  
 
(MBbls)
Beginning proved reserve quantities, January 1, 2013  6,164    31,071   1,576  
  6,482    16,496   1,478  
Purchases of minerals-in-place
 
  92
Extensions and discoveries
Production
  (202 )  (1,276 )  (66
)
  (862 )  (8,281 )  (281
Revisions of quantity estimates
)
  11,615   38,372   2,767  
Proved reserve quantities, December 31, 2013
 
   
Ending proved developed reserve quantities:
December 31, 2012
  1,131    10,157   344
 
 
  1,607    10,317   493
December 31, 2013
363
-
(1)       Present Value Discounted at 10% (“PV10”) is a Non-GAAP measure that differs from the GAAP measure “standardized
measure of discounted future net cash flows” in that PV10 is calculated without regard to future income taxes. Yuma
management believes that the presentation of PV10 value is relevant and useful to investors because it presents the estimated
discounted future net cash flows attributable to Yuma’s estimated proved reserves independent of its income tax attributes,
thereby isolating the intrinsic value of the estimated future cash flows attributable to its reserves. Because many factors that are
unique to each individual company impact the amount of future income taxes to be paid, Yuma believes the use of a pre-tax
measure provides greater comparability of assets when evaluating companies. For these reasons, Yuma management uses, and
believes the industry generally uses, the PV10 measure in evaluating and comparing acquisition candidates and assessing the
potential return on investment related to investments in oil and natural gas properties. PV10 does not necessarily represent the
fair market value of oil and gas properties.
81
PV10 is not a measure of financial or operational performance under GAAP, nor should it be considered in isolation or as a
substitute for the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows as defined under GAAP. For presentation of the
standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows, please see Note Y – “Supplementary Information on Oil and Natural
Gas Exploration, Development and Production Activities (Unaudited),” in the Notes to the Historical Consolidated Financial
Statements of Yuma for the three years ended December 31, 2013 included with this proxy statement/prospectus. The table
below titled “Non-GAAP Reconciliation” provides a reconciliation of PV10 to the standardized measure of discounted future net
cash flows.
Non-GAAP Reconciliation (in thousands)
The following table reconciles Yuma’s direct interest in oil and gas reserves as of December 31, 2013:
$431,248  
Present value of estimated future net revenues (PV10)
   (105,894)
Future income taxes, discounted at 10%
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows $325,354
Uncertainties are inherent in estimating quantities of proved reserves, including many risk factors beyond Yuma’s control.
Reserve engineering is a subjective process of estimating subsurface accumulations of oil and natural gas that cannot be
measured in an exact manner, and the accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data and the
interpretation thereof. As a result, estimates by different engineers often vary, sometimes significantly. In addition, physical factors
such as the results of drilling, testing and production subsequent to the date of the estimates, as well as economic factors such as
change in product prices, may require revision of such estimates. Accordingly, oil and natural gas quantities ultimately recovered
will vary from reserve estimates.
Proved Undeveloped Reserves
From January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2014, Yuma’s proved undeveloped reserves (“PUDs”) increased 74% from 9,752 MBoe to
16,958 MBoe, or an increase of 7,207 MBoe. Increases due to acquisitions were 10,247 MBoe, which were primarily attributable
to the purchase of Addison Oil, LLC’s producing assets and acreage in the Greater Masters Creek Field. Yuma also added
approximately 108 MBoe to proved undeveloped reserves, in extensions and discoveries, primarily as a result of successful
drilling in 2013 and the commensurate PUDs associated with drilling at its Musial Prospect inside the Livingston 3D shoot.
Reserves of 444 MBoe were moved from the PUD reserve category to the proved developed producing category through the
drilling of the Crosby 12-l. Yuma incurred approximately $6.1 million in capital expenditures during 2013 in converting the Crosby
12-1 well to the proved developed reserve category. The remaining change in PUDs of (2,705) MBoe was a result of decreased
prices, performance revisions over the time period and a small amount of production. Based on Yuma’s 2013 year end
independent engineering reserve report, Yuma plans to drill all of its PUD drilling locations within five years.
Preparation of Reserve Estimates
Yuma has engaged an independent petroleum engineering consulting firm, Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”), to
prepare its annual reserve estimates and has relied on NSAI’s expertise to ensure that Yuma’s reserve estimates are prepared in
compliance with SEC guidelines. NSAI was founded in 1961 and performs consulting petroleum engineering services under
Texas Board of Professional Engineers Registration No. F-2699. Within NSAI, the technical persons primarily responsible for
preparing the estimates set forth in the NSAI reserves report incorporated herein are G. Lance Binder and Philip R. Hodgson. Mr.
Binder has been practicing consulting petroleum engineering at NSAI since 1983. Mr. Binder is a Registered Professional
Engineer in the State of Texas (No. 61794) and has over 30 years of practical experience in petroleum engineering, with over 30
years of experience in the estimation and evaluation of reserves. He graduated from Purdue University in 1978 with a Bachelor
of Science degree in Chemical Engineering. Mr. Hodgson has been practicing consulting petroleum geology at NSAI since
1998. Mr. Hodgson is a Licensed Professional Geoscientist in the State of Texas, Geology (No. 1314) and has over 29 years of
practical experience in petroleum geosciences. He graduated from University of Illinois in 1982 with a Bachelor of Science
Degree in Geology and from Purdue University in 1984 with a Master of Science Degree in Geophysics. Both technical
principals meet or exceed the education, training, and experience requirements set forth in the Standards Pertaining to the
Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers; both are
proficient in judiciously applying industry standard practices to engineering and geoscience evaluations as well as applying SEC
and other industry reserves definitions and guidelines.
Yuma’s principal engineer is primarily responsible for overseeing Yuma’s independent petroleum engineering firm during the
preparation of Yuma’s reserve report. His professional qualifications meet or exceed the qualifications of reserve estimators and
auditors set forth in the “Standards Pertaining to Estimation and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information” promulgated by
the Society of Petroleum Engineers. His qualifications include: Bachelors of Science degree in Petroleum Engineering from
Texas A&M University, 1999; Masters in Finance from the University of Houston in 2008; Executive Masters of Business
Administration degree from Rice University in 2011; member of the Society of Petroleum Engineers since 1998; and more than
14 years of experience in the oil and gas industry.
82
Yuma maintains adequate and effective internal controls over its reserve estimation process as well as the underlying data upon
which reserve estimates are based. The primary inputs to the reserve estimation process are technical information, financial data,
ownership interest, and production data. The relevant field and reservoir technical information, which is updated annually, is
assessed for validity when Yuma’s independent petroleum engineering firm has technical meetings with its engineers, geologist,
operations and land personnel. Current revenue and expense information is obtained from Yuma’s accounting records, which
are subject to external quarterly reviews, annual audits and its own set of internal controls over financial reporting. All current
financial data such as commodity prices, lease operating expenses, production taxes and field-level commodity price differentials
are updated in the reserve database and then analyzed to ensure that they have been entered accurately and that all updates are
complete. Yuma’s current ownership in mineral interests and well production data are also subject to Yuma’s internal controls
over financial reporting, and they are incorporated in Yuma’s reserve database as well and verified internally by Yuma to ensure
their accuracy and completeness. Once the reserve database has been updated with current information, and the relevant
technical support material has been assembled, Yuma’s independent engineering firm meets with Yuma’s technical personnel to
review field performance and future development plans in order to further verify the validity of estimates. Following these reviews
the reserve database is furnished to NSAI so that it can prepare its independent reserve estimates and final report. The reserve
estimates prepared by NSAI are reviewed and compared to Yuma’s internal estimates by Yuma’s principal engineer and staff in
Yuma’s reservoir engineering department. Material reserve estimation differences are reviewed between NSAI’s reserve
estimates and Yuma’s internally prepared reserves on a case-by-case basis. An iterative process between NSAI and Yuma, and
additional data is provided to address the differences. If the supporting documentation will not justify additional changes, the
NSAI reserves are accepted. In the event that additional data supports a reserve estimation adjustment, NSAI will analyze the
additional data, and may make changes it deems necessary. Additional data is usually comprised of updated production
information on new wells. Once the review is completed and all material differences are reconciled, the reserve report is finalized
and Yuma’s reserve database is updated with the final estimates provided by NSAI. Access to Yuma’s reserve database is
restricted to specific members of Yuma’s reservoir engineering department.
Net Oil, Gas and Natural Gas Liquids Production, Average Price and Average Production Cost
The net quantities of oil, gas and natural gas liquids produced and sold by Yuma for each of the three years ended December 31,
2013, the average sales price per unit sold and the average production cost per unit are presented below.
2012
2011
9,571
1,692
2013
 
 
   184,349     154,437    109,304 
Oil Production (Bbls)
   1,580,468    515,112    367,465 
Gas Production (Mcf)
   51,875
 
Natural Gas Liquids Production (Bbls)
   499,635     249,860    172,240 
Total Production (Boe)*
    
 
Average realized price:
     
     
Excluding hedging (realized and unrealized)    
 
  $107.57   $109.39  
   Crude Oil and Condensate (per Bbl)
 
  $3.07
   Natural Gas (per Mcf)
   Natural Gas Liquids (per Bbl)
  $42.67
 
     
Including hedging (realized only)
 
  $106.45   $105.48  
   Crude Oil and Condensate (per Bbl)
 
  $4.07
   Natural Gas (per Mcf)
   Natural Gas Liquids (per Bbl)
  $42.67
 
 
  $11.99
Production cost per Boe**
$104.26
 $3.83
 $40.17
    
 $102.46
 $4.08
 $40.17
 $12.40
$4.51
  $53.08
$7.41
  $53.08
  $18.54
Barrels of oil equivalent have been calculated on the basis of six thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas equal to one barrel of
*
oil equivalent (1 Boe).
Excludes ad valorem taxes (which are included in lease operating expenses on Yuma’s consolidated statements of income in
the Historical Consolidated Financial Statements of Yuma for the three years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
included with this proxy statement/prospectus) of $717,922, $101,628, and $54,457 in 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively and
severance taxes.
**
Effective January 1, 2013, Yuma acquired its interest in the Greater Masters Creek Field, which contained 78% of Yuma’s total
proved reserves as of December 31, 2013. No other single field accounted for 15% or more of Yuma’s proved reserves as of
December 31, 2013. The net quantities of oil and gas produced and sold by Yuma for the year ended December 31, 2013, the
average sales price per unit sold and the average production cost per unit for the Greater Master Creek Field are presented
below.
83
Year Ended December 31, 2013 
Greater Masters Creek Field
  
 
Oil Production (Bbls)
 
Gas Production (Mcf)
  
 
Natural Gas Liquids Production (Bbls)  
 
  
Total Production (Boe)*
Average realized price:**
  
 
 
   Crude Oil and Condensate (per Bbl) $
 
 $
   Natural Gas (per Mcf)
 
 $
   Natural Gas Liquids (per Bbl)
Production cost per Boe***
 $
24,972
85,866
8,702
47,985
 
100.87
4.07
34.98
97.12
Barrels of oil equivalent have been calculated on the basis of six thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas equal to one barrel of
*
oil equivalent (1 Boe).
** Excludes hedges (realized and unrealized) as they are not recorded by specific field.
***
Excludes ad valorem taxes (which are included in lease operating expenses on Yuma’s consolidated statements of income in
the Historical Consolidated Financial Statements of Yuma included with this proxy statement/prospectus) of $570,940 in 2013
and severance taxes.
Yuma’s La Posada (Bayou Herbert) field contained 17% of Yuma’s total proved reserves as of December 31, 2012. No other
single field accounted for 15% or more of Yuma’s proved reserves as of December 31, 2012. The net quantities of oil and gas
produced and sold by Yuma for the year ended December 31, 2012, the average sales price per unit sold and the average
production cost per unit for Yuma’s La Posada (Bayou Herbert) field are presented below.
Year Ended December 31, 2012 
La Posada (Bayou Herbert) Field
 
  
Oil Production (Bbls)
  
 
Gas Production (Mcf)
 
Natural Gas Liquids Production (Bbls)  
 
  
Total Production (Boe)*
 
Average realized price:**
  
 
   Crude Oil and Condensate (per Bbl) $
   Natural Gas (per Mcf)
 $
 
 
 $
   Natural Gas Liquids (per Bbl)
Production cost per Boe***
 $
6,780
345,309
8,442
72,774
 
107.68
3.17
43.05
2.54
*Barrels of oil equivalent have been calculated on the basis of six thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas equal to one barrel of
oil equivalent (1 Boe).
** Excludes hedges (realized and unrealized) as they are not recorded by specific field.
***
Excludes severance taxes but includes ad valorem taxes in lease operating expenses since this well is non-operated by
Yuma and the operator does not break-out the ad valorem taxes from lease operating expenses.
Yuma’s Fresh Water Bayou South field contained 18% of Yuma’s total proved reserves as of December 31, 2011. No other
single field accounted for 15% or more of Yuma’s proved reserves as of December 31, 2011. The net quantities of oil and gas
produced and sold by Yuma for the year ended December 31, 2011, the average sales price per unit sold and the average
production cost per unit for Yuma’s Fresh Water Bayou South field are presented below.
Year Ended December 31, 2011 
Fresh Water Bayou South
 
  
Oil Production (Bbls)
 
Gas Production (Mcf)
  
Natural Gas Liquids Production (Bbls)  
 
 
  
Total Production (Boe)*
 
Average realized price:**
  
 
   Crude Oil and Condensate (per Bbl) $
   Natural Gas (per Mcf)
 $
 
 
  
   Natural Gas Liquids (per Bbl)
Production cost per Boe***
 $
108
17,978
-
3,104
 
112.53
4.30
-
68.40
Barrels of oil equivalent have been calculated on the basis of six thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas equal to one barrel of
*
oil equivalent (1 Boe).
** Excludes hedges (realized and unrealized) as they are not recorded by specific field.
***
Excludes severance taxes but includes ad valorem taxes in lease operating expenses since this well is non-operated by
Yuma and the operator does not break-out the ad valorem taxes from lease operating expenses.
84
In 2013, four purchasers each accounted for 78% of Yuma’s consolidated oil and gas revenues. In 2012, four purchasers
accounted for 79% of Yuma’s unaffiliated oil and gas revenues. In 2011, three purchasers accounted for approximately 65% of
Yuma’s unaffiliated oil and gas revenues. No other single purchaser accounted for 10% or more of Yuma’s oil and gas revenues
in 2013, 2012 or 2011. There are adequate alternate purchasers of Yuma’s production such that it believes the loss of one or
more of the above purchasers would not have a material adverse effect on its results of operations or cash flows.
Gross and Net Productive Wells
As of December 31, 2013, Yuma’s total gross and net productive wells were as follows:
Productive Wells
Oil (1)
Gross 
Net 
  
Wells
Wells
  80
    41     37
Natural Gas (1)  Total (1)
Gross 
Gross 
Net 
  
  
  
Wells
Wells
Wells
   117     43
Net 
  
Wells
    2
A gross well is a well in which a working interest is owned. The number of net wells represents the sum of fractions of working
(1)
interests Yuma owns in gross wells. Productive wells are producing wells plus shut-in wells Yuma deems capable of
production. Horizontal re-entries of existing wells do not increase a well total above one gross well. Yuma has working
interests in 10 gross wells with completions into more than one productive zone; in the table above, these wells with multiple
completions are only counted as one gross well.
Gross and Net Developed and Undeveloped Acres
As of December 31, 2013, Yuma had total gross and net developed and undeveloped leasehold acres as set forth below. The
developed acreage is stated on the basis of spacing units designated or permitted by state regulatory authorities. Gross acres are
those acres in which a working interest is owned. The number of net acres represents the sum of fractional working interests
Yuma owns in gross acres.
Undeveloped
  Gross   Net
Total
  Gross
Net
Net
State
Louisiana
North Dakota  18,513    965
Texas
   296
Oklahoma
   96
Total
Developed
 Gross
 
  102,161   53,993   44,040   28,034   146,202   82,028 
 
 
  2,601
  2,160
 
  125,435   55,350   44,094   28,047   169,530   83,397
18,513    965
   2,655
   308
   96
   2,160
-
   54
   -
-
   13
   -
As of December 31, 2013, Yuma had leases representing 12,518 net acres (12,020 of which were in the Greater Masters Creek
Field) expiring in 2014; 7,579 net acres (4,379 of which were in the Greater Masters Creek Field) expiring in 2015; and 7,950 net
acres (7,643 of which were in the Greater Masters Creek Field) expiring in 2016 and beyond. The 12,020 net acres expiring in
2014 in the Greater Masters Creek Field all fall under one lessor and can be extended (for as long as Yuma chooses to do so)
under a continuous drilling provision by drilling one well at a location of Yuma’s choice approximately every six months. For the
remainder of the leases, Yuma anticipates that its current and future drilling plans, along with selected lease extensions, will
address the majority of the remaining leases expiring in the Greater Masters Creek Field in 2015 and beyond.
Exploratory Wells and Development Wells
Set forth below for the three years ended December 31, 2013 is information concerning the number of wells Yuma drilled during
the years indicated.
Net Exploratory
Wells Drilled
Net Development
Wells Drilled
Total Net Productive
and Dry Wells
Year Productive  Dry  Productive   Dry   Drilled
   .31     1.21
2013   .32
    1.25
   -
2012   .33
2011   .13
   -
   
.71
-
    .57
   .28     .64
   .29     .30
Present Activities
At August 1, 2014, Yuma had 2 gross (0.9001 net) wells in the process of drilling or completing, the Crosby 14-1 and the Nettles
39-1.
85
Supply Contracts or Agreements
Crude oil and condensate are sold through month-to-month evergreen contracts. The price is tied to an index or a weighted
monthly average of posted prices with certain adjustments for gravity, BS&W (Basic Sediment and Water) and transportation.
Generally, the index or posting is based on WTI (West Texas Intermediate) and adjusted to LLS (Light Louisiana Sweet) or HLS
(Heavy Louisiana Sweet). For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, the LLS postings averaged $9.58, $17.16
and $17.20 over WTI, respectively. For the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, the LLS postings averaged $6.05 and
$20.14 over WTI, respectively.
Yuma’s natural gas is sold under multi-year contracts with pricing tied to either first of the month index or a monthly weighted
average of purchaser prices received. Natural gas liquids are also sold under multi-year contacts usually tied to the related
natural gas contract. Pricing is based on published prices for each product or a monthly weighted average of purchaser prices
received.
Yuma also engages in hedging activities as discussed below in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations of Yuma – Hedging Activities.”
Description of Major Properties and General Strategy
Yuma is the operator of properties containing approximately 79% of its proved oil and gas reserves. As operator, Yuma is able to
directly influence exploration, development and production operations. Yuma’s producing properties have reasonably
predictable production profiles and cash flows, subject to commodity price fluctuations, and have provided a solid foundation for
its technical staff to pursue the development of its undeveloped acreage, further develop its existing properties and also generate
new projects that Yuma believes have the potential to increase stockholder value.
As is common in the industry Yuma participates in non-operated properties on a selective basis; its non-operating participation
decisions are dependent on the technical and economic nature of the projects and the operating expertise and financial standing
of the operators. The following is a description of Yuma’s major oil and gas properties.
Greater Masters Creek Field in the Austin Chalk Trend
Yuma’s Austin Chalk asset consists of approximately 76,178 net acres in the Masters Creek field area, specifically in the Allen,
Vernon, Rapides and Beauregard Parishes in West Central Louisiana. Austin Chalk production in the Masters Creek area was
first reported in 1996 and approximately 50 wells were producing by the end of 1997. The Austin Chalk Trend in Masters Creek
is located at an average vertical depth of approximately 15,000 feet and has an average thickness in excess of 300 feet. The
Austin Chalk is a low-permeability reservoir that has been developed with horizontal wellbores that intersect natural fractures in
the rock. The reservoir is not mechanically stimulated or fractured.
The Austin Chalk reservoir infill drilling opportunity covers 450 square miles in the greater Masters Creek area. The well spacing
of the previous development of the area was approximately 8,000 to 10,000 feet (i.e. 1,250 to 1,600 acre spacing), which Yuma
estimates is insufficient for the purposes of fully draining the recoverable hydrocarbons from each production unit. Infield
sidetrack wells have found near-virgin reservoir conditions less than 2,500 feet from wells that produced over 650 MBbl of oil and
1.8 Bcf of gas, and there are numerous examples of successful down-spacing along the Greater Masters Creek Field area.
Typical per-well production from the Greater Masters Creek Field area is significantly higher than the per-well production for all
wells in the Austin Chalk Trend and oil is sold at Light Louisiana Sweet pricing. Yuma’s proved reserves in the Greater Masters
Creek Field area are predominantly liquids, with oil and natural gas liquids making up 78% of Yuma’s proved reserves as of
December 31, 2013, of 9,838.8 MBbl of oil, 25,142.9 Mcf of gas and 2,270.7 MBbl of natural gas liquids. Given that the area is an
existing field which has previously been developed, there is extensive existing infrastructure available throughout Yuma’s leases
in the Greater Masters Creek Field.
Yuma’s development plan is to drill new 6,000 foot single lateral wells between existing wells in order to more effectively drain
the reservoir. Based on this down spacing development plan, Yuma has identified 70 proved undeveloped locations which it
operates and 14 non-operated proved developed locations. These locations have been confirmed by NSAI.
In November 2013, Yuma completed its first development well, the Crosby 12-1, which tested at a peak rate of 529 Bbl/d of oil
and 2,604 Mcf/d of gas and approximately 260 Bbl/d of natural gas liquids. Yuma started drilling the second development well,
the Crosby 14-1, in the beginning of March 2014.
86
La Posada – Bayou Hebert Field
Yuma’s La Posada asset is situated on the eastern flank of the Tigre Lagoon Planulina Embayment between Live Oak field and
the Avery Island Salt Dome. The Embayment, one of several in southern Louisiana, is a semi-regional “mini-basin” characterized
by thick sequences of Planulina sands and numerous structures that formed in response to a lowering of sea levels followed by
shelf edge collapse. Oil and gas production from the Embayment has been prolific with cumulative production from all sands of
2.9 Tcfe.
Two existing production fields are located nearby to the north of La Posada. The Erath field, developed in 1940, is known to have
produced a total of 1.2 Tcf of gas and 43 MMbbl of oil, while the Tigre Lagoon field, developed in 1947, has produced a total of
421 Bcf of gas and 20 MMbbl of oil.
Yuma has a 12.5% working interest in La Posada, which is an oil and gas discovery located in Vermilion Parish, Louisiana. The
prospect was generated by Yuma utilizing 40 square miles of 3-D seismic data recorded in 2004 targeted over a large lower
Miocene structure. The primary objectives were the Lower Planulina Cris R sands, located at a depth of approximately 17,700 to
18,250 feet.
The prospect was successfully tested on the southern portion of the structure by the operator PetroQuest Energy in 2011. The
Thibodeaux-1 well was drilled to a total depth of 19,079 feet and logged a net 217 feet of hydrocarbon bearing sand. The well
was completed and as of December 31, 2013 has cumulatively produced 16.3 Bcf of gas and 308 MBbl of oil. The liquid yield is
approximately 39 Bbls of natural gas liquids per MMcf gas from all sand intervals. On December 31, 2013, the well produced 30
MMcf gas and 639 Bbls of oil.
In 2012, the Broussard-2 well was drilled to a depth of 19,150 feet on the north side of the structure. This well logged a net 328
feet of hydrocarbon bearing sand in the Lower Planulina Cris R-1 and Cris R-2A, B and C sandstones. The well was completed
and as of December 31, 2013, has cumulatively produced 17.3 Bcf of gas and 310 MBbl of oil. On December 31, 2013, the well
produced 50 MMcf of gas and 865 Bbl of oil.
In 2013, the Broussard-1 well (originally drilled and temporarily abandoned in 2007) was re-entered and sidetracked to the upper
Cris R sand as an acceleration well. The Broussard-1 sidetrack was drilled to a depth of 18,035 feet and encountered the upper
productive sand. The well was completed and as of December 31, 2013 has cumulatively produced 6.1 Bcf of gas and 118 MBbl
of oil. On December 31, 2013, the well produced 30 MMcf of gas and 695 Bbl of oil.
On December 31, 2013, the total Bayou Herbert field production was 110 MMcf of gas and 2,199 Bbl of oil. PetroQuest Energy
refers to the newly discovered field as “La Cantera.”
Livingston Prospects
South Louisiana has been one of the most prolific oil and gas producing provinces along the U.S. Gulf Coast. Oil and gas
production in the vicinity of Yuma’s Livingston Parish 3-D seismic survey area comes from several reservoirs that range from
shallow Miocene sandstones to deep Lower Tuscaloosa sandstones, located in the St. Helena and Livingston Parishes,
Louisiana. The primary exploration targets which produce in the region include intermediate depth Eocene Wilcox sandstones
and the deeper lower Tuscaloosa sand-stones.
Yuma’s in-house team acquired, processed and interpreted the Livingston 3-D seismic survey that covers approximately 138
square miles of an area not previously imaged with a 3-D survey. Yuma has leased 2,872 net acres (8,411 gross acres), and
holds an average 33% working interest across the prospects.
Along the lower Cretaceous shelf-edge and within the project area, several large oil and gas fields produce from depths that
range from 5,000 to 20,000 feet. Recording of the 3-D survey began in the fourth quarter of 2008 and processing of the data was
completed in August 2009.
Since acquisition of the 3-D seismic data, Yuma has drilled five exploration wells with four discoveries. Three of the wells
targeted the lower Tuscaloosa formation (oil), one well targeted the Wilcox formation (oil), and one well drilled for a shallow
Miocene target (gas). Two development wells have also been drilled in the Lower Tuscaloosa. Currently, four wells are
producing from the Lower Tuscaloosa, one well is producing from the Wilcox, and a shallow Miocene discovery proved to be
limited in size and is temporarily abandoned. At December 31, 2013, several of the wells were undergoing work-overs to
enhance production. Daily production from all five Livingston 3-D wells after the recompletions were completed during the first
quarter of 2014 reached in excess of 500 Boe/d (net 116 Boe/d).
Yuma has identified three new lower Tuscaloosa prospects in the Livingston 3-D seismic survey area and two Wilcox
development locations.
87
Bakken – Yellowstone and Southeast Homerun
The Mississippian-Devonian Bakken formation of the Williston Basin is characterized by low porosity and low permeability
reservoirs, organic-rich source rocks, and regional hydrocarbon charge. The unconventional play is the current focus of
exploration and development activity by many operators, with the U.S. Geological Survey (“USGS”) estimating mean
technologically recoverable resources estimates for the 3.65 BBbl of oil, 1.85 Tcf of associated/dissolved natural gas, and 148
MMbbl of natural gas liquids. Productive areas, or “sweet spots,” are localized areas of improved reservoir permeability through
natural fracturing or development of rock matrix permeability, or a combination of both.
Yuma currently holds an average 5% non-operated working interest in 18,513 gross acres (965 net acres) across twenty-five (25)
1,280 acre drilling units in McKenzie County, North Dakota. Of the total acreage position, approximately 938 acres (96.2%) are
held by production. Yuma holds interests in six producing oil wells and two active salt water disposal wells. All producing wells
are located over two fields, Yellowstone and Southeast Homerun. Yuma’s interests are currently operated by Zavanna, LLC, and
Emerald Oil.
Approximately 140 drilling locations remain across Yuma’s Bakken asset. In addition, significant future infill and Three Forks
development upside potential exists as Yuma holds its working interest share over all depths of acreage on the leases.
Lake Fortuna Field (Raccoon Island)
Yuma’s legacy producing Lake Fortuna asset was discovered in 1996 in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana when Yuma’s 3-D
Raccoon Island prospect was drilled. The target was Middle Miocene sand on a known productive structure. This normally
pressured structure is on trend with some of the most prolific oil production in South Louisiana and has similar trapping
mechanism and stratigraphical section. In 2005, Yuma acquired the majority of the working interest in Raccoon Island from
Amerada Hess, and now owns a working interest of 91%. The proved developed producing reserves for the field are 250 MBbl of
oil net to Yuma’s interest with a net present value at 10% discount rate of $9.5 million as of December 31, 2013.
Chacahoula field
Yuma’s legacy producing Chacahoula asset is a shallow piercement dome located in northern Lafourche Parish, Louisiana.
Since the discovery of oil and gas at the dome in 1938, the Chacahoula asset has produced over 785 BCF of gas and 33 MMbbl
of oil from more than 30 middle and lower Miocene sandstone reservoirs. In 1998, a 110 square mile 3-D seismic survey was
acquired over the field and surrounding area by Phillips Petroleum. In 2001, Yuma and Phillips Petroleum initiated a joint
exploration agreement which granted Yuma access to the 3-D seismic data as well as confidential subsurface data for the
purpose of generating drilling prospects.
Yuma’s acreage position in the Chacahoula asset is held by production and comprises approximately 11 net acres (45 gross
acres) at Bolivar and 9 net acres (24 gross) at Point Loma. The total remaining proved reserves for the field are 319 MBbl of oil
and 143 MMcf of gas net to Yuma’s interest with a net present value at 10% discount rate of $9.6 million as of December 31,
2013.
Chandeleur Block 71
Yuma holds a 30% working interest in the producing Chandeleur Block 71 in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana. The structure from
which the two Yuma-operated wells produce was originally found to be productive by other operators between 1975 and 1989,
and was reanalyzed using 3-D seismic data along with subsurface and production data. Yuma recognized the need for additional
wells to recover the remaining reserves from the structures, and subsequently drilled one well in each of 2004 and 2005 targeting
the middle Miocene sand section along productive downthrown structures.
88
Title to Properties
It is customary in the oil and gas industry to make a limited review of title to undeveloped oil and gas leases at the time they are
acquired. It is also customary to obtain more extensive title examinations prior to the commencement of drilling operations on
undeveloped leases or prior to the acquisition of producing oil and gas properties. With respect to the future acquisition of both
undeveloped and proved properties, we plan to conduct title examinations on such properties in a manner consistent with
industry and banking practices. Yuma has obtained title opinions, title reports or otherwise conducted title investigations covering
substantially all of its producing properties and believe it has satisfactory title to such properties in accordance with standards
generally accepted in the oil and gas industry. Yuma’s properties are subject to customary royalty interests, overriding royalty
interests, and other burdens which it believed do not materially interfere with the use or affect the value of such properties.
Yuma’s credit facility is secured by substantially all of its oil and gas properties. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Yuma – Liquidity and Capital Resources” beginning on page [—].
Legal Proceedings
A description of Yuma’s legal proceedings is included in Note Q – “Contingencies,” of the Notes to the Historical Consolidated
Financial Statements of Yuma for the three years ended December 31, 2013 and is incorporated herein by reference.
From time to time, Yuma is a party to litigation or other legal proceedings that it considers to be a part of the ordinary course of its
business. Yuma is not currently involved in any legal proceedings, nor is it a party to any pending or threatened claims, that could
reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on Yuma’s financial condition or results of operations.
89
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF YUMA
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of Yuma and the notes thereto
included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus. The discussion includes certain forward-looking statements. For a
discussion of important factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from the results referred to in the forward-
looking statements, see “Risk Factors – Risks Relating to Yuma’s Business” and “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-
Looking Statements.”
Overview
Yuma Energy, Inc. is a U.S.-based oil and gas company focused on the exploration for, and development of, conventional and
unconventional oil and gas prospects. Yuma’s predecessor was established in 1983. Yuma has employed a 3-D seismic-based
strategy to build a multi-year inventory of development and exploration prospects. Yuma’s current operations are focused on
onshore central Louisiana, where Yuma is targeting the Austin Chalk, Tuscaloosa, Wilcox, Frio, Marg Tex and Hackberry
formations. In addition, Yuma has a non-operated position in the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Yuma’s core competencies in
generating oil and gas prospects include: unconventional oil plays; onshore liquids-rich projects; and high impact deep onshore
prospects located beneath known producing trends, identified through the use of 3-D seismic surveys.
At December 31, 2013, Yuma’s estimated total proved oil and natural gas reserves, as prepared by its independent reserve
engineering firm, Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”), were approximately 20,777 MBoe, consisting of 11,615 MBbls
of oil, 2,767 MBbls of natural gas liquids, and 38,372 MMcf of natural gas. Approximately 18.4% of Yuma’s proved reserves were
classified as proved developed. Yuma maintains operational control of approximately 79% of its proved reserves. For the year
ended December 31, 2013, production averaged 1,369 Boe/d compared to 685 Boe/d for the year ended December 31, 2012.
Yuma’s total revenues for 2013 were $29,142,572 compared to $21,883,909 in 2012. For the three months ended March 31,
2014, production averaged 2,632 Boe/d compared to 875 Boe/d for the three months ended March 31, 2013. Yuma’s total
revenues for the first three months of 2014 were $10,596,932 compared to $4,756,590 for the first three months of 2013.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties and that could
potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. For a detailed description of Yuma’s
accounting policies, see Note B – “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to the Historical Consolidated
Financial Statements of Yuma for the three years ended December 31, 2013 included in this proxy statement/prospectus.
Sales and Other Operating Revenues
The net quantities of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids produced and sold by Yuma for each of the three years ended
December 31, 2013, and for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, and the average sales price per unit sold are
presented below.
Production volumes:
Crude oil and condensate (Bbl)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Natural gas liquids (Bbl)
Barrel of oil equivalent (Boe)
 
Average prices realized:
Excluding commodity derivatives (both realized and
unrealized)
Crude oil and condensate (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Natural gas liquids (per Bbl)
Including commodity derivatives (realized only)
Crude oil and condensate (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Natural gas liquids (per Bbl)
90
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31, 
 2014
 
  2012
  2013
     
  
 
     
    184,349
   62,887
    154,437     109,304  
    1,580,468     515,112     367,465  
   855,889
   31,326
    51,875
 
    9,571
    249,860     172,240  
    499,635
   236,861
2013
   
    38,010
    211,007
    5,533
    78,711
2011
1,692
$ 101.41
 $ 5.08
 $ 44.73
  
 $ 95.41
 $ 4.38
 $ 44.73
$ 108.31
  $ 3.77
  $ 45.11
   
  $ 108.52
  $ 4.21
  $ 45.11
$104.26
  $3.83
  $40.17
     
  $102.46
  $4.08
  $40.17
$107.57
  $3.07
  $42.67
     
  $106.45
  $4.07
  $42.67
$109.39
  $4.51
  $53.08
     
  $105.48
  $7.41
  $53.08
Yuma’s revenues for the three years ended December 31, 2013, and for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, are
summarized in the below table:
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 2014
Sales of crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids:    
Crude oil and condensate
Natural gas
Natural gas liquids
Realized gain/(loss) on commodity derivatives
Unrealized gain/(loss) on commodity derivatives
Gas marketing sales
 
Other revenue
Total revenues
$ 6,377,088
   4,345,599
   1,401,246
   (973,194
   (978,386
   183,086
    
   241,493
 $ 10,596,932
2013
     
  $ 4,116,699
    794,689
    249,588
)   102,257
)   (675,613
    282,322
     
    126,648
  $ 4,996,590
2011
2012
2013
     
 
  $19,220,185  $16,613,315  $11,956,612 
    6,049,500     1,581,783     1,656,813  
 
    89,815
    2,083,905     408,389
 
    72,076
    639,380
    341,066
)   (231,886 )   1,256,918     231,847
 
    1,080,644     4,379,970  
    881,823
 
     
     
    1,066,969     601,794
 
  $29,142,572  $21,883,909  $19,431,539
477,102
Sale of Crude Oil and Condensate
Crude oil and condensate are sold through month-to-month evergreen contracts. The price is tied to an index or a weighted
monthly average of posted prices with certain adjustments for gravity, BS&W (Basic Sediment and Water) and transportation.
Generally, the index or posting is based on WTI (West Texas Intermediate) and adjusted to LLS (Light Louisiana Sweet) or HLS
(Heavy Louisiana Sweet). For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, the LLS postings averaged $9.58, $17.16
and $17.20 over WTI, respectively. For the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, the LLS postings averaged $6.05 and
$20.14 over WTI, respectively.
The following trends were experienced in the sale of crude oil and condensate:
Yuma’s crude oil revenues increased by 16% in 2013 compared to 2012 as a result of new production at Broussard 1 and 2 (La
Posada), the Addison acquisition, and the Bakken wells in North Dakota. These were partially offset by volume declines at
·
Raccoon Island (Lake Fortuna). A 3% decline in average oil prices without commodity derivatives caused a further reduction in
crude oil revenues from 2012 to 2013.
Between the years ended December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2012, Yuma’s crude oil revenues experienced a significant
improvement as a result of a 41% rise in volumes, with increases from Raccoon Island (Lake Fortuna), Olympic (Livingston), La
·
Posada, and the Bakken wells, only partially offset by declines at the Caviar wells. Average oil prices experienced a 2% decline
from 2011 to 2012, somewhat reducing the volumetric increases for the same period.
Yuma’s crude oil revenues increased by 55% in the first three months of 2014 compared to the first three months of 2013 as a
result of new production at Broussard 1, Starns 38-1 and Crosby 12-1, the acquisition of properties during 2013, primarily the
·
Addison acquisition, and the additional interest attributable to Yuma resulting from the La Posada payout. These were partially
offset by a 6% decline in average oil prices without taking into account commodity derivatives.
Sale of Natural Gas and Natural Gas Liquids
Yuma’s natural gas is sold under multi-year contracts with pricing tied to either first of the month index or a monthly weighted
average of purchaser prices received. Natural gas liquids are also sold under multi-year contacts usually tied to the related
natural gas contract. Pricing is based on published prices for each product or a monthly weighted average of purchaser prices
received.
The following trends were experienced in the sale of natural gas and natural gas liquids:
Yuma’s natural gas revenues experienced a marked improvement due to an increase in gas volumes of 1,065,356 Mcf, or 207%,
from 2012 to 2013. Increases in natural gas sales from the Addison acquisition wells and the new wells at La Posada were
·
slightly reduced by wells at Caviar, Pierre Pass and Cote de Mer being shut-in. These volumetric benefits were further enhanced
by increased natural gas prices realized for 2013 compared to 2012.
Natural gas liquids revenues increased 410% from 2012 to 2013 as a result of the Addison acquisition and the new wells at La
·
Posada.
91
Yuma’s natural gas revenues decreased in 2012 compared to 2011 due to declining gas prices during that period. As a partial
·
offset to this price decline, natural gas volumes in 2012 increased 40% compared to 2011. This improvement in gas production
came from new production at the La Posada Field, reduced by the drop in volumes at the Caviar wells and State Tract 89.
Despite a 20% decline in natural gas liquids prices from 2011 to 2012, natural gas liquids revenues during the same period
·
increased 355% due to new production at La Posada.
Yuma’s natural gas revenues increased due to higher gas volumes of 644,882 Mcf, or 306%, from the three months ended
March 31, 2013 to the same period of 2014. Increases in natural gas sales from the Addison acquisition wells and the new wells
·
at Broussard 1 and Crosby 12-1 were further improved by Yuma’s additional interest in the La Posada wells after payout. These
volumetric benefits were enhanced by a 35% increase in natural gas prices realized for the first three months of 2014 compared
to the same period in 2013.
The volumetric factors affecting natural gas revenues also had a favorable impact on natural gas liquids revenues, resulting in a
·
461% increase in natural gas liquids revenues for the first three months of 2014 over the same period in 2013.
Gas Marketing Sales
Gas marketing sales are natural gas volumes purchased from certain Yuma operated wells and the aggregated volumes sold
with a mark-up of $.03 per MMBtu. Texas Southeastern Gas Marketing Company (“Marketing”), a wholly owned gas marketing
subsidiary of Yuma, purchases and sells natural gas on behalf of Yuma and its working interest partners.
The revenues of Marketing continued to decline due to reduced natural gas production in St. Bernard and Plaquemines
Parishes, Louisiana. Revenues fell by $3,299,326 from 2011 to 2012 and by an additional $198,821 from 2012 to 2013.
Marketing Cost of Sales
Marketing’s cost of sales for the three years ended December 31, 2013 tracked the revenue trend due to the reduction of volumes
sold from Yuma wells in St. Bernard and Plaquemine Parishes, Louisiana. In the first three months of 2014, the net operating
income of Marketing continued to decline due to reduced natural gas production in St. Bernard and Plaquemines Parishes,
Louisiana
Lease Operating Expenses
Lease operating expenses $ 3,658,505
 
LOE per Boe
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31, 
  2013(2)
 2014 (1)
 
  $9,316,364   $5,098,868   $4,792,117  
 
     
  $18.65
2013 (1)
  $ 1,347,731
     
  $ 17.12
2012 (2)
2011 (2)
$ 15.45
$20.41
$27.82
(1)
If severance and ad valorem taxes were not included in the above table, lease operating costs would have been reduced by
$1,192,727 and $493,237 during the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, and operating costs per
barrel of oil equivalent would have been reduced to $10.41 and $10.85 for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013,
respectively.
(2)
If severance and ad valorem taxes were not included in the above table, lease operating costs would have been reduced by
$3,121,185, $2,104,025, and $1,598,325 during the years 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively, and operating costs per barrel of
oil equivalent would have been reduced to $12.40, $11.99, and $18.54 for the years 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Lease operating expenses (“LOE”) include all costs incurred to operate wells and related facilities, both operated and non-
operated. In addition to direct operating costs such as labor, repairs and maintenance, equipment rentals, materials and supplies,
fuel and chemicals, LOE also includes severance taxes, product marketing and transportation fees, insurance, ad valorem taxes
and operating agreement allocable overhead. LOE excludes costs classified as re-engineering and workovers.
LOE for 2013 increased by $4,217,496 from 2012. This increase was primarily due to the Addison acquisition and LOE from new
·
wells at La Posada (Broussard 1), Musial (Starns 38-1), and Austin Chalk (Crosby 12-1). However, LOE per barrel of oil
equivalent decreased for the same period, from $20.41 in 2012 to $18.65 in 2013, a 9% reduction.
92
For the year 2012, LOE rose by $306,751 compared to the year 2011, primarily due to increased severance tax expenses
attributable to improved crude oil revenues during the same period. LOE per Boe decreased from $27.82 in 2011 to $20.41 in
·
2012, or a 27% decline. The addition of relatively low cost production from the La Posada wells was responsible for the
reduction in LOE per Boe.
LOE for the first three months of 2014 increased by $2,310,774 from the same period of 2013. This increase was primarily due to
the Addison acquisition, LOE from new wells at Broussard 1, Starns 38-1 and Crosby 12-1, and Yuma’s increased share of LOE
·
at La Posada resulting from its additional interest after payout. However, LOE per barrel of oil equivalent decreased for the same
period, from $17.12 in 2013 to $15.45 in 2014, a 10% reduction due to significantly increased production volumes.
Re-engineering and Workovers
Re-engineering and workover expenses include the costs to restore or enhance production in current producing zones as well as
costs of significant non-recurring operations.
These workover costs increased from $433,599 in 2012 to $2,521,707 in 2013 primarily due to major re-engineering programs
on Yuma’s Livingston properties, the USA 34-1 well acquired from Addison, and the non-operated DS&B 117 well, in addition to
·
non-recurring operation expenses for the Crosby 12-1 salt water disposal and costs to bring various Addison-acquired wells to
producing standards.
In 2012, there were only minor workover projects, resulting in costs of $433,599, a 68% decrease from the workover expenses of
·
$1,340,127 in 2011, which included substantial expenditures at Yuma’s Racoon Island salt water disposal well.
There were only minor workover costs in the three months ended March 31, 2014, with a resulting expense of $1,510. For the
·
same period of 2013, workover expenses of $50,957 were generated by projects at the Weyerhaeuser wells 57-2 and 9-1,
DS&B 1, and the non-operated McIlhenny well.
General and Administrative Expenses
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 2014
General and administrative:    
Stock based compensation  $ 56,122
Other
Capitalized
 
Net
3,901,701
   (759,838
    
 $ 3,197,985
2013
     
  $ -
    2,058,748
)   (806,957
     
  $ 1,251,791
2011
     
  $-
2012
     
  $-
2013
 
     
  $589,164
 
    8,253,038     6,928,704     6,264,375  
)   (2,786,669)   (2,589,342)   (2,779,203)
     
 
  $6,055,533   $4,339,362   $3,485,172
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses primarily consist of overhead expenses, employee remuneration and professional
and consulting fees. Yuma capitalizes certain G&A expenditures where they satisfy the criteria for capitalization under GAAP as
relating to oil and gas exploration activities.
During 2013, Yuma was successful in expanding its staffing, particularly in the engineering and business development areas
with the intent to more effectively manage Yuma’s producing properties and continue Yuma’s expansion and growth. Consistent
with these goals, Yuma has modified its compensation practices to insure Yuma will continue to retain and attract capable
employees. Accordingly, G&A costs (including costs capitalized) increased $1,913,498, or 28% for 2013 from 2012. Cash G&A
costs increased by $1,324,334, or 19% as a result of increases in salaries and the overall head count as well as other general
overhead expenses. Non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation of $452,058 were new in 2013 and were a result of
additional incentive stock awards granted during 2013.
G&A expenses (including costs capitalized under full cost accounting) for the year ended December 31, 2012 increased by
$664,329, or 11% over 2011. The increases were partially attributable to Yuma implementing an annual incentive plan for key
members of the management team tied to certain performance metrics for 2012. Each year's performance metrics are set by
Yuma’s board of directors. During 2013, Yuma granted an aggregate of $444,294 in cash awards.
For the three months ended March 31, 2014, net G&A cost was $1,946,194, or 155%, over the amount for the same period in
2013. This increase was principally due to the write-off of $1,589,130 in expenses incurred to explore several alternatives to
obtaining a public listing for Yuma stock. General outside consulting and professional fees unrelated to the merger agreement
also increased from the same period in 2013 by $78,385.
93
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization (“DD&A”)
DD&A $ 5,726,083
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31, 
 
 2014
  2013
     
    
 
  $12,077,368  $5,074,070  $2,865,878
2013
     
  $ 1,661,505
2012
2011
DD&A for 2013 was up from 2012 primarily due to the Addison acquisition, which increased oil and gas properties before asset
retirement obligations (“ARO”) by $7,170,715. The increase to property for Addison ARO was $6,043,412. Future development
costs increased by $213,711,517 to $423,330,417, a 102% increase, largely due to 33 additional Addison Proved Undeveloped
Locations (“PUDs”). Depletion per barrel went from $19.84 to $23.87. The increases were offset by increases to Proved (“1P”)
reserves. At January 1, 2013, the effective date of the Addison acquisition, the acquisition added 6,145 MBbls of oil, 17,130 MMcf
gas and 1,573 MBbls in natural gas liquids. At year-end 2013, total reserves were up 7,859 MBbls (61%), 7,301 MMcf (24%) for
gas and 1,191 MBbls (76%) for natural gas liquids after consideration for reductions due to production of existing reserves during
2013.
DD&A for 2012 increased 77% from 2011 primarily due to the addition of the Bakken acreage and Austin Chalk acreage to
Yuma’s reserves. Future development costs increased $196,312,700 to $209,618,900 at year end 2012, of which $194,782,200
was for Bakken and Austin Chalk. The estimated costs to abandon future wells increased $8,001,209, primarily due to Bakken
and Austin Chalk. These increases to the depreciable base were largely offset by the increases to reserves for Bakken and
Austin Chalk: 4,775 MBbls of oil, 12,930 MMcf of gas, and 1,199 MBbls of natural gas liquids.
DD&A for the three months ended March 31, 2014 was up from the same period in 2013 primarily due to the Addison acquisition,
which increased oil and gas properties before AROs by $7,073,031. The increase to property for Addison ARO was $6,043,412.
Future development costs increased by $215,080,016 to $423,335,360, a 103% increase, largely due to 33 additional Addison
PUDs. Depletion per barrel increased from $20.67 to $24.08. The increases were offset by increases to proved reserves. On
April 5, 2013, Yuma closed on the Addison acquisition (with an effective date of January 1, 2013), which added 6,145 MBbls of
oil, 17,130 MMcf of natural gas and 1,573 MBbls of natural gas liquids. At March 31, 2014, total reserves, as estimated by Yuma,
were up 5,284 MBbls (84%) for oil, 6,738 MMcf (22%) for natural gas and 1,167 MBbls (75%) for natural gas liquids after
consideration for reductions due to production of existing reserves during 2014.
Adjusted EBITDA
Net Income
Add: Depreciation, depletion & amortization of
property and equipment
Add: Interest expense, net of interest income and
amounts capitalized
Add: Income tax expense
EBITDA
Add: Costs associated with exploring public listing
alternatives
Add: Change in value of preferred stock derivative
liability
Add: Accretion of asset retirement obligation
Add: Bank mandated commodity derivative novation
cost
Deduct: Amortization of (benefit) cost from commodity
derivatives (sold) and purchased, net
Add: Net commodity derivatives mark-to-market
(gain) loss
Adjusted EBITDA
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 2014
  
 $ (294,978
2013
   
 
  $(33,050,103) $(14,769,468) $(4,712,855)
2013
   
) $ 2,107,829
2012
2011
5,726,083
1,661,505
12,077,368     5,074,070     2,865,878
138,370
163,177
560,340
201,945
583,045
(849,000
   4,720,475
)   114,800
    4,047,311
3,080,272     3,098,309     853,496
 
    (17,332,123)   (6,395,144 )   (410,436 )
1,589,130
-
27,056
-
-
(1,472,030
)   (2,003,655
)   26,258,559     17,098,504     5,604,231
142,144
64,244
668,497
265,323
239,612
-
-
175,000
-
-
(23,437
)   (18,150
)   (72,600
)   (112,508
)   -
978,386
675,613
231,886
(1,256,918 )   (231,847 )
$ 5,934,668
$ 2,765,363
$9,956,275   $9,599,257   $5,201,560
“EBITDA” represents earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, depletion and amortization, and is a non-GAAP financial
measure. Because Yuma makes other adjustments to its EBITDA formula by considering the change in the preferred stock
derivative liability, accretion of asset retirement obligations, changes in commodity derivative values and bank mandated
commodity derivative novation cost, management refers to this metric as adjusted EBITDA and it is provided as an additional
metric that is used by Yuma’s board of directors and management to measure operating performance and trends. Adjusted
EBITDA for 2013 increased from 2012 by $329,962 (3%). The 2012 amount increased from 2011 by $4,397,697 (85%). The
small increase for 2013 was from increased LOE mostly offsetting revenue increases. The increase in 2012 from 2011 includes a
decrease of $3,621,861 in marketing cost of sales from decreased activity by Marketing. The related decrease in marketing
revenues was offset by increased exploration and production revenues. Adjusted EBITDA for the three months ended March 31,
2014 increased from the same period in 2013 by $1,580,175 (57%), which was due primarily to increased oil and gas revenue as
discussed above.
94
Interest Expense
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 
 2014
 
  
 
Interest Expense
 $376,320
Interest Capitalized   (236,901
2011
 
  2013
   
 
   
  $1,599,492   $891,173
  $705,283  
)   (1,031,816 )   (681,090 )   (108,060 )
2013
   
  $404,286
)   (239,063
2012
Net
 
Bank Debt
$139,419
    
 $30,565,000   $19,050,000
$165,223
$597,223  
  $567,676
     
 
     
  $31,215,000  $17,875,000  $2,975,000
$210,083
Some of the proceeds from the Yuma Series A preferred stock offering in 2011 were used to retire bank debt, which remained
down at the end of 2011. In the first three months of 2012, bank debt was used to finance the acquisition of Bakken and Austin
Chalk acreage. In addition, further Austin Chalk acreage was added throughout 2012. The additions added to outstanding debt
and added to capitalized interest for the associated work-in-progress accounts. The Series B preferred stock offering in the
beginning of the third quarter of 2012 again lowered the debt balance. At the beginning of the second quarter of 2013, debt was
used to finance the acquisition of the Addison acreage.
At the beginning of the second quarter of 2013, debt was used to finance the acquisition of the Addison acreage, attributing to
much of the increase in debt for the three months ended March 31, 2014 compared to the same period in 2013. Interest for the
three months ended March 31, 2013 was, however, greater than the same period in 2014 because 2013 interest included
$123,925 of debt cost write-off due to the exit of a lender from the Yuma loan syndicate.
Bank-mandated Commodity Derivative Novation Cost
Société Générale joined the Yuma credit facility as agent bank on February 13, 2013, replacing Union Bank, N.A. Société
Générale charged a one-time fee of $175,000 to novate Yuma’s commodity derivatives (i.e., substitute Yuma’s commodity
derivative instrument counter-party) from British Petroleum to Société Générale. The novation fee was a loan requirement
resulting from the change in agent banks.
Income Tax Expense
The following summarizes Yuma’s income tax expense (benefit) and effective tax rates:
Consolidated Net Income (Loss) before Income Taxes
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
)%   (26.55
Effective Tax Rate
 
 
Adjusted Consolidated Net Income (Loss) before Income Taxes 1   (3,711,272 )
   3,080,272  
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Effective Tax Rate, as adjusted
   (83.00
Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 
 2011
 
 2013
  
  
 
 
 $(3,859,359)
 $(29,969,831)
 
   3,080,272  
   853,496
)%
   (10.28
    
    
 
   1,744,872  
 
   853,496
%
)%   (22.11
    
 
   5,427,345  
   3,098,309
2012
  
 
 $(11,671,159)
   3,098,309
)%   57.09
%    48.91
1 Adjusted to exclude the change in fair value of preferred stock derivative liability.
The differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and Yuma’s effective tax rates for the years ended December 31,
2013, 2012 and 2011 are due primarily to the tax effects of the excess of book basis over the tax basis in the full cost pool and the
net operating loss carryforwards for each period.
95
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
Yuma’s primary source of cash for 2013 and 2011 was operating activities. Yuma’s primary source of cash in 2012 was from
financing activities. During 2011, Yuma raised gross proceeds of $14,605,000 (net of $1,271,396 in expenses) through the sale
of the Series A preferred stock. For 2011, proceeds from the sale of preferred stock were largely offset by repayments of
borrowings under Yuma’s credit facility. During 2012, Yuma raised gross proceeds of $18,590,000 (offset by offering expenses of
$1,406,295) from the sale of the Series B preferred stock. For 2012, cash was primarily provided by borrowings from Yuma’s
credit facility of $14,900,000 and the sale of the Series B preferred stock. For 2013, cash was provided almost equally by
operations and borrowings under Yuma’s credit facility. Cash from operations increased in 2012 over 2011 due primarily to
increased production volumes as more fully described below. Cash from operations increased in 2013 over 2012 primarily from
increases in production volumes and the realization of Yuma’s back-in at its La Posada field as more fully described below.
For the three months ended March 31, 2014, cash flows provided by operations more than covered investment activities and
repayments of borrowings. The net increase in cash for the first three months of 2014 compared with the same period in 2013
was $930,456, representing a 75% increase. This is primarily the result of reduced investment expenditures during the first three
months of 2014 compared with the same period in 2013.
2013
 
   
 
  $ 5,675,541
Cash flows provided by operating activities
Cash flows provided by (used for) investing activities   (1,905,758 )   (5,160,326
Cash flows provided by (used for) financing
activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash
$ 1,240,338
$ 2,170,794
)   725,123
Three Months Ended March 31  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 2014
  
 $ 4,929,579
2013
   
 
  $13,008,322   $4,896,736   $2,735,321  
)   (25,348,460)   (30,412,467)   (10,678,985)
2011
2012
(853,027
11,249,627     29,879,721     (40,856
)
$(1,090,511 ) $4,363,990   $(7,984,520 )
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
For 2013, net cash provided by operating activities increased $8,111,586, or 166%, from 2012. Yuma believes that it has
sufficient liquidity and capital resources to execute its business plans over the next twelve months. Yuma expects to fund its
planned capital program through its existing credit facility and projected cash flows. In 2012 as compared to 2011, net cash
provided by operating activities increased by $2,161,415 (79%). These year-over-year increases were directly attributable to
increases in production.
Cash flows from operations were $4,929,579 and $5,675,541 for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
This represents a decrease of 13.1%. Revenues in the first three months of 2014 increased over the same period of 2013
primarily due to increased production in the La Posada field, new production at Crosby 12-1, and the increased interest to Yuma
resulting from the La Posada payout. These increases were offset by higher lease operating expenses associated with the
increased working interest at La Posada, new production at Crosby 12-1 and the Addison acquisition.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
During 2013, Yuma realized proceeds from the sale of interests in its projects and the sale of a salt water disposal well of
$882,666. During 2012, Yuma had proceeds of $1,386,649 from the sales of interests in various Yuma projects including its
Amazon 3-D Seismic Project, Tigre Lagoon 3-D Seismic Project, and several individual wells, including Piranha and Musial.
During 2013, Yuma completed the Addison acquisition of producing oil and gas properties including the assumption of certain
liabilities for a cost of $7,350,000. During 2012, Yuma completed two significant acquisitions, one non-operated joint venture of
development acreage in the Bakken region of North Dakota for $4,175,000, and a second operated acreage position in the
Greater Masters Creek Field of the Austin Chalk Trend in Central Louisiana for $8,891,134. During 2011, Yuma made no
significant acquisitions.
96
Yuma’s cash used in investing activities was $26,248,133 for 2013, $31,796,630 for 2012 and $10,676,504 for 2011. Yuma’s
cash used by investing activities for capital expenditures on property, plant and equipment was $2,308,992 for the three months
ended March 31, 2014 and $5,215,033 for the three months ended March 31, 2013. The following summarizes the expenditures
by type:
Acquisition of acreage and new properties
Drilling and completion
Recompletions, capital workovers and P&A
Total oil and natural gas investing activities
Corporate office property & equipment purchases   38,482
Total cash used in investing activities
Three Months Ended March 31,  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 2014
  
 $ 1,568,197
   1,354,247
   (651,934
   2,270,510
2013
   
 
  $11,966,227  $18,830,912  $4,636,929  
    11,788,741    11,668,105    3,012,481  
    2,412,658     978,364
    2,998,430  
    26,167,626    31,477,381    10,647,840 
    80,507
 
  $26,248,133  $31,796,630  $10,676,504
2013
   
  $ 3,012,809
    2,104,282
)   58,722
    5,175,813
    39,220
  $ 5,215,033
$ 2,308,992
2012
2011
319,249
28,664
The cost of acreage and new properties and additions to the asset retirement obligations in 2013 are primarily from the Addison
acquisition in the Austin Chalk Trend in Louisiana. The plugging of two wells in Louisiana make up most of the recompletions,
capital workovers and plugging and abandoning (“P&A”) costs in 2013. The acquisition of acreage in the Austin Chalk Trend in
Louisiana and a non-operated working interest in the Bakken in North Dakota account for most of the costs of acreage and new
properties in 2012. In both 2013 and 2012, Yuma drilled or participated in the drilling of wells in its Amazon, Livingston and La
Posada prospect areas in Louisiana and the Bakken in North Dakota. In 2013, Yuma drilled its first well in the Austin Chalk.
Yuma incurred substantial workover and facilities reconfiguration costs in the Raccoon Island field in 2011.
During the three months ended March 31, 2014, the Greater Masters Creek Field accounted for $1,993,613 of Yuma’s total oil
and natural gas investing activities. Of that, $898,142 was spent primarily on lease extensions and geological and geophysical
activities. The remaining $1,095,471 included $1,060,550 of drilling costs for the Crosby 14-1. A net credit of $671,553 for
insurance recovery on the Grief Bros. 1 created a credit balance for recompletions, capital workovers and P&A for the three
months ended March 31, 2014. An unintended flow of gas at the surface caused the operator, to re-enter the well and plug it. The
well had been inactive for a couple of years prior to that time.
For the three months ended March 31, 2013, lease related costs of $2,243,384 were incurred on the Austin Chalk Project, a part
of the Greater Masters Creek Field. Other significant lease related costs for the first three months of 2013 were $325,081 for
Livingston and $258,870 for Tigre Lagoon. Costs incurred in the Bakken to drill and complete the Bunning 35-26 1H and build
the Jerry and Monson SWD facilities amounted to $555,707. At La Posada, $372,075 was incurred to drill and complete the
Broussard 1 side track and upgrade the production facilities. Also, $916,803 was spent drilling the Starns 38-1 at Livingston.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Yuma’s cash flows, both in the short-term and the long-term, are impacted by highly volatile crude oil and natural gas prices.
Although Yuma mitigates this risk by hedging a significant portion of its future crude oil and natural gas production out two years
(three to five years historically), a significant deterioration in commodity prices negatively impacts revenues, earnings, and cash
flows, capital spending, and potentially Yuma’s liquidity. Sales volumes and costs also impact cash flows; however, these
historically have not been as volatile or as impactful as commodity prices in the short-term.
Yuma’s long-term cash flows are highly dependent on its success in efficiently developing current reserves and economically
finding, developing and acquiring additional recoverable reserves. Cash investments are required to continuously fund
exploration and development projects and acquisitions, which are necessary to offset the inherent declines in production and
reserves. Yuma may not be able to find, develop or acquire additional reserves to replace its current and future production at
acceptable costs, which could materially adversely affect its future liquidity. For a discussion of risk factors related to Yuma’s
business and operations, please refer to the section entitled “Risk Factors – Risks Relating to Yuma’s Business” in this proxy
statement/prospectus.
Yuma expects to finance future acquisition, development and exploration activities through available working capital, cash flows
from operating activities, advances from its credit facility, sale of non-strategic assets, and the possible issuance of additional
debt and/or equity securities. In addition, Yuma may slow or accelerate its development of existing reserves to more closely
match its projected cash flows.
97
At March 31, 2014, Yuma had a $40 million borrowing base, with available borrowing capacity of $9,435,000 in accordance with
its credit facility. The borrowing base is reviewed and redetermined in March and September of each year and was increased to
$44.5 million on April 22, 2014.
Credit Facility:
Balances outstanding, beginning of the period $ 31,215,000
Activity during the period
Balances outstanding, end of the period
 
Issuance of Series A Preferred Stock
Issuance of Series B Preferred Stock
(650,000
 $ 30,565,000
 
  
   -
   -
Three Months Ended  Twelve Months Ended December 31,
 March 31, 2014
2012
2011
2013
 
     
  $17,875,000  $2,975,000   $15,958,696  
)   13,340,000    14,900,000    (12,983,696)
  $31,215,000  $17,875,000  $2,975,000  
     
 
     
  $13,333,604  
    -
    -
-
  $17,183,705    -
Other than the credit facility, Yuma had debt of $178,027, $183,601 and $236,464 (2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively) from
installment loans financing oil and gas property insurance premiums.
In April 2013, Yuma borrowed $8,300,000 (net of $2,050,000 repayments) under its credit facility. These proceeds were
principally used to fund the Addison acquisition that closed on April 5, 2013.
Debt in 2014 has been favorably impacted by the La Posada payout revenues and has been trending lower.
Hedging Activities
Current Commodity Derivative Contracts
Yuma seeks to reduce its sensitivity to oil and gas price volatility and secure favorable debt financing terms by entering into
commodity derivative transactions which may include fixed price swaps, price collars, puts and other derivatives. Yuma believes
its hedging strategy should result in greater predictability of internally generated funds, which in turn can be dedicated to capital
development projects and corporate obligations. The following is a summary of Yuma’s current oil and gas commodity derivative
contracts as of December 31, 2013.
Oil Commodity Derivatives January 2014 through 2016
Short
  Puts
Ceiling
Basis
$ 90.88    $ 103.57   $ 69.71
Derivative   
 Volumes   Floor
Collars with Short Puts (3-ways)   
   
  Swaps  Swaps
2014 NYMEX WTI  50,900
  $95.23   
 
  $99.40   
 
     
 
     
 
     
 
2015 NYMEX WTI  117,100   $ 87.31 * $ 104.36   $ 67.98 *    
     
 
     
2016 NYMEX WTI  70,263
  $ 92.38    $ 106.39   $ 72.38
NYMEX WTI  222,126      
     
 Argus LLS   22,816
 NYMEX WTI  54,000
     
  349,842      
 Total
Swaps with Short Puts
Short
 Puts
  
  
  
 $ 70.00
$ 89.33
* 16% includes a $5.56 premium to be paid per barrel (27,588 barrels) not included in average price calculation.
98
Gas Commodity Derivatives January 2014 through 2016
Basis
Derivative    
 Volumes   Floor
Ceiling
2014 NYMEX  779,285   $ 4.15   $ 4.47
 
 
 
2015 NYMEX  2,377,371  $ 4.00   $ 4.47
Collars with Short Puts (3-ways)   
   
 
  Swaps 
     
 
  $ 4.07
NYMEX  2,047,751     
  2,827,036     
 Total
Short
  Puts
  $ 3.35
   
   
   
  $ 3.25
NYMEX  165,388      
  2,542,759     
 Total
2016 NYMEX  1,122,533  $ 4.10   $ 4.35
$ 3.25
$ 3.63
Fair Market Value of Commodity Derivatives
March 31, 2014
 
  Gas
 Oil
 
   
  
 
Assets
    
     
Noncurrent $684,295   $-
     
 
    
Liabilities     
     
Current
Noncurrent   -
December 31, 2013  
  Gas
 
  Oil
 
   
   
 
     
     
  $818,637   $-
 
 
     
     
     
     
 
   (766,323)   (996,465)   (423,217)   (253,915)
    (218,649)
(12,766 )   -
Assets and liabilities are netted within each commodity on the balance sheet as all contracts are with the same counterparty. For
the balances without netting, refer to Note H – “Commodity Derivative Instruments” in the Notes to the Historical Consolidated
Financial Statements of Yuma for the three years ended December 31, 2013 and Note C – “Commodity Derivative Instruments”
in the Unaudited Condensed Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of Yuma for the three months ended March 31,
2014 included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
The fair market value of Yuma’s commodity derivative contracts in place at March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 were net
liabilities of $1,091,259 and $77,144, respectively. For the three months ended March 31, 2014, Yuma recognized, in oil and gas
revenues, realized cash settlement losses on commodity derivatives of $996,631. For the three months ended March 31, 2013,
Yuma recognized, in oil and gas revenues, realized cash settlement gains on commodity derivatives of $84,107. Also recognized
in revenue were gains (net of losses) for commodity derivatives sold (net of commodity derivatives purchased) of $23,438 and
$18,150 for the first three months of 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Based on the estimated fair market value of Yuma’s commodity derivatives at March 31, 2014, Yuma expects to reclassify losses
on commodity derivatives of $6,888 net after taxes into earnings from accumulated other comprehensive income during the
twelve months ending March 31, 2015; however, actual cash settlement gains and losses recognized may differ materially.
Please see Note C – “Commodity Derivative Instruments” of the Unaudited Condensed Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements of Yuma for the three months ended March 31, 2014 for additional information on Yuma’s commodity derivatives.
Hedging commodity prices for a portion of Yuma’s production is a fundamental part of Yuma’s corporate financial management.
Yuma does not engage in speculative commodity trading activities and does not hedge all available or anticipated quantities of
its production. In implementing its hedging strategy Yuma seeks to:
effectively manage cash flow to minimize price volatility and generate internal funds available for operations, capital
·
development projects and additional acquisitions; and
·ensure its ability to support its exploration activities as well as administrative and debt service obligations.
Estimating the fair value of derivative instruments requires complex calculations, including the use of a discounted cash flow
technique, estimates of risk and volatility, and subjective judgment in selecting an appropriate discount rate. In addition, the
calculations use future market commodity prices which, although posted for trading purposes, are merely the market consensus
of forecasted price trends. The results of the fair value calculation cannot be expected to represent exactly the fair value of
Yuma’s commodity derivatives. Yuma currently obtains fair value positions from its counterparties and compares that value to the
calculated value provided by its outside commodity derivative consultant. Yuma believes that the practice of comparing the
consultant’s value to that of Yuma’s counterparties, who are more specialized and knowledgeable in preparing these complex
calculations, reduces its risk of error and approximates the fair value of the contracts, as the fair value obtained from Yuma’s
counterparties would be the cost to Yuma to terminate a contract at that point in time.
99
Commitments and Contingencies
Yuma has the following contractual obligations and commitments as of March 31, 2014:
Debt (1)
Operating   Asset Retirement
Liability for
  Commodity
  Derivatives (2)  Leases
Obligations
$ 1,482,582   $399,294   $ 1,783,756
    92,487
    (483,810
$-
2014
   -
2015
   -
2016
   30,565,000    -
2017
    -
2018
   -
Thereafter   -
    -
Totals
536,137     174,619
)   544,472     361,514
    534,055     161,387
    708,422
    2,197
    -
    7,636,619
 $30,565,000  $ 1,091,259   $2,016,155  $ 10,826,317
This table does not include future commitment fees, interest expense or other fees because the credit agreement is a floating
rate instrument, and Yuma cannot determine with accuracy the timing of future loans, advances, repayments or future interest
rates to be charged.
Represents the estimated future payments under Yuma’s oil and natural gas derivative contracts based on the future market
prices as of March 31, 2014. These amounts will change as oil and natural gas commodity prices change.
(1)
(2)
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Yuma has no off balance sheet arrangements, special purpose entities, financing partnerships or guarantees (other than Yuma’s
guarantee of Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc.’s credit facility).
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk of Yuma
Commodities. Yuma is exposed to market risk from changes in commodity prices. In the normal course of business, Yuma enters
into derivative transactions, including commodity price collars, swaps and floors to mitigate its exposure to commodity price
movements. Yuma does not participate in these transactions for trading or speculative purposes. While the use of these
arrangements may limit the benefit to Yuma of increases in the prices of oil and natural gas, it also limits the downside risk of
adverse price movements.
Interest rates. Yuma is exposed to financial risk from changes in future interest rates to the extent that it incurs future
indebtedness. As of March 31, 2014, Yuma had outstanding indebtedness under its credit facility of $30,565,000, which matures
in May 2017. The credit facility provides for a variable interest rate. In the event interest rates rise significantly, and Yuma incurs
future indebtedness without mitigating or fixing future interest rates, Yuma’s interest expense will increase in accordance with
any future borrowings and at rates in effect at the time of those borrowings.
100
INFORMATION ABOUT PYRAMID
Overview
Pyramid Oil Company is a California corporation that has been in the oil and gas business continuously, since it was
incorporated on October 9, 1909. Pyramid is engaged in the business of exploration, development and production of crude oil
and natural gas.
Pyramid acquires interests in land and producing properties through acquisition and lease on which it drills and/or operates
crude oil or natural gas wells in efforts to discover and/or to produce oil and gas. Crude oil and natural gas produced from these
properties are sold to various refineries and pipeline companies. The majority of all oil and gas properties that Pyramid owns and
operates, is for its own account. Pyramid also participates in specific joint ventures with other companies in the development of
oil and gas properties Pyramid’s interests in these properties will vary depending on the availability of said interests and their
locations. Although Pyramid owns some minor oil and gas interests in New York, Texas and Wyoming, all of its operations and
major revenue producing properties are in California.
Pyramid’s executive offices are located at 2008-21st Street, Bakersfield, California, 93301 and its mailing address is P. O. Box
832, Bakersfield, California 93302, and its telephone number is (661) 325-1000. It maintains a website at the address
www.pyramidoil.com. We are not including the information contained on Pyramid’s website as part of, or incorporating it by
reference into, this proxy statement/prospectus. Through the website, Pyramid makes available its annual report on Form 10-K,
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to these reports, as soon as reasonably
practicable after it files such material with the SEC.
Description of Business – Oil and Gas Operations
Exploration and Development
Pyramid operates in a highly competitive industry wherein many companies, from large multinational companies to small
independent producers, are competing for a finite amount of oil and gas resources. Pyramid seeks out properties to explore for oil
and gas by drilling and also seeks out producing oil and gas properties that can be purchased and operated. Management
believes that under the right economic conditions, several of the producing properties that Pyramid owns could have further
developmental potential. Certain oil properties currently owned and operated by Pyramid may be receptive to enhanced oil
recovery procedures under certain economic conditions.
Oil and Gas Production Operations
Pyramid owns and operates 27 oil and gas leases (properties) located within Kern and Santa Barbara Counties in the State of
California. Nine of these properties were non-operated during 2013. All of the non-operated properties were shut-down before
January 1, 2013. No other properties were shut-down prior to 2013. Most of these properties are capable of producing oil or
natural gas, although not all of these properties are considered profitable under certain economic conditions. There are no
proved reserves attributed to the nine properties that were shut-down prior to January 1, 2013 at December 31, 2013. All of the
non-operated properties were written-down in prior periods.
During 2013, Pyramid operated 18 leases within California; 12 of these leases had total annual gross oil production exceeding
1,000 barrels per lease. Production activities primarily consist of the daily pumping of oil from a well(s) into tanks, maintaining the
production facilities both at the well and tank settings, preparing and shipping the crude oil to buyers. Daily operations differ from
one property to another, depending on the number of wells, the depth of the wells, the gravity of the oil produced and the location
of the property. All of Pyramid’s oil production is classified as primary recovery production at this time; although certain properties
may be conducive to secondary recovery operations in the future, depending on the prevailing price of oil.
Primary recovery of oil and gas is by means of natural flow(s) or artificial lift of oil and gas from a single well bore. Natural gas
and petroleum fluids enter the well bore by means of reservoir pressure or gravity flow; fluids and gases are moved to the surface
by natural pressure or by means of artificial lift (pumping). In secondary recovery operations, liquids or gases are injected into the
reservoirs for the purpose of augmenting reservoir energy or increasing reservoir temperatures. Secondary recovery operations,
usually, but not always, are done after the primary-recovery phase has passed.
Pyramid employs field personnel (i.e., pumpers, rig crews, roustabouts and equipment operators) that perform basic daily
activities associated with producing oil and gas. Daily operations include inspections of surface facilities and equipment,
gauging, reporting and shipping oil, and routine maintenance and repair activities on wells, production facilities and equipment
Pyramid owns and maintains various pieces of equipment necessary for employees to perform various repair and maintenance
tasks on Pyramid properties. Such equipment consists of service rigs, mobile pumps, vacuum trucks, hot oil truck, backhoe,
trucks and trailers.
101
Occasionally, Pyramid drills new wells or redrills existing wells on properties it owns in an attempt to increase the daily oil and
gas production. In the last five years, Pyramid has utilized the services of outside drilling contractors for drilling new wells and
redrilling existing wells. Maintenance and repairs of existing wells to maintain or increase oil and gas production are carried out
by Pyramid’s personnel on a continuing basis. Most maintenance and repair work is performed with its own rigs.
Economic factors associated with the price of oil and gas and the productive output of wells determines the number of active
wells Pyramid operates. Under certain economic conditions, it has the potential to operate approximately 102 wells, and of these,
on average, 47 were in operation during 2013 on a daily basis. Pyramid also owns other oil and gas interests outside the State of
California that it does not operate. These interests are located in New York, Texas and Wyoming.
Marketing of Crude Oil and Natural Gas
Pyramid sells its crude oil to Phillips 66 and Kern Oil & Refining, accounting for approximately 51% and 47%, respectively, of
Pyramid’s crude oil sales in 2013. While revenue from these customers is significant, and the loss of any one could have an
adverse effect on Pyramid, it is management’s opinion that the oil and gas it produces could be sold to other crude oil
purchasers, refineries or pipeline companies. Phillips 66 and its predecessors, and Kern Oil have been customers of Pyramid for
over twenty years. Natural gas is sold to companies in the area of operations. Pyramid sells its oil pursuant to short-term
contracts. Accordingly, the amount of oil Pyramid sells is dependent upon market demand. Market demand for its production is
subject to various influences and can never be assured, especially in an era of changing prices. The base values for crude oil
Pyramid sells is set by major oil companies in response to area and market strengths and international influences. Types and
qualities of crude oil vary substantially in base values posted by crude oil buyers in various areas of the country. Pyramid’s crude
oil sales are not seasonal, but uniform throughout the year.
Competition and Industry Conditions
The profitability of Pyramid’s operations depends primarily on the production of oil and gas in commercially profitable quantities.
Oil and gas properties often fail to provide a return sufficient to repay the substantial sums of money required for their acquisition,
exploration and development. The acquisition, exploration and development of oil and gas properties is a highly competitive
business. Many entities with which Pyramid competes have significantly greater financial and staff resources. Such competitive
disadvantages could materially and adversely affect Pyramid’s ability to acquire new properties or develop existing properties.
Regulations
Pyramid’s business is affected by numerous governmental laws and regulations, including energy, environmental, conservation,
tax and other laws and regulations relating to the petroleum industry. Changes in any of these laws and regulations could have a
material and adverse effect on Pyramid’s business and financial stability. In view of the many uncertainties with respect to current
laws and regulations, including their applicability to Pyramid, it cannot predict the overall effect of such laws and regulations on
future operations.
Taxation
The operations of Pyramid, as is the case in the petroleum industry generally, are significantly affected by federal tax laws.
Federal, as well as state, tax laws have many provisions applicable to corporations which could affect its future tax liability.
Environmental
Pyramid’s activities are subject to existing federal and state laws and regulations governing environmental quality and pollution
control. These laws may require the acquisition of permits relating to certain ongoing operations, for drilling, emissions, waste
water disposal and other air and water quality controls. In view of the uncertainty and unpredictability of environmental statutes
and regulations, Pyramid cannot ensure that such laws and regulations will not materially and adversely affect its business.
Pyramid does not currently anticipate any material effect on its capital expenditures or earnings as the result of governmental
regulations, enacted or proposed, concerning environmental protection or the discharge of material into the environment.
Pyramid is actively pursuing an ongoing policy of upgrading and restoring older properties to comply with current and proposed
environmental regulations.
Commitments and Contingencies
Pyramid is liable for future dismantlement and abandonment costs associated with its oil and gas properties. These costs include
down-hole plugging and abandonment of wells, future site restoration, post closure and other environmental exit costs. The costs
of future dismantlement and abandonment have been accrued and recorded in the financial statements. See Note 9. “Asset
Retirement Obligations” in the Notes to Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid contained in this proxy statement/prospectus.
102
Employees
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Pyramid had 12 full-time employees and one part-time individual. Two full-time
and one part-time individual were office or administrative personnel, and the rest were field personnel. Pyramid contracts for
additional labor services when needed. Pyramid is not a party to any union contracts. It believes that its employee relationships
are satisfactory.
Properties
Description of Properties
Pyramid’s principal assets consist of proven and unproven oil and gas properties, oil and gas production related equipment and
developed and undeveloped real estate holdings. Pyramid’s oil and gas properties are located exclusively in the continental
United States, in California, New York, Texas and Wyoming.
Developed oil and gas properties are those on which sufficient wells have been drilled to economically recover the estimated
reserves calculated for the property. Undeveloped properties do not presently have sufficient wells to recover the estimated
reserves. Pyramid did not have any proved undeveloped reserves at December 31, 2013 and 2012. Pyramid had proved
undeveloped reserves of 44,700 barrels of crude oil, 77,700 barrels of crude oil, and 96,000 barrels of crude oil at December 31,
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
Pyramid had proved undeveloped reserves of 44,700 barrels of crude oil at December 31, 2011. These reserves were
attributable to two wells that Pyramid planned to drill in 2012. Pyramid projected that it would cost approximately $1,281,000 to
drill and complete these wells. One of these wells the Santa Fe #20 well, a development well, was drilled and completed in the
first quarter of 2012. This well is currently not producing and a valuation allowance of $207,000 was recorded in the fourth
quarter against the Santa Fe lease. The other well that was projected to be drilled in 2012, the CLI 4-H well, was not drilled in
2012 and Pyramid currently does not anticipate drilling this well at any time in the foreseeable future.
Oil and Gas Properties
Pyramid’s estimated future net recoverable oil and gas reserves from proved reserves, both developed and undeveloped
properties were assembled by MHA and are as follows:
December 31,   
2013
2012
2011
(Mcf)
Crude Oil  Natural Gas 
 
 (Bbls)
449,000    14,000
  482,000    -
  546,000    42,000
Using the 12 month average of the first-of-the-month oil and gas prices and 12 month average of lease operating expenses, the
estimated value of future net revenues to be derived from Pyramid’s proved developed oil and gas reserves, discounted at 10%,
were $13,967,270 at December 31, 2013, $13,712,000 at December 31, 2012, $18,439,000 at December 31, 2011.
Internal Controls over Reserve Estimation
Pyramid’s proved reserve information as of December 31, 2013 included in this proxy statement/prospectus was estimated by its
independent petroleum consultant, MHA Petroleum Consultants, LLC (“MHA”), in accordance with generally accepted petroleum
engineering and evaluation principles and definitions and guidelines established by the SEC. The technical persons responsible
for preparing the reserves estimates presented herein meet the requirements regarding qualifications, independence, objectivity
and confidentiality set forth in the Standards Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information
promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers. MHA and its predecessors have been preparing Pyramid’s reserve
information for over twenty-five years and thus, are familiar with Pyramid’s operations and its oil and gas properties.
Pyramid’s personnel provide data (such as well ownership interests, oil and gas prices, production volumes and well operating
costs) to MHA. The primary Pyramid employees responsible for reviewing MHA, use of its data and MHA’s estimation of
Pyramid’s reserves are Michael D. Herman, Interim CEO and Lee G. Christianson, CFO. Pyramid has employed the services of a
third-party geologist to provide MHA with technical data (such as well logs, geological information and well histories). Mr.
Herman has been Chairman of the Board and a director since 2005. Mr. Christianson has been with Pyramid for over twenty-five
years.
103
Pyramid’s net oil and gas production after royalty and other working interests for the past three years ending December 31, were
as follows:
2013   2012   2011  
Crude oil (Bbls)   43,000   45,000   55,000 
Natural gas (Mcf)  6,000    6,000    9,000
Pyramid’s average sales prices per barrel or per MCF of crude oil and natural gas, respectively, and production costs per
equivalent barrel (gas production is converted to equivalent barrels at the rate of 6 MCF per barrel, representing the estimated
relative energy content of gas to oil) for the past three years ending December 31, were as follows:
2013
 
    
 
Sales price:
 $103.78  $106.60  $104.78 
Crude oil (per barrel)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
 
 $3.15
Production costs (per Boe) $45.60   $41.00   $33.00
2012
2011
$2.76
$3.87
The average selling price of Pyramid’s crude oil at December 31, 2013, was approximately $102.17 per barrel and the average
selling price of its natural gas at December 31, 2013, was approximately $3.31 per Mcf.
As of December 31, 2013, Pyramid had the following gross and net position in wells and proved acres:
Proved Acres
Wells
 
 
 Gross (1)  Net (1)  Gross (2)  Net (2) 
 
   109    8,782
   1,403 
Oil
   110
   7
Natural Gas   22
   12,246    4,082 
   116    21,028    5,485 
   132
Total
(1)
“Gross wells” represent the total number of wells in which Pyramid has a working interest. “Net wells” represent the number of
gross wells multiplied by the percentage of the working interests therein held by Pyramid.
(2)
“Gross acreages” represents all acres in which Pyramid has a working interest. “Net acres” represent the aggregate of the
working interests of Pyramid in the gross acres.
Pyramid did not drill any wells during 2013.
Pyramid drilled one development well in 2012, the Santa Fe No. 20. This well is currently non-producing. A valuation allowance
of $207,000 was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2012 against the Santa Fe lease.
Pyramid drilled two wells in 2011, the Pike 1-H well and the Jacoby-Potter Unit #1 well. Both of these wells were drilled jointly
with different partners in each well. Both of these wells were drilled in the first quarter of 2011. Pyramid is the operator of the Pike
1-H well. Pyramid’s share of the costs of drilling the Pike well was $897,000. This well was written down by $673,000 during
2011 because the production from the well was lower than projected. The write-down was based on Pyramid’s share of projected
future net cash flows for the well. The Jacoby-Potter well was drilled by the joint venture in Texas. Pyramid participated as one of
the non-operators in the drilling of this well. Pyramid’s share of the costs for drilling this well were $54,000. This well was
abandoned as a dry-hole. Pyramid recorded a valuation allowance of $54,000 during 2011 for this well.
As of December 31, 2013, Pyramid held positions in unproven acreage in the following locations. “Unproven” oil and gas
properties are those on which the presence of commercial quantities of reserves of crude oil or natural gas has not been
established. “Undeveloped” acreage exists on those oil and gas properties where economically recoverable reserves are
estimated to exist in proved reservoirs from wells to be drilled in the future.
State
Counties
Acres
 Gross   Net
New York Mount Morris and Livingston Counties  34,800   9,788 
   
 
 
Texas
  5,700    713
McMullen County
104
Real Property Owned
Pyramid owned the following real property as of December 31, 2013, all located in California.
County of Kern
Mullaney yard
Miller property
Ranton property
Murphy property
 
City of Bakersfield3 lots
20 acres
112 acres
80 acres
50 acres
Pyramid’s executive offices are located on the three lots of real property in the city of Bakersfield, California. This property was
acquired by Pyramid in 1986. The office building located on this property is a one story structure with approximately 4,200 square
feet and is in good condition.
Legal Proceedings
Pyramid is subject to potential litigation in the normal course of business. The resolution in any reporting period of such litigation
could have a material impact on Pyramid’s financial position or results of operations for that period. Pyramid is not party to any
proceedings or actions which management believes might have a material effect upon its financial position or results of
operations nor have any such proceedings or actions been threatened.
105
MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID
Set forth below is a description of Pyramid’s management as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus. Upon completion of
the merger, each of Pyramid’s current directors and officers will resign and the newly appointed directors will commence serving
as directors of the combined company and the newly appointed executive officers will begin serving as executive officers of the
combined company on and after the merger. See “Management of Pyramid Following the Merger.”
Age Position
Name
Michael D. Herman  56  Chairman of the Board of Directors, Interim President and Chief Executive Officer
Rick D. Kasch
Gary L. Ronning
Lee G. Christianson 66  Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary
63  Director
 71  Director
Set forth below are descriptions of the backgrounds of the officers and directors of Pyramid and their principal occupations for the
past five years.
Michael D. Herman has been Chairman of Pyramid’s board of directors since July 2005 and its largest shareholder since July
2005. Mr. Herman has served as Pyramid’s Interim President and Chief Executive Officer since September 30, 2013. Mr. Herman
is also the Chairman and CEO of Enservco Corporation, (NYSE MKT: ENSV). Enservco provides various energy-related
services such as frac heating, acidizing, hot oiling, water hauling and disposal for customers in several basins in the continental
United States. Mr. Herman was the Chairman and owner of Pasadena, California based Key Food Ingredients, Inc. from January
1, 2005 until October, 2007. Key Food Ingredients supplies dehydrated vegetables from its factory in Qingdao, China to
customers worldwide. Mr. Herman was Chairman and owner of Telematrix, Inc. from October 1992 until December 1998, when
that company was sold to a major hospitality company, and he repurchased a majority ownership interest in December 2004 and
held that majority ownership interest until April 2006. Telematrix, Inc. designs and distributes communications products and
telephones to hospitality and business customers globally.
Mr. Herman has been active in the oil and gas producing and servicing business since the mid-1980’s. His broad experience in
the oil and gas industry and diverse business experience outside the oil and gas industry are valuable resources to Pyramid’s
board in formulating business strategy, addressing business opportunities and resolving operational issues that arise from time
to time.
Rick D. Kasch was appointed to Pyramid’s board of directors on October 8, 2013. Since July 2012, until his appointment as
President in April 2013, Mr. Kasch served as Chief Financial Officer of Enservco Corporation, (NYSE MKT: ENSV). On July 25,
2012, Mr. Kasch was elected to the Board of Directors of Enservco Corporation. Mr. Kasch served as the principal financial
officer of the Enservco Corporation’s predecessor (Enservco LLC) since its inception in May 2007. Mr. Kasch also served as the
principal financial officer, Secretary and Treasurer of Dillco Fluid Services, Inc. since December 2007. Further, he has served as
a manager and the principal financial officer for Heat Waves Hot Oil Service LLC since March 2006. Additionally, Mr. Kasch has
served as the Chief Financial Officer for various other companies, including software development companies and internet based
companies. Mr. Kasch received a BBA – Accounting degree from the University of South Dakota. Mr. Kasch is a CPA but does
not hold an active license.
Gary L. Ronning has served as a member of Pyramid’s board of directors since 1998. Mr. Ronning has been Executive Vice
President, Western Region of Prime Natural Resources, LLC, since 1999. Mr. Ronning previously worked with Ferguson Energy,
an independent oil and gas exploration company beginning in 1967. Mr. Ronning also has had several positions with Ferguson
Energy, managing operations and production in several states.
Mr. Ronning has been engaged in all aspects of the oil and gas industry continuously since 1967. Mr. Ronning brings to the
Pyramid board a range and length of industry experience that is a unique asset.
Lee G. Christianson has been employed in the oil and gas industry for 38 years. Mr. Christianson has served as Pyramid’s
Chief Financial Officer since 1988 and as Pyramid’s Corporate Secretary since 1990. Mr. Christianson worked for another
publicly held oil and gas company from 1976 to 1988 in various accounting positions. Mr. Christianson received a BSBA –
Accounting degree from the University of North Dakota. Mr. Christianson obtained his CPA in 1976 in Minnesota but has since
let it lapse.
Code of Ethics
Pyramid has adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that is applicable to all of its directors, officers and employees. A
copy of the code is available at no charge to any person who sends a request for a copy to the Corporate Secretary, Pyramid Oil
Company, P.O. Box 832, Bakersfield, California 93302. A copy of the Code is also available on our website at
www.pyramidoil.com.
106
Audit Committee
The members of the Pyramid audit committee are Rick D. Kasch and Gary L. Ronning. The Pyramid audit committee reviews
Pyramid’s financial and accounting organization, financial reporting and the reports of the independent registered public
accounting firm and is responsible for the selection and oversight of the independent registered public accounting firm. The
Pyramid board of directors has determined that Mr. Kasch is an “audit committee financial expert” within the meaning of Item
407(d)(5) of the SEC’s Regulation S-K. A copy of the Pyramid audit committee’s charter is available on Pyramid’s website at
www.pyramidoil.com.
Compensation Committee
The members of the Compensation Committee are Mr. Kasch and Mr. Ronning. The Compensation Committee recommends and
approves the compensation of the Company’s directors and executive officers, including approving individual executive officer
compensation, and reviews and recommends to the Board compensation plans, policies and benefit programs for employees
generally. A copy of the Compensation Committee’s charter is available on the Company’s website at www.pyramidoil.com.
Nominating and Governance Committee
The members of Pyramid’s nominating committee are Mr. Kasch and Mr. Ronning. The Pyramid nominating committee
recommends prospective directors to fill vacancies that may arise from time to time and proposes individuals for election to the
Pyramid board of directors. A copy of the Pyramid nominating committee’s charter is available on Pyramid’s website at
www.pyramidoil.com.
Executive Compensation of Pyramid
The following table sets forth the compensation for the 2013 and 2012 fiscal years for the two persons who served as Pyramid’s
Principal Executive Officer during the 2013 fiscal year. No other Pyramid executive officer had total compensation in excess of
$100,000 for the 2013 fiscal year.
Summary Compensation Table of Pyramid
Year   Salary
Name and Principal Position
Bonus (1)  Option Awards 
Michael D. Herman (2)
   
   
Interim President and Chief Executive Officer    
   
 
   
John H. Alexander (3)
  2013  $112,100   
Former President and Chief Executive Officer   
   
  2012  $142,800
$ 83,207
2013    -
-
 
 
-
 
-
-
 
-
All Other 
 
Compensation
(5) $ 1,600
$ 1,034,119
    
   -
Total (1)
 
(2) $83,207
 
 
 
 
(4) $1,146,219 
    
 
 
 $142,800
(1)
Perquisites and other personal benefits provided to the CEO were less than $10,000 in the aggregate for each of the 2013 and
2012 fiscal years and, in accordance with applicable SEC regulations, they are not listed in this table.
Mr. Herman became Pyramid’s Interim President and CEO on September 30, 2013. However, Mr. Herman does not receive
any compensation in his capacity as Interim President and CEO. All compensation that Mr. Herman receives from Pyramid is
(2)received in his capacity as a non-employee director of Pyramid and is described below under “Compensation of Directors of
Pyramid.” As reported under “Compensation of Directors of Pyramid,” Mr. Herman received $1,600 for director’s fees during
the 2013 fiscal year.
(3) Mr. Alexander resigned as President, CEO and as director of Pyramid on September 30, 2013.
Represents $967,329 that Pyramid agreed to pay to Mr. Alexander pursuant to a Settlement Agreement and General Release
of Claims, dated as of September 30, 2013, in satisfaction of amounts owed to Mr. Alexander under his employment
agreement upon the termination of his employment and $30,000 of consulting fees that Pyramid paid to Mr. Alexander during
the 2013 fiscal year following the termination of his employment on September 30, 2013. See Note 14, “Settlement
Agreement” of the Notes to the Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid included elsewhere in this proxy
statement/prospectus. Mr. Alexander also received, pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, a vehicle valued at $30,790 and a
golf club membership valued at $6,000.
The amounts for option awards represent the estimated fair value of stock options at the date of grant. Fair value of the options
is determined by the Black-Scholes option pricing model in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718. For a discussion of the
valuation assumptions used, see Note 10, “Share Based Compensation,” of the Notes to the Historical Financial Statements of
Pyramid included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
(4)
(5)
107
Outstanding Pyramid Equity Awards at Year Ended December 31, 2013
Name
Michael D. Herman 
Interim President and 
Chief Executive Officer
 
John H. Alexander 
Former President and 
Chief Executive Officer
-
10/8/13    50,000
-
Option Awards
Grant
 
Date
Number of Securities Underlying
  
Unexercised Options (#) Exercisable
Option Exercise
  
Price ($)
Option Expiration Date
$ 5.16
10/8/18
-
-
Compensation of Directors of Pyramid
Prior to October 8, 2013, only non-employee directors of Pyramid received payment for service as directors of Pyramid. Non-
employee directors received an annual retainer fee of $2,000, $800 for each Pyramid board meeting attended in person, $400 for
each telephonic meeting over one hour and $250 for committee meetings not held in conjunction with a Pyramid board meeting.
Each Pyramid board meeting was attended by all of the Pyramid directors in 2013. Effective October 8, 2013, outside directors’
compensation was $30,000 per year, payable quarterly, with no fees payable for attending Pyramid board meetings.
Effective October 8, 2013, the Pyramid board of directors approved a one-time grant of 5-year options to purchase 25,000 shares
of Pyramid common stock for each of Mr. Kasch and Mr. Ronning. The Pyramid board of directors also approved a grant of 5-year
options to purchase 50,000 shares of Pyramid common stock for Mr. Herman in his capacity as Chairman of the Board of
Directors of Pyramid. These options are immediately vested and do not have a cashless exercise provision. The options have an
exercise price of $5.16 per share, which equals the closing price of Pyramid’s common stock on October 8, 2013.
The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation paid to Pyramid non-employee directors during 2013 for
their services as directors.
Name
Option
Fees Earned or
All Other
Total
Paid In Cash
Michael D. Herman (2) $ 1,600
 $ 7,500
Rick D. Kasch
 $ 11,100
Gary L. Ronning
John E. Turco (3)
 $ 3,600
John H. Alexander (4)
-
Awards(1) Compensation
  $ 82,207    
  $ 41,103    
  $ 41,103    
    -
   
   
    -
-
-
-
-
-
$83,807 
  $48,603 
  $52,203 
  $3,600  
 
    -
Represents the aggregate grant date fair value of the stock options awarded to the director, calculated in accordance with
FASB ASC Topic 718, and does not take into account any estimated forfeitures. For information regarding the valuation
assumptions used with respect to the option grants, see Note 10, “Share Based Compensation,” of the Notes to the Historical
Financial Statements of Pyramid included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus. The amounts shown above do not
necessarily correspond to the actual values that will be recognized by each Pyramid director from the awards.
Pursuant to applicable rules of the SEC, the compensation that Mr. Herman, Pyramid’s Interim President and Chief Executive
Officer, received in his capacity as a director is also reported by us above in the above Summary Compensation Table of
Pyramid.
(1)
(2)
(3) Mr. Turco resigned as a director of Pyramid effective September 30, 2013.
(4)
Mr. Alexander resigned as a director of Pyramid effective September 30, 2013 and did not receive any compensation for his
service on Pyramid’s board of directors.
108
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF PYRAMID
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements of Pyramid and the notes thereto included
elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus. The following discussion includes certain forward-looking statements. For a
discussion of important factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from the results referred to in the forward-
looking statements, see “Risk Factors – Risks Relating to Pyramid’s Business” and “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-
Looking Statements.”
Impact of Changing Prices
Average prices decreased by approximately $3.82 per barrel of oil equivalent sold during 2013 as compared with average prices
for 2012. In 2013 there were 242 separate crude oil price changes, as compared with 244 price changes in 2012. The difference
between the highest ($112.70) and lowest ($95.15) posted prices in 2013 was $17.55 per barrel. By comparison, this same
differential in 2012 was $33.55 per barrel.
Critical Accounting Policies
Costs Incurred in Oil and Gas Producing Activities
Pyramid has adopted the “successful efforts” method of accounting for its oil and gas exploration and development activities, as
set forth in FASB ASC Topic 932.
Pyramid initially capitalizes expenditures for oil and gas property acquisitions until they are either determined to be successful
(capable of commercial production) or unsuccessful. The carrying value of all undeveloped oil and gas properties is evaluated
periodically and reduced if such carrying value appears to have been impaired. Leasehold costs relating to successful oil and
gas properties remain capitalized while leasehold costs which have been proven unsuccessful are charged to operations in the
period the leasehold costs are proven unsuccessful. Costs of carrying and retaining unproved properties are expensed as
incurred.
The costs of drilling and equipping development wells are capitalized, whether the wells are successful or unsuccessful. The
costs of drilling and equipping exploratory wells are capitalized until they are determined to be either successful or unsuccessful.
If the wells are successful, the costs of the wells remain capitalized. If, however, the wells are unsuccessful, the capitalized costs
of drilling the wells, net of any salvage value, are charged to operations in the period the wells are determined to be
unsuccessful.
Pyramid adopted FASB Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic No. 360-10-15, “Accounting for the
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to be Disposed of” (the “Statement”). The Statement specifies when
an impairment loss should be recognized and how impairment losses should be measured for long-lived assets to be held and
used and for long-lived assets to be disposed of. In accordance with the Statement, the costs of proved oil and gas properties
and equipment are periodically assessed on a lease by lease basis to determine if such costs exceed undiscounted future cash
flows, and if conditions warrant an impairment reserve will be provided based on the estimated future discounted cash flows.
Pyramid recorded an impairment reserve of $151,243, $237,771 and $751,263 at December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011,
respectively. The accumulated impairment reserve was $4,988,758 and $4,980,931 at December 31, 2013 and 2012,
respectively.
Depletion, Depreciation, and Amortization
Depletion of leasehold costs of producing oil and gas properties is provided on the unit-of-production method, by individual
property unit, based on estimated recoverable proved reserves. Depreciation and amortization of the costs of producing wells
and related equipment are provided on the unit-of-production method, by individual property unit, based on estimated
recoverable proved developed reserves. Amortization of the costs of undeveloped oil and gas properties is based on Pyramid’s
experience, giving consideration to the holding periods of leaseholds. The average depletion per equivalent barrel of crude oil
produced for 2013, 2012 and 2011 were $11.88, $16.66 and $24.27, respectively.
Drilling and operating equipment, buildings, automotive, office and other property and equipment and leasehold improvements
are stated at cost. Depreciation and amortization are computed using the straight-line method over the shorter of the estimated
useful lives or the applicable lease terms (range of 3 to 19 years). Any permanent impairment of the carrying value of property
and equipment is provided for at the time such impairments become known.
109
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2013, the FASB issued ASU 2013-01, “Balance Sheet (Topic 210): Clarifying the Scope of Disclosures about
Offsetting Assets and Liabilities.” The amendments in this ASU clarify the scope for derivatives accounted for in accordance with
Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, including bifurcated embedded derivatives, repurchase agreements and reverse
repurchase agreements and securities borrowing and securities lending transactions that are either offset or subject to netting
arrangements. An entity is required to apply the amendments for fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2013. Pyramid
does not expect the adoption of ASU 2013-01 to have a material impact on its financial statements.
In April 2013, the FASB issued ASU 2013-07, “Presentation of Financial Statements (Topic 205): Liquidation Basis of
Accounting.” The amendments in this update are being issued to clarify when an entity should apply the liquidation basis of
accounting. In addition, the guidance provides principles for the recognition and measurement of assets and liabilities and
requirements for financial statements prepared using the liquidation basis of accounting. The amendments are effective for
entities that determine liquidation is imminent during annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2013, and interim
reporting periods therein. Pyramid does not expect the adoption of ASU 2013-07 to have a material impact on its financial
statements.
In July 2013, the FASB issued ASU No. 2013-011, “Presentation of an Unrecognized Tax Benefit When a Net Operating Loss
Carryforward, a Similar Tax Loss, or A Tax Credit Carryforward Exists.” These amendments provide guidance on the financial
statement presentation of unrecognized tax benefits to better reflect the manner in which an entity would settle at the reporting
date any additional income taxes that would result from the disallowance of a tax position. For public entities, the amendments
are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2013. The adoption of ASU
2013-11 will not have a material impact on Pyramid’s consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Pyramid had cash and short-term investments of $6,545,000 at December 31, 2013, for a net increase of $575,000, when
compared to December 31, 2012. Short-term investments consist of certificates of deposit having original maturities of three
months to eighteen months. Pyramid had long-term investments of $1,132,000 at December 31, 2013. Long-term investments
consist of certificates of deposit having original maturities of 18 months or more. During 2013, operating activities generated cash
of $1,018,000. During 2013, cash was consumed by capital spending of $195,000 and the funding of a “Rabbi Trust” in the
amount of $967,000, for further information, see Note 14. “Settlement Agreement” of the Notes to the Historical Financial
Statements of Pyramid included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus. Adequate funds were available to carry out all
necessary oil and gas operations and to maintain Pyramid’s equipment. A $500,000 line of credit, unused at December 31, 2012,
also provided a source of additional liquidity during 2013 although it was not drawn upon during the year.
Pyramid believes that its existing current assets and the amount of cash it anticipates it will generate from current operations will
be sufficient to fund the anticipated liquidity and capital resource it needs for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2014. In
addition to its current assets, Pyramid also has a credit facility of $500,000 available in the event that it needs other resources to
fund its liquidity and capital resource needs. Although Pyramid may increase its capital expenditures during the current fiscal
year to enhance its current oil production capacities, it does not anticipate that such expenditures would exceed the amount of
liquidity currently available. Pyramid believes that its existing assets and the cash expected to be generated from operations will
be sufficient during fiscal year 2014, without giving effect to the anticipated Yuma merger, are based on the following:
As of December 31, 2013, the amount of cash, cash equivalents, short-term and long-term investments was equal to $7,677,000
in the aggregate.
As of December 31, 2013, Pyramid had approximately $9,072,000 in current assets and $1,894,000 of current liabilities.
As of December 31, 2013, Pyramid had no long-term or current debt.
Pyramid did not drill any wells in 2013. Pyramid is not a party to off-balance sheet arrangements and does not engage in trading
activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. In addition, Pyramid has no financial guarantees, debt or lease agreements or
other arrangements that could trigger a requirement for an early payment or that could change the value of Pyramid’s assets.
Management continues to examine various alternatives for increasing capital resources including, among other things,
participation with industry and/or private partners in drilling and exploration prospects and specific rework of existing properties to
enhance production and expansion of its sales of crude oil and natural gas in California. If necessary, Pyramid could sell certain
nonessential assets to raise capital for the benefit of these programs.
Pyramid drilled one development well during 2012. Pyramid drilled two joint-venture wells in 2011. All three wells were financed
internally.
110
Pyramid’s proved developed producing crude oil reserves decreased by approximately 32,000 barrels at December 31, 2013
compared to at December 31, 2012. The decrease in crude oil reserves was due to crude oil production of 43,000 barrels offset
by an increase of 11,000 barrels as a result of revisions of previous estimates.
Pyramid’s proved developed producing crude oil reserves decreased by approximately 19,000 barrels at December 31, 2012
compared to at December 31, 2011. The decrease in crude oil reserves was due to crude oil production of 45,000 barrels offset
by an increase of 26,000 barrels as a result of revisions of previous estimates.
Pyramid’s proved developed producing crude oil reserves increased by approximately 41,600 barrels at December 31, 2011
compared to at December 31, 2010. The increase in crude oil reserves was due primarily to revisions of previous estimates. The
increase in reserves due to revisions of estimates is due primarily to higher net average crude prices (after production taxes and
operating expenses) for 2011. Certain oil and gas properties recoverable reserves and net revenues increased due to the higher
net average prices.
Certain properties that Pyramid owns have become uneconomic and have been shut-down. When these properties are not
operated, any reserves that could be assigned to these properties are not included in the year-end engineering report of total
Pyramid reserves. Another major factor that directly affects Pyramid’s future reserves are the prices of crude oil used to value the
year-end reserves. Pyramid uses the 12-month average of the first-of-the-month oil and gas prices for reserve valuation
purposes. The prices used to value the year-end reserves have a significant impact on the estimated future net recoverable oil
and gas reserves from proved developed properties. At certain depressed price levels, some of the Pyramid’s oil and gas
properties are not economical to operate and thus its year-end engineering reserve reports do not assign any oil and gas
reserves to these properties. Conversely, if prices used to value the year-end reserves should increase to a certain level, the
reserves on these leases would be economic to produce and would increase Pyramid’s reserves.
Pyramid currently is executing a plan to increase oil and gas production volumes on its core California properties. This effort is
principally focused on workovers of existing wells. Pyramid also is planning to re-drill and deepen three existing wells into the
Monterey formation on Pyramid’s Delaney Tunnell property in Santa Maria, California. Two of the wells will be utilized for
production and one will be used for disposal of produced water. All necessary state permits have been received. However, in
light of management’s focus on the merger agreement with Yuma, Pyramid has not established a definitive drilling timeline.
Pyramid has positioned itself to withstand various types of economic uncertainties, and has maintained a strong balance sheet
and working capital position. In addition, Pyramid has filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC. The
registration statement gives Pyramid the flexibility to offer and sell from time to time, up to $30 million of common or preferred
stock. Pyramid does not have immediate plans to sell securities under the shelf registration statement.
Pyramid’s future growth, without giving effect to the anticipated merger with Yuma, will be highly dependent on the level of
success it has in its operations and capital investments, including the outcome of wells that have not yet been drilled. Pyramid’s
future capital investment program may be modified due to exploration and development successes or failures, market conditions
and other variables. The production and sales of oil and gas involves many complex processes that are subject to numerous
uncertainties, including reservoir risk, mechanical failures, human error and market conditions.
Pyramid may be subject to future costs necessary for compliance with the implementation of new air and water environmental
quality requirements of various state and federal governmental agencies. However, those potential requirements and costs are
unknown at this time. Pyramid continues to absorb the costs for various state and local fees and permits under new
environmental programs, the sum of which was not material during 2013. Pyramid is actively pursuing an ongoing policy of
upgrading and restoring older properties to comply with current and proposed environmental regulations. Management believes
the costs associated with these programs will not have a material adverse effect upon Pyramid’s financial position or results of
operations.
Results of Operations For The Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared To The Fiscal Year Ended December
31, 2012
Revenues
Oil and Gas Sales
Oil and gas sales decreased by $603,503 due primarily to lower crude oil production for 2013. Crude oil production/sales
decreased by approximately 4,000 barrels for 2013. The decline in production for the twelve months of 2013 is not attributable to
any one property. Many of the oil and gas leases had lower production due primarily to natural decline. Average prices of
Pyramid’s oil and gas sales decreased by $4.17 cents per equivalent barrel when compared to the same period for 2012.
111
Gain on Sales of Property and Equipment
Effective December 1, 2013, Pyramid sold an oil and gas lease and recognized a gain of $809,476. Pyramid retained an
overriding royalty interest of 2% in the property.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $35,714 for 2013 when compared to the same period for 2012. During 2013, the cost to
produce an equivalent barrel of crude oil was $45.59 per barrel, an increase of $4.61 per barrel when compared with production
costs for the same period of 2012. The increase in lease operating expenses is caused by many factors. Costs increased the
most for labor and contract operations. These were offset by lower costs for crude oil inventory change, chemicals, well
abandonments and equipment fuel.
Labor costs increased by $91,781 due to many different factors. Among them, the hiring of one additional field level employee in
the fourth quarter of 2012 increased labor costs by $35,064. Labor costs of $22,734 were capitalized in 2012 for the drilling of a
well, thus reducing labor costs charged to operations, and no wells were drilled in 2013. The payment of a bonus was made in
2013 in the amount of $20,000, but no bonus was paid in 2012. During 2012, Pyramid billed a joint-venture partner for their share
of labor costs in the amount of $15,784, thus reducing labor costs charged to operations. Pyramid purchased the joint venture
partner’s interest in the joint venture in December of 2012.
Contract operations increased by $88,678 due primarily to an increase in costs related to the joint venture interests in Texas.
During the third quarter of 2013, Pyramid paid $69,000 for its share of the costs of a gas sales pipeline obligation related to the
Murray Franklin Estate No. 1 well, a Texas joint venture well. The costs of operating the Fox Creek Ranch 1-H well increased by
$29,000.
Crude oil inventory change contributed to a decrease in operating expenses of $56,129 in 2013, as compared with the same
period of 2012. The change in inventory for the year ended December 31, 2013, resulted in a decrease in operating expenses of
$20,154. The change in the inventory for the year ended December 31, 2012, resulted in an increase in operating expenses of
$35,976.
Chemical costs decreased by $33,253 due primarily to lower quantities of chemicals purchased and used during 2013. Well
abandonment costs decreased by $29,839 due to the abandonment of three wells in 2012. No wells were abandoned in 2013.
Equipment fuel costs decreased by $23,485 due to lower volumes of diesel and gasoline purchased and used during 2013. The
remaining favorable variance of $2,040 is the result of a number of offsetting cost factors.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $238,125 for the year ended December 31, 2013 when compared with the
same period for 2012. Legal fees increased by $117,603 due primarily to legal services related to the Settlement Agreement
between Pyramid and John H. Alexander, the former President and CEO of Pyramid, the preparation of a Registration Statement
on Form S-3 that was filed in November of 2013 and work related to the potential Yuma merger. Consulting services increased
by $99,915 due to fees paid to an investment banking firm for services related to the potential Yuma merger. Consulting services
also increased due to a consulting agreement that was entered into between Mr. Alexander and Pyramid. For additional
information, see Note 14. “Settlement Agreement,” of the Notes to the Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid included
elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
Accounting services increased by $59,594 due primarily to higher fees for audit and tax related matters. Administrative salaries
decreased by $47,508 due primarily to the retirement of Mr. Alexander, effective October 1, 2013. The remaining net increase in
general and administrative costs of $2,088 is attributable to many offsetting cost categories.
Deferred Compensation
On September 30, 2013, Mr. Alexander resigned as the President and Chief Executive Officer of Pyramid. In connection with Mr.
Alexander’s resignation, Mr. Alexander and entered into a Settlement Agreement, dated as of September 30, 2013 (the
“Settlement Agreement”). Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, among other things, Pyramid agreed to pay an aggregate
amount of $967,329 to Mr. Alexander in satisfaction of amounts that are owed to Mr. Alexander under his employment
agreement, with such amount to be paid in three equal installments of $322,443 each, on April 5, 2014, January 5, 2015, and
January 5, 2016. These amounts are included in restricted cash and deferred compensation liability. On March 18, 2014, the trust
agreement, “Rabbi Trust” dated October 1, 2013, was terminated by agreement of Pyramid, Mr. Alexander and the trustee, and
the funds were disbursed to Mr. Alexander.
112
Stock Based Compensation
Stock based compensation increased by $164,413 for the year ended December 31, 2013 when compared with the same period
in 2012. On October 8, 2013, Pyramid’s Board of Directors granted an option to purchase 25,000 shares of common stock for
each of directors Rick D. Kasch and Gary L. Ronning and granted an option to purchase 50,000 shares of common stock to
Michael D. Herman. For additional information, see Note 10. “Share Based Compensation,” of the Notes to the Historical
Financial Statements of Pyramid included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus. The options vest immediately and must
be exercised within ninety days after the director leaves office. Pyramid recorded $164,413 in stock based compensation based
on a valuation performed using a Black-Scholes option-pricing method.
Provision for Depletion, Depreciation and Amortization
The provision for depletion, depreciation and amortization decreased by $142,420 for the year ended December 31, 2013, when
compared with the same period for 2012. The decrease is due primarily to a decrease in the depletion of oil and gas properties.
Depletion decreased due primarily to lower average per barrel depletion rates combined with lower production volumes. The
depletion rates for 2013 declined due to lower net costs to amortize.
Valuation Allowances
Pyramid recorded a valuation allowance of $151,243 at December 31, 2013 on one of its oil and gas properties. The valuation
allowance resulted from an engineering reserve report that was prepared by MHA.
Results of Operations For The Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared To The Fiscal Year Ended December
31, 2011
Revenues
Oil and Gas Sales
Revenues decreased by $693,110 due primarily to lower crude oil production for 2012. Crude oil production/sales decreased by
approximately 6,900 barrels for 2012. Average prices of Pyramid’s oil and gas sales increased by sixty cents per equivalent
barrel when compared to the same period for 2011.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $153,185 for 2012 when compared to the same period for 2011. During 2012, the cost to
produce an equivalent barrel of crude oil was $40.98 per barrel, an increase of $8.02 per barrel when compared with production
costs for the same period of 2011. The increase in lease operating expenses is caused by many factors. Inventory change
contributed to an increase in operating expenses of $67,771. Costs increased for equipment fuel, well abandonments, chemicals,
licenses and fees and gas engine repairs. These were offset by lower costs for outside services.
Inventory change increased operating expenses by $35,976 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012 and decreased
operating expenses by $31,795 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011. As a result, operating expenses increased by
$67,771 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012, when compared with the same period of 2011. The decrease in
inventory at December 31, 2012 of $35,976 is due primarily to lower inventory volumes at December 31, 2012 offset by higher
average per unit values. The increase in inventory at December 31, 2011 of $31,795 is due primarily to higher average per barrel
inventory valuations offset by lower inventory volumes.
Equipment fuel costs increased by $44,758 due primarily to an increase in fuel consumed combined with higher average fuel
costs for gasoline and diesel used by Pyramid’s vehicles and production equipment. Well abandonment costs increased by
$26,331 due to the abandonment of three wells in 2012. One well was abandoned in 2011. Chemicals increased by $14,400 due
primarily to higher usage of chemicals on the Delaney-Tunnell lease. Licenses and permits increased by $13,714 due primarily
to fees related to the Santa Fe lease. Gas engine repairs increased by $11,755 due primarily to maintenance activities on the
Santa Fe and Anderson wells. Outside services decreased by $14,724 due to lower demand for third-party repair and
maintenance services.
113
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased by $37,742 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012 when compared
with the same period for 2011. Accounting services decreased by $62,442 due to lower audit fees and lower fees paid to a third-
party who assisted with the training and implementation of a new oil and gas accounting software that was effective January 1,
2011. Legal fees declined by $26,027 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2012 due primarily to the filing of a Form S-
8 during 2011. The legal fees expended for the filing of the Form S-8 during 2011 were $17,500. Outside services increased by
$16,852 due primarily to the hiring of temporary help for the corporate office staff. General liability insurance increased by
$10,425 due to an increase in the allocation of insurance costs to general and administrative expense from operating expenses
during 2012. General expenses increased by $8,000 due to a donation Pyramid made during the second quarter of 2012 to a
local medical facility. Administrative salaries increased by $6,077 due to a 7% wage rate increase that was effective May 1, 2012.
The remaining net increase in general and administrative costs of $9,353 is attributable to many different cost categories, none of
them significant in amount.
Stock Based Compensation
Effective June 2, 2011, Pyramid’s board of directors approved the issuance of options to purchase 5,000 shares of Pyramid’s
common stock to its two non-employee directors. These options vested immediately and must be exercised within ninety days
after the director leaves office. Pyramid recorded $43,743 in stock based compensation during the third quarter of 2011, based on
a valuation performed using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
Taxes, Other Than Income and Payroll Taxes
Taxes, other than income and payroll taxes increased by $22,981 due primarily to higher property taxes on Pyramid’s oil and gas
properties.
Provision for Depletion, Depreciation and Amortization
The provision for depletion, depreciation and amortization decreased by $85,673 for the twelve months ended December 31,
2012, when compared with the same period for 2011. The amortization of Texas leaseholds decreased by approximately
$48,000 during 2012. The Texas leaseholds were fully amortized as of June 30, 2011. Depletion of oil and gas properties
decreased by $32,600 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012. Depletion of oil and gas properties was lower due
primarily to lower sales volumes for 2012.
Valuation Allowances
Pyramid recorded a valuation allowance of $237,711 at December 31, 2012 on certain of its oil and gas properties. The valuation
allowance resulted from an engineering reserve report that was prepared by MHA.
Results of Operations For The Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 Compared To The Three Months Ended March 31,
2013
Revenues
The increase in oil and gas sales of $35,796 was primarily due to an increase in crude oil sales of 866 barrels. The average
sales price of Pyramid’s oil and gas for the first quarter of 2014 decreased by approximately $5.44 per barrel equivalent as
compared to the same period of 2013. Pyramid’s daily oil production is stored in tanks near the producing wells until the crude oil
volumes in inventory reach an accumulation necessary to economically transport the crude oil by truck to the point of sale. Due to
the variability in truck pick-ups during the month, inventories will rise and fall at the end of a given month. As a result, between
December 31, 2013 and March 31, 2014 inventories decreased 645 barrels, contributing to the higher sales volumes.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $61,852. The cost to produce an equivalent barrel of crude oil during the first quarter of 2014
was approximately $47.96 per barrel, an increase of approximately $2.14 per barrel when compared with production costs for the
first quarter of 2013. Inventory change increased by $62,212 for the first quarter of 2014 when compared to the same period of
2013.
Inventory change increased operating expenses by $27,727 for the first quarter of 2014 and decreased operating expenses by
$34,485 for the first quarter of 2013. As a result, operating expenses increased by $62,212 for the first quarter of 2014, when
compared with the same period of 2013. The increase in inventory change at March 31, 2014 of $27,727 was due primarily to a
reduction in inventory of 645 barrels when compared with inventory volumes at December 31, 2013. The decrease in inventory
change at March 31, 2013 of $34,485 was due primarily to higher average per barrel inventory valuations combined with higher
crude oil volumes when compared with inventory valuations and volumes at December 31, 2012.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $355,822 for the first quarter of 2014 when compared to the same period of
2013 due primarily to higher legal and consulting fees of $437,445 associated with the merger agreement between Pyramid and
Yuma. See Note 13, “Merger Agreement” in the Unaudited Notes to the Financial Statements of Pyramid for the three months
ended March 31, 2014. Officer and administrative salaries decreased by $49,107 due to a reduction in staff and accounting fees
decreased by $36,799 due primarily to lower accruals of audit fees.
114
Provision for Depletion, Depreciation and Amortization
The provision for depletion, depreciation and amortization decreased by $9,009 for the first quarter of 2014, when compared with
the same period of 2013. Depletion of oil and gas properties decreased by $4,026 and depreciation of fixed assets decreased by
$4,983.
Other Costs and Expenses
Other costs and expenses increased by $12,866 for the first quarter of 2014 when compared to the same period of 2013 due
primarily to an increase in director’s fees of $11,600.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) decreased by $110,369 due primarily to a net loss before income taxes of $207,079 for the first
quarter of 2014. Pyramid had a net income of $174,566 before income taxes for the first quarter of 2013.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents increased by $151,399 for the three months ended March 31, 2014. During the three months ended
March 31, 2014, operating activities used cash of $807,423. Cash was used for a decrease in deferred compensation liability of
$744,341. Cash was provided by using restricted cash of $967,329 to reduce the deferred compensation liability. See the
accompanying Unaudited Statements of Cash Flows of Pyramid for the three months ended March 31, 2014 for additional
detailed information. Pyramid has available a line of credit of $500,000 and short-term and long-term investments of $3,281,036
at March 31, 2014 that provided additional liquidity during the first three months of 2014.
Impact of Changing Prices
Pyramid’s revenue is affected by crude oil prices. Average crude oil prices for the first three months of 2014 decreased by
approximately $5.44 per barrel of equivalent when compared with the same period of 2013. Pyramid cannot predict the future
course of crude oil prices.
115
MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID FOLLOWING THE MERGER
Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, at and after the effective time of the merger, the Pyramid board of directors shall
consist of six members. Pyramid’s board of directors has nominated six persons in accordance with the terms of the merger
agreement; none are current directors of Pyramid. Assuming the merger agreement is approved and adopted, immediately
following the effective time of the merger, Pyramid’s directors and executive officers will consist of the six directors of Yuma and
Yuma’s current executive officers.
The following table lists the names and ages as of August 6, 2014 and positions of the individuals who are expected to serve as
directors and executive officers of the combined company upon completion of the merger.
Age Position
Name
  
 
 64  Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
Sam L. Banks
 63  President and Chief Operating Officer
Michael F. Conlon
 61  Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer and Corporate Secretary
Kirk F. Sprunger
 53  Vice President – Exploration
Mark D. Hartman
 36  Vice President – Corporate and Business Development
James J. Jacobs
  
 
 66  Director
James W. Christmas
 64  Director
Frank A. Lodzinski
Ben T. Morris
 68  Director
Richard K. Stoneburner 60  Director
 78  Director
Richard W. Volk
Set forth below are descriptions of the backgrounds of the executive officers and directors of Yuma and their principal
occupations for the past five years.
Sam L. Banks is the founder and majority owner of Yuma. He has 37 years of experience in the oil and gas industry, the majority
of which he has been leading Yuma. Prior to founding Yuma, he held the position of Assistant to the President of Tomlinson
Interests, a private independent oil and gas company. Mr. Banks graduated with a Bachelor of Arts from Tulane University in
New Orleans, Louisiana, in 1972, and in 1976 he served as Republican Assistant Finance Chairman for the re-election of
President Gerald Ford, under former Secretary of State, Robert Mosbacher.
Michael F. Conlon joined Yuma in 2002 as President and Chief Operating Officer. He has 41 years of experience in the oil and
gas industry. From 1989 to 1992, Mr. Conlon served as Exploration Manager for BHP Petroleum in Melbourne, Australia with his
team discovering the Griffin and Stag fields, as well as making the key discovery in the Pyrenees field complex. Mr. Conlon also
worked for BHP Petroleum in Denver, Colorado and Houston, Texas. He has also held positions at Cities Services Oil Company,
Cabot Oil and Gas Exploration, and North Central Oil Corporation. Prior to joining Yuma, Mr. Conlon was Vice President
Exploration for Pluspetrol S.A. in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Mr. Conlon graduated from the Colorado School of Mines with a B.S.
in Geological Engineering in 1972.
Kirk F. Sprunger joined Yuma in 1996 as Treasurer, Corporate Secretary and Chief Financial Officer. He has 39 years of
experience in finance. Mr. Sprunger began his career in 1974 working at Arthur Andersen & Co. in their management consulting
practice. Since 1980, Mr. Sprunger has performed a range of financial controller roles at Blocker Energy Corporation, AN-SON
Corporation, Terry Companies, St. Paul Oil and Gas Corporation, TGX Corporation and Horizon Directional Systems. Mr.
Sprunger graduated with a Bachelor of Business Administration in Accounting from the University of Texas at El Paso in 1974
and completed a Master of Business Administration in Finance from the University of Minnesota in 1991. He holds CPA
certificates from Texas and Oklahoma.
Mark D. Hartman joined Yuma in 2004 as a Senior Staff Geophysicist. In 2008, he was promoted to Exploration Manager and
subsequently Vice President – Exploration. He has 31 years of experience in the oil and gas industry. Mr. Hartman commenced
his career with Shell E&P in Houston and held a variety of roles at Shell over a 14 year period. In 1996, Mr. Hartman joined
Meridian Resources as a Staff Geophysicist followed by Vice President of Exploration. In 2001, Mr. Hartman rejoined Shell E&P
as a Senior Staff Geophysicist where he managed the South Texas Exploration team. Mr. Hartman graduated with a Bachelor of
Science in Electrical Engineering degree from Texas Tech in 1982.
James J. Jacobs joined Yuma in 2013 as Vice President of Corporate and Business Development. He has 13 years of
experience in the financial services and energy sector. In 2001, Mr. Jacobs worked as an Energy Analyst at Duke Capital
Partners. In 2003 Mr. Jacobs worked as a Vice President of Energy Investment Banking at Sanders Morris Harris where he
participated in capital markets financings, mergers and acquisitions, corporate restructurings and private equity transactions for
various sized energy companies. In 2006, Mr. Jacobs joined Houston America Energy Corp as CFO, Treasurer and Secretary,
where he was responsible for financial accounting and reporting for US and Colombian operations, in addition to taking
responsibility for capital raising activities of the Company. Mr. Jacobs graduated with a Master’s Degree in Professional
Accounting and a Bachelor of Business Administration from the University of Texas in 2001.
116
James W. Christmas has served as a director of Yuma since September 2013. Mr. Christmas began serving as a director of
Petrohawk Energy Corporation (“Petrohawk”) on July 12, 2006, effective upon the merger of KCS Energy, Inc. (“KCS”) into
Petrohawk. He continued to serve as a director, and as Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors, for Petrohawk until BHP Billiton
acquired all of Petrohawk in August 2011. He also served on the Audit Committee and the Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee. Currently, Mr. Christmas serves as a member of the Board of Directors of Petrohawk, a wholly-owned
subsidiary of BHP Billiton, and as chair of the Financial Reporting Committee of such board. On January 29, 2014, Mr. Christmas
was appointed to the Board of Directors of Rice Energy, Inc., and serves on its audit and compensation committees. He also
serves on the Advisory Board of the Tobin School of Business of St. John’s University. He served as President and Chief
Executive Officer of KCS from 1988 until April 2003 and Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of KCS until its
merger into Petrohawk. Mr. Christmas was a Certified Public Accountant in New York and was with Arthur Andersen & Co. from
1970 until 1978 before leaving to join National Utilities & Industries (“NUI”), a diversified energy company, as Vice President and
Controller. He remained with NUI in various executive positions until 1988, when NUI spun out its unregulated activities that
ultimately became part of KCS. As an auditor and audit manager, controller and in his role as CEO of KCS, Mr. Christmas was
directly or indirectly responsible for financial reporting and compliance with SEC regulations, and as such has extensive
experience in reviewing and evaluating financial reports, as well as in evaluating executive and board performance and in
recruiting directors. He has extensive experience in oil and gas company growth issues, with a focus on capital structure and
business development strategies. Prior to his appointment as a Director, Mr. Christmas was an advisor to the Yuma board of
directors from August 2012 through September 2013. Mr. Christmas received a bachelor’s degree in accounting and an honorary
doctorate of commercial science degree from St. John’s University.
Frank A. Lodzinski has served as a director of Yuma since August 2012. He has more than 40 years of oil and gas industry
experience, including the successful completion of several reverse mergers. In 1984, Mr. Lodzinski formed Energy Resource
Associates which acquired interests in oil and gas limited partnerships that were later exchanged for shares of Hampton
Resources, which was ultimately sold to Bellwether Exploration in 1995. In 1996, Mr. Lodzinski acquired Cliffwood Oil and Gas
and then a controlling interest in Texoil where he served as President, CEO, and a Director. Texoil was sold to Ocean Energy in
2001. From 2001 to 2004, Mr. Lodzinski served as President, CEO, and Director of AROC to direct the restructuring and ultimate
liquidation of the company in 2004. In 2004, Mr. Lodzinski formed Southern Bay Energy and merged that company into
GeoResources, Inc. He served as President, CEO, and a Director until GeoResources was sold to Halcón Resources
Corporation for $1 billion in 2012. Since December 2012, Mr. Lodzinski has served as Chief Executive Officer and President of
Oak Valley Resources, LLC. He holds a BSBA degree in Accounting and Finance from Wayne State University in Detroit,
Michigan.
Ben T. Morris has served as a director of Yuma since July 2011. He has an extensive financial background, with over 20 years
of experience in many aspects of the financial sector. He began his career as an accountant at Price Waterhouse & Co. in 1967
and in 1973 joined Mid American Oil and Gas Inc. as CFO and later became President of the company. From 1980 to 1986, Mr.
Morris served as COO of Tatham Corp., a privately-held oil and gas company. He is a retired CEO of the Sanders Morris Harris
Group, a financial services and wealth management company he co-founded in 1987 and was a director until September 2012.
Mr. Morris has served on the boards of several public companies including Capital Title Group (1998-2006), American Equity
Investment Life Holding Company (1997-2006), and Tyler Technologies, Inc. (2002-2005), where he served as Chairman of the
Audit committee. Mr. Morris earned a B.B.A. degree from the University of North Texas.
Richard K. Stoneburner has served as a director of Yuma since September 2013. Mr. Stoneburner has over 35 years of
experience in the exploration and production sector. He began his career as a geologist in 1977. Mr. Stoneburner joined
Petrohawk Energy in 2003, where he led Petrohawk’s exploration program from 2005 to 2007 prior to serving as the company’s
President and COO from 2007 to 2011. When BHP Billiton acquired Petrohawk in 2011, he was appointed President of the North
America Shale Production Division where he managed operations in the Fayetteville Shale, the Haynesville Shale, the Eagle
Ford Shale, and the Permian Basin divisions until December 2012. Mr. Stoneburner currently serves on the Board of Directors of
Newfield Exploration and Cub Energy and serves as a Senior Advisor to the private equity firm Pine Brook Partners, LLC. Prior
to his appointment as Director, Mr. Stoneburner was an advisor to the Yuma board of directors from August 2013 to September
2013. Mr. Stoneburner has a bachelor’s degree in geological sciences from the University of Texas and a master’s degree in
geological sciences from Wichita State University.
Richard W. Volk has served as a director of Yuma since June 2011. Since 1992, Mr. Volk has been a consultant specializing in
the formulation and implementation of long-term strategies for oil and gas companies and other clients. He has been an advisor
to Yuma since 1994. Mr. Volk began his oil and gas career in 1960 with Plains Exploration Company which merged into Cardinal
Petroleum Company in 1969. In 1973, he was appointed President and CEO of Clinton Oil Company, which was subsequently
renamed Energy Reserves Group and in 1985 was acquired by BHP and renamed BHP Petroleum (America), of which Richard
was Chairman and CEO. After presiding over the successful consolidation of BHP Petroleum and Monsanto Oil Company, Mr.
Volk relocated to Australia as General Manager and CEO of BHP Petroleum’s Australia/Asia Division. He returned to the United
States in 1991. Mr. Volk has the degree of Petroleum Engineer from the Colorado School of Mines and a juris doctor degree from
the University of Denver.
117
Yuma Executive Compensation
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
The named executive officers for Yuma’s fiscal year ended December 31, 2013 (the “2013 Fiscal Year”), and who are described
in this Compensation Discussion and Analysis section, are:
· Sam L. Banks, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
· Michael F. Conlon, President and Chief Operating Officer
· Mark D. Hartman, Vice President – Exploration
Philosophy and Objectives of Yuma’s Executive Compensation Program
The primary objectives of Yuma’s executive compensation program are to (i) motivate the named executive officers to help
achieve Yuma’s long- and short-term goals by rewarding superior individual and company performance and (ii) retain Yuma’s
experienced and successful leadership team and continue to recruit outstanding talent by providing compensation that is
competitive with the companies with which Yuma competes for executive services. In particular and as further discussed below,
Yuma believes that its annual incentive plan motivates the named executive officers to strive for outstanding company and
individual performance while the Yuma stock plan maximizes executive officer retention over the course of several years. The
Yuma board of directors and Yuma’s chief executive officer review Yuma’s compensation programs annually to ensure that the
programs continue to achieve their objectives. At the current time, Yuma does not have a compensation committee of its board of
directors.
Yuma’s future success and the ability to create long-term value for its stockholders depend on its ability to attract, retain and
motivate highly talented individuals. Yuma’s compensation program is designed to reward performance that supports its long-
term strategy and achievement of its short-term goals.
The overall objectives of Yuma’s compensation philosophy are to:
help to attract and retain highly talented individuals to contribute to its progress, growth and profitability by being competitive with
·
compensation paid to persons having similar responsibilities and duties in other companies in the same industry;
·align the interests of the individual with those of its stockholders to encourage long-term value creation;
·be directly tied to the attainment of Yuma’s annual performance targets and reflect individual contribution thereto; and
·reflect the unique qualifications, skills, experience and responsibilities of each individual.
Key Components of Yuma’s Compensation Policy
During 2013, the compensation and benefits programs for the named executive officers consisted of the following components,
which are described in greater detail below:
·
Base salary;
Annual incentive awards, based on the achievement of both quantitative and qualitative company performance goals as well as
·
an evaluation of individual performance;
· Long-term restricted stock awards granted under the Yuma stock plan;
· Overriding royalty interests;
· Severance protections; and
· Participation in health and welfare benefits.
118
Setting Executive Compensation
Yuma’s executive compensation program is overseen by the Yuma board of directors. The Yuma board of directors discusses
compensation issues during full board meetings. The Yuma board of directors makes all decisions regarding the compensation
of the chief executive officer based on several factors, including individual performance and business results. Each year, Yuma’s
chief executive officer reviews compensation for all of the named executive officers other than himself as well as compensation
expenses for the business as a whole, and makes recommendations to the Yuma board of directors with respect to the budget
that will be established for compensation paid both to the named executive officers and all other Yuma employees. The Yuma
board of directors then evaluates the chief executive officer’s recommendations and conducts its own independent evaluation,
including a review of current and developing pay practices at companies with which Yuma competes for executive talent, before
setting the compensation budget for the year. Once the compensation budget has been established by the Yuma board of
directors, the chief executive officer has historically made all other decisions with respect to compensation paid to the named
executive officers other than himself, within the parameters of the compensation budget.
In 2013, the Yuma board of directors engaged AG Ferguson & Associates, Inc. (“AG Ferguson”), to provide a broad-based review
of Yuma’s executive compensation program. AG Ferguson provided services to the Yuma board of directors, including, but not
limited to, (i) the provision of market-based compensation data for each of Yuma’s named executive officers, and (ii) the
recommendation of changes to Yuma’s compensation agreements and programs to ensure compliance with best pay practices.
AG Ferguson did not provide any services to Yuma or Yuma’s executive team, only providing services to Yuma’s board of
directors and Yuma board of directors.
Components of Executive Compensation Program
Base Salary
Each named executive officer’s base salary is a fixed component of compensation and does not vary depending on the level of
performance achieved. Base salaries are determined for each named executive based on his position and responsibility. The
Yuma board of directors and Yuma’s chief executive officer review the base salaries for each named executive annually (other
than the chief executive officer as to his own compensation) as well as at the time of any promotion or significant change in job
responsibilities, and in connection with each review they consider individual and company performance over the course of that
year. The base salary for each named executive officer for the 2013 Fiscal Year is reported in the Summary Compensation Table
below.
Annual Incentive Plan
Near the beginning of each fiscal year the Yuma board of directors, in consultation with Yuma’s chief executive officer, and chief
financial officer, establishes the performance metrics and weighting of each metric used to calculate the bonus pool for Yuma’s
annual performance-based incentive plan. The Yuma board of directors selects performance metrics that it believes are important
to the successful growth and development of Yuma. When evaluating Yuma’s qualitative performance for the year, the Yuma
board of directors considers, among other things, the extent to which Yuma achieved its strategic objectives for the year and
Yuma’s performance as a whole. The aggregate sum of the percentages of the target bonus pool earned for each metric is the
total percentage of the target bonus pool that will be paid out.
Long-Term Equity-Based Incentives
Yuma granted restricted stock awards to the named executive officers in 2013 and in prior years. Restricted stock awards entitle
the holder to common stock of Yuma only upon liquidation events meeting certain requisite financial thresholds. The total number
of restricted stock awards held by each named executive officer as of the end of the 2013 Fiscal Year is reported in the table
below entitled “Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End.”
Employment Agreements
Each of the named executive officers is party to an employment agreement with Yuma. These agreements outline the basic terms
of employment including minimum base salary, basic benefits, and vacation days. The agreements also include restrictive
covenants, including an obligation not to compete against Yuma or to solicit employees or customers for a period of two years
following termination of employment, and a requirement to maintain confidentiality regarding certain information obtained during
the executive’s employment with Yuma.
119
The employment agreements with the named executive officers also contain severance provisions in the event of certain
involuntary terminations of employment. Yuma believes that severance protection provisions serve as important retention tools,
since post-termination payments allow employees to leave Yuma’s employment with value in the event of certain terminations of
employment that were beyond their control. Post-termination payments allow management to focus its attention and energy on
making objective business decisions that are in the best interests of Yuma without allowing personal considerations to cloud the
decision-making process. Further, Yuma believes that such protections help maximize stockholder value by encouraging the
named executive officers to review objectively any proposed transaction in determining whether such proposal is in the best
interest of Yuma’s stockholders, whether or not the executive will continue to be employed. Executive officers at other companies
in Yuma’s industry and the general market in which Yuma competes for executive talent commonly have post-termination
payments, and Yuma has consistently provided this benefit to the named executive officers in order to remain competitive in
attracting and retaining skilled professionals in Yuma’s industry.
Overriding Royalty Interest Plan
The Yuma overriding royalty interest plan (the “Yuma royalty plan”) was established in 1983 with the formation of Yuma’s
predecessor for the issuance of a portion of certain overriding royalty interests developed and leased on Yuma prospects from
time to time by Yuma to its employees and management. The purpose of the Yuma royalty plan is to provide an employee
incentive plan to reward the successful generation and drilling of Yuma prospects and provide for employee retention. The Yuma
royalty plan is administered and interpreted by the chief executive officer of Yuma and/or one or more independent directors of
Yuma.
From time to time, Yuma reserves approximately 3.5% of its net revenue interest (based on 100% of the net revenue interest) on
Yuma generated prospects as a pool to satisfy grants of overriding royalties under the Yuma royalty plan. This amount is subject
to the approval of Yuma’s partners in the applicable prospects via absorbing their proportionate share of the overriding royalty
interests. The amount of each actual grant is typically subject to the terms of applicable employment agreements and the vesting
schedules included therein, unless otherwise determined.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Yuma royalty plan provides that nothing in it prohibits Yuma from operating its
business in the ordinary course. Also, Yuma has no obligation to conduct any drilling operations or take any other action upon or
with respect to any property subject to the Yuma royalty plan or to continue to operate any well or to operate or maintain in force
any lease. In addition, Yuma has the right at any time to surrender, abandon or otherwise terminate any such lease in whole or in
part without any liability to any Yuma royalty plan participant.
Working Interest Incentive Plan
The Yuma working interest incentive plan (the “working interest plan”) is intended to foster and promote the development and
execution of Yuma’s business by retaining and motivating the chief executive officer of Yuma, Sam L. Banks, imposing on Mr.
Banks the same risk incurred by Yuma in its core operations, and providing for liquidity for Mr. Banks outside of Yuma. The
working interest plan was originally adopted in 1983 and most recently amended by the Yuma board of directors on August 15,
2011 to limit the parameters of the plan. Mr. Banks has participated in the working interest plan since 1983. The Yuma board of
directors has the right to terminate the working interest plan after December 31, 2014 by providing written notice of termination to
Mr. Banks.
The working interest plan is administered and interpreted by Yuma’s board of directors. The board has the power to take any and
all action the board deems necessary of advisable for the proper operation or administration of the working interest plan.
Subsequent to August 15, 2011, the Yuma board of directors has approved all property acquisitions under the working interest
plan.
From time to time, Yuma may acquire certain real property interests upon which it will generate one or several oil and gas
prospects, or it may acquire a working interest in existing oil and gas prospects. Once Yuma has generated a drillable prospect,
or upon the acquisition of a working interest in an existing prospect from an unaffiliated third party, Mr. Banks has the option to
acquire from Yuma, or such unaffiliated third party directly, a working interest in such prospects in an amount up to a 2.5% of
Yuma’s working interest. In lieu of acquiring a working interest in the prospects from Yuma, Mr. Banks has the right, at his
election, to participate with Yuma on any production acquisitions in which Yuma undertakes in an amount up to 5% of the
working interest to be acquired. The terms under which Mr. Banks acquires any interests will be on no better terms than the terms
promoted to unaffiliated third parties who are drilling participants in Yuma generated prospects.
The purchase price for any interests acquired from Yuma will be determined using the same cost basis as Yuma acquired such
interest. The purchase price for any interests acquired from a third party in a transaction in which Mr. Banks participates will be
determined in arm’s length negotiations. The pricing and payment terms for any interests acquired will be no better than the terms
promoted to unaffiliated third parties who are drilling participants in Yuma generated prospects. Mr. Banks shall pay the purchase
price for any interests acquired from Yuma in cash at the closing of the acquisition, and he will be responsible for obtaining any
financing required to purchase any interests. In no event will Yuma advance the purchase price for any acquisition, assist Mr.
Banks in obtaining financing, or otherwise arrange such financing or any other extension of credit for Mr. Banks in connection
with the working interest plan, and will not provide any guarantee or other credit support to Mr. Banks.
120
Nothing in the working interest plan prohibits Yuma from operating its business in the ordinary course. The working interest plan
automatically terminates upon termination of Mr. Bank’s employment or upon his death. Participating in the working interest plan
does not give Mr. Banks any right to remain in the employ of or continue serving as a director of Yuma or any of its subsidiaries.
Summary Compensation Table
The table below sets forth the annual compensation earned during the 2013 Fiscal Year by Yuma’s “named executive officers,”
as of December 31, 2013:
Name and Principal Position
Year
Salary
($)
Bonus
  
($)
Stock
Awards
($)(1)
Nonequity
incentive plan
  
compensation
($)(2)
Sam L. Banks
Chief Executive Officer
 
Michael F. Conlon
President and Chief Operating Officer   
   
 
Mark D. Hartman
  2013   248,798   10,000    813,691    81,953
   
Vice President – Exploration
2013   400,000   125,000   665,843    -
    
     
   
    
    
   
     
    
   936,616    -
  2013   308,750   -
All Other
Compensation
  
($)(3)
Total 
  
($)
1,537,145
    
    
   923,071
    
    
   906,479
2,727,988 
    
 
    
 
   2,195,437 
 
    
    
 
   2,060,921
(1)
Computed with a fair value computation from Monte Carlo simulation value of (A) $2,941 as of June 30, 2013, and (B) $2,062
as of March 31, 2013. See Note B – “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to the Historical Consolidated
Financial Statements of Yuma for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, relating to the discussion of Level 3
valuation techniques. The valuations do not consider a discount for lack of marketability since Yuma is a privately-held
company and the Yuma common stock is illiquid. This amount does not reflect the actual economic value realized by the
named executive officer.
(2) Annual cash incentive bonus paid in 2014 for performance in Fiscal Year 2013.
(3)
The amounts reported in this column include overriding royalty interests and other perquisites and benefits, as shown in the
following table:
Name
Year
Overriding Royalty
Interest ($)(i)
Sam L. Banks
Michael F. Conlon  2013    923,071
Mark D. Hartman   2013    906,479
2013    1,492,136
Accounting
  
Support ($)(ii)  
    28,870
    -
    -
Engineering
Support ($)(iii)  
    8,547
    -
    -
Land Support
($)(iv)
    7,592
    -
    -
Total ($)
1,537,145 
   923,071  
   906,479
(i)
Denotes revenues received during Fiscal Year 2013 from overriding royalty interests received by the named executive officer
since the beginning of his employment with Yuma.
Mr. Banks was provided personal accounting support in Fiscal Year 2013. The value of personal accounting support allocated
to him in Fiscal Year 2013 includes allocation of the following with respect to such support personnel: (i) cash compensation
(ii)
and Yuma’s portion of payroll taxes; (ii) company−matching contributions to Yuma’s 401(k) plan; and (iii) company−paid
health, dental and life insurance premiums. Mr. Banks does not plan to continue such support after the merger.
(iii)
Mr. Banks was provided personal engineering support in Fiscal Year 2013. The value of personal engineering support
allocated to him in Fiscal Year 2013 includes allocation of the following with respect to such support personnel: (i) cash
compensation and Yuma’s portion of payroll taxes; (ii) company−matching contributions to Yuma’s 401(k) plan; and (iii)
company−paid health, dental and life insurance premiums. Mr. Banks does not plan to continue such support after the merger.
(iv)
Mr. Banks was provided personal land support in Fiscal Year 2013. The value of personal land support allocated to him in
Fiscal Year 2013 includes allocation of the following with respect to such support personnel: (i) cash compensation and
Yuma’s portion of payroll taxes; (ii) company−matching contributions to Yuma’s 401(k) plan; and (iii) company−paid health,
dental and life insurance premiums. Mr. Banks does not plan to continue such support after the merger.
121
Outstanding Equity Awards at 2013 Fiscal Year-End
The following table provides information on outstanding Yuma restricted stock awards held by the named executive officers as of
December 31, 2013 and valued as of December 31, 2013. This table includes the total number of Yuma restricted shares held by
each named executive officer as of the end of the 2013 Fiscal Year.
Name
Stock Awards
Number of shares or units of
 
 
stock that have not vested (#)
  
Sam L. Banks
  
 
  
 
Michael F. Conlon  
  
 
  
 
 
  
Mark D. Hartman
116
223
 
60
222
172
 
242
107
(2) $
(3) $
  
 
(2) $
(4) $
(3) $
  
 
(4) $
(3) $
Market value of shares or units of
 
 
stock that have not vested ($)(1)
358,092
688,401
 
185,220
685,314
530,964
 
747,054
330,309
(1)
Share value of $3,087 using Monte Carlo simulation model prepared by an independent consultant as of December 31, 2013.
See Note B – “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to the Historical Consolidated Financial Statements
of Yuma for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 concerning Level 3 valuation techniques. This value
represents fair value but does not include a discount for a lack of marketability since Yuma is a privately-held company and
the Yuma restricted shares are illiquid.
(2)
Vests upon the earlier of a Liquidity Event and June 30, 2016. The term “Liquidity Event” means either (i) the closing of an
initial public offering of Yuma securities raising gross proceeds of at least $40 million, or (ii) the closing of a merger or stock
exchange between Yuma or its stockholders pursuant to which the Yuma stockholders own in excess of 50% of the common
equity of the surviving company and such surviving company is subject to the reporting obligations under Section 13(a) or
Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act. The closing of the merger described in this proxy statement/prospectus would be deemed
a “Liquidity Event.”
(3)
If a Liquidity Event occurs during the year ended December, 31, 2014, one-third of the Yuma restricted shares will vest upon
the Liquidity Event, one-third will vest on December 31, 2014, and one-third will vest on December 31, 2015. If a Liquidity
Event occurs during the year ended December, 31, 2015, two-thirds of the Yuma restricted shares will vest upon the Liquidity
Event and one-third will vest on December 31, 2015. If a Liquidity Event does to occur prior to December, 31, 2015, the Yuma
restricted shares will vest upon the earlier of a Liquidity Event and June 30, 2016.
(4)
If a Liquidity Event occurs during the year ended December, 31, 2014, two-thirds of the Yuma restricted shares will vest upon
the Liquidity Event and one-third will vest on December 31, 2014. If a Liquidity Event does to occur in the year ended
December, 31, 2014, the Yuma restricted shares will vest upon the earlier of a Liquidity Event and June 30, 2016.
Potential Payments Upon Termination or a Change in Control
Employment Agreements
The employment agreements between each of the named executive officers and Yuma include severance provisions that apply
upon certain involuntary terminations of employment. As a condition to the payment of any severance benefit described below,
Yuma may require the executive to execute and not revoke a release of claims in favor of Yuma. The employment agreements
also contain certain restrictive covenants, including the obligation not to compete against Yuma and a confidentiality
requirement. In the event the executive violates these restrictive covenants, Yuma may cease paying all severance benefits to
the executive and may recover an amount equal to any severance benefits previously paid to the executive under the agreement.
The employment agreements between the named executive officers and Yuma provide that in the event of a termination of
employment by Yuma for cause or by the executive without good reason, the executive will be entitled to accrued but unpaid
base salary and benefits through the date of termination but will forfeit any other compensation from Yuma.
In the event the named executive officer’s employment is terminated by Yuma without cause, or by the executive for good reason,
then the executive will be entitled to receive (i) any earned but unpaid bonus, (ii) the greater of (A) continued payments of base
salary for a period of 12 months (or 24 months for Mr. Banks) and (B) the remainder of the term of the executive’s employment
agreement, assuming continued compliance with restrictive covenants and execution and non-revocation of a release of claims,
and (iii) either the provision of continued participation in Yuma’s health insurance plans or the payment of the executive’s
premiums for continued health insurance pursuant to the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (“COBRA”),
in each case, for a period of the greater of (A) 12 months (or 24 months for Mr. Banks) and (B) the remainder of the term under the
executive’s employment agreement.
122
The employment agreements provide that “cause” generally means: fraud or dishonesty committed by the named executive
officer against or with respect to Yuma, its affiliates or customers as shall be reasonably determined to have occurred by the
board of directors of Yuma; conviction of the named executive officer of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction; continued
violation of the policies outlined in Yuma’s employee handbook; unprofessional behavior as determined by a majority of the
Yuma board of directors; continued and willful failure or refusal by the named executive officer to perform his duties under the
employment agreement if such failure or refusal is not cured within 30 days after written notice is provided to the named
executive officer.
If the employment agreement of any named executive officer is terminated by Yuma or by the named executive officer for reasons
other than for cause, and there are specific prospects or projects which are in the process of being developed, but have not been
drilled at the time of termination, the named executive officer will be entitled to a percentage of the overriding royalty interest he
would have earned if his employment had not been terminated. The percentage is based on the status of the prospect or project
at the time of termination ranging from 10% to 100% of the overriding royalty interest.
Yuma Stock Plan
All unvested Yuma restricted share awards granted under the Yuma stock plan will become immediately vested in the event the
named executive officer’s employment is terminated by the named executive officer with good reason in a change in control. If a
named executive officer’s employment is terminated for any other reason, all unvested restricted stock awards will be
immediately cancelled and forfeited by the executive.
Yuma Director Compensation
For the 2013 Fiscal Year, Yuma’s board of directors included Messrs. Sam L. Banks, James W. Christmas, Frank A. Lodzinski,
Ben T. Morris, Richard K. Stoneburner, and Richard W. Volk. Mr. Banks is employed by Yuma, and as such, receives no
additional compensation for his service on the Yuma board of directors. The table below sets forth the compensation for non-
employee directors of Yuma’s board of directors for the year ended December 31, 2013.
Name
All other
compensation
  
($)(4)
    31,000
Total
  
($)
41,000  
   63,682  
   63,682  
   19,500  
   527,632
Stock
Fees Earned or
Awards
  
 
Paid in Cash
($)(1)(2)
($)
   -
   22,682     -
   22,682     -
   -
   486,632    -
9,500
James W. Christmas (3)
   10,000
   41,000
Frank A. Lodzinski
   41,000
Ben T. Morris
Richard K. Stoneburner (3)   10,000
Richard W. Volk
   41,000
(1)
Each of the directors in the table above currently holds Yuma restricted stock awards. Mr. Christmas holds 11 Yuma restricted
stock awards, Mr. Lodzinski holds 11 Yuma restricted stock awards, Mr. Morris holds 11 Yuma restricted stock awards, Mr.
Stoneburner holds 11 Yuma restricted stock awards, and Mr. Volk holds 236 Yuma restricted stock awards. Stock awards
during 2013 to Mr. Lodzinski, Mr. Morris and Mr. Volk were made April 1, 2013.
(2)
Share value of $2,062 as of December 31, 2013 using Monte Carlo simulation model prepared by an independent consultant.
See Note B – “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to the Historical Consolidated Financial Statements
of Yuma for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 concerning Level 3 valuation techniques. This value
represents fair value but does not include a discount for a lack of marketability since Yuma is a privately-held company and
the Yuma restricted shares are illiquid.
(3)
Messrs. Christmas and Stoneburner joined the Yuma board of directors on September 19, 2013 and received approximately
one-quarter of the pro rata amount of the cash retainer paid by Yuma to the members of its board of directors.
(4)
Mr. Christmas received consulting fees in the amount of $31,000 for consulting services he provided to Yuma in 2013. Mr.
Stoneburner received consulting fees in the amount of $9,500 for consulting services he provided to Yuma in 2013.
Attracting and retaining qualified non-employee directors is critical to the future value growth and governance of Yuma. Yuma’s
board of directors developed a competitive director compensation program based upon market-based compensation data for
each of Yuma’s directors.
Yuma intends that, following the closing of the merger, each non-employee director will generally be entitled to receive an annual
cash retainer of approximately $40,000 plus an annual equity grant with a fair market value of approximately $50,000 at the time
of grant. In addition, directors who are placed in leadership roles will be entitled to supplemental compensation in connection
with their additional duties. Yuma expects that the audit committee chair will be entitled to receive approximately an additional
$15,000 payment annually, and chairs of any other standing committees of the board will each be entitled to receive
approximately an additional $8,000 payment annually. Directors who are also employees of Yuma will continue to receive no
additional compensation for their service on the Yuma board of directors.
123
Corporate Governance of Pyramid Following the Merger
Classes of Directors
If the merger agreement is approved and adopted by the Pyramid stockholders and the Yuma stockholders, at the consummation
of the merger, three directors will be appointed to an initial one-year term and three directors will be appointed to an initial two-
year term (and at each annual meeting thereafter, directors will be elected to succeed those directors whose terms then expire,
and each person so elected will serve for a two-year term).
Controlled Company and Board Independence
Because Sam L. Banks will control a majority of Pyramid’s outstanding common stock following the merger, Pyramid is expected
to be a “controlled company” under the NYSE MKT corporate governance standards. A controlled company is not required to
meet the NYSE MKT corporate governance rules that require its board of directors to have a majority of independent directors
and independent compensation and nominating and corporate governance committees. Notwithstanding Pyramid’s status as a
controlled company, Pyramid will remain subject to the NYSE MKT corporate governance standard that requires it to have an
audit committee composed entirely of independent directors. As a result, Pyramid must have at least two independent directors
on its audit committee.
While these provisions will apply to Pyramid as long as Pyramid remains a “controlled company,” Pyramid expects that, as of
completion of the merger, its board of directors will consist of a majority of independent directors within the meaning of the NYSE
MKT listing standards currently in effect. It has not yet been determined which persons will serve as members of the audit
committee of the Pyramid board of directors or any other board committee.
Committees of the Board of Directors of Pyramid Following the Merger
The members of the committees of Pyramid’s board of directors will not be appointed until Pyramid’s board of directors is fully
constituted immediately following the merger. At that time, Pyramid’s board of directors will make determinations with respect to
each committee member’s independence in accordance with the exchange listing standards and SEC rules and regulations and
each committee will adopt or revise its committee charter as applicable.
Following the merger, the combined company intends to post the committee charters on its website at www.yumaenergyinc.com.
Code of Conduct and Ethics
Pyramid has in place a Code of Ethics it adopted in 2012 that is applicable to all of its directors, officers and employees. A copy
of the Code of Ethics is available at no charge to any person who sends a request for a copy to the Corporate Secretary, Pyramid
Oil Company, P.O. Box 832, Bakersfield, California 93302. A copy of the Code of Ethics is also available on Pyramid’s website
at www.pyramidoil.com.
124
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT OF YUMA
The following sets forth information regarding the beneficial ownership of Yuma common stock and preferred stock as of August
6, 2014 by:
each person to be known by Yuma management to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of its outstanding shares of
·
common stock;
· each of Yuma’s executive officers;
· each of Yuma’s directors; and
· all of Yuma’s current executive officers and directors as a group.
As of August 6, 2014, approximately 54,280 shares of Yuma common stock were outstanding, approximately 16,531 shares of
Series A preferred stock of Yuma were outstanding, and approximately 20,192 shares of Series B preferred stock of Yuma were
outstanding. Unless otherwise noted, the mailing address of each person or entity named below is 1177 West Loop South, Suite
1825, Houston, Texas 77027.
Name
Series A
 
Preferred Stock
Executive Officers:
Sam L. Banks
Michael F. Conlon
Kirk F. Sprunger
Mark D. Hartman
James J. Jacobs
 
Non-Employee Directors:
James W. Christmas
Frank A. Lodzinski
Ben T. Morris
Richard K. Stoneburner
Richard W. Volk
 
Officers and Directors as a Group (ten
persons):
-
   -
   -
   -
   -
 
  
  
 
   341
   -
   130
   -
   -
471
Percent of
 
  
Class (1)
     
    -
    -
    -
    -
    -
     
     
    2.1
    -
    *
    -
    -
-
   -
   -
   -
   -
%   1,638
162
   109
   -
   -
2.8
%   1,909
9.4
%  54,234     99.9
* Represents less than one percent.
(1)The percentage is based upon 16,531 shares of Yuma Series A preferred stock issued and outstanding on August 6, 2014.
Series B 
 
Preferred Stock
Common 
 
Stock
Percent (3)
Percent of
 
 
Class (2)
    
   -
   -
   -
   -
   -
    
    
   8.1
(4)   *
   *
 
   -
 
   -
54,083     99.6
 
  60
 
  75
 
  -
 
  16
 
   
 
 
   
%  -
 
  -
  -
 
  -
 
  -
*
    *
    -
    *
     
     
    -
    -
    -
    -
    -
%
%
(3)The percentage is based upon 20,192 shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock issued and outstanding on August 6, 2014.
(3)The percentage is based upon 54,280 shares of Yuma common stock issued and outstanding on August 6, 2014.
(4)
Includes 162 shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock held in the name of Azure Energy, LLC (“Azure”). Mr. Lodzinski is the
manager of Azure and has the power to vote and dispose of all shares held by Azure. Mr. Lodzinski disclaims beneficial
ownership of the shares held by Azure, except to the extent of his pecuniary interests therein.
125
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID
The following sets forth information regarding the beneficial ownership of Pyramid common stock as of August 6, 2014 by:
each person to be known by Pyramid management to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of its outstanding shares of
·
common stock;
· each of Pyramid’s executive officers;
· each of Pyramid’s directors; and
· all of Pyramid’s current executive officers and directors as a group.
As of August 6, 2014, approximately 4,888,085 shares of Pyramid common stock were outstanding. Unless otherwise noted, the
mailing address of each person or entity named below is P. O. Box 832, Bakersfield, California 93302.
Name
Executive Officer and Directors:
Michael D. Herman (4)
Common Stock (2)(3)  Percent (1) 
 
    
   2,102,580
%
42.5
Rick D. Kasch (5)
Gary L. Ronning (6)
 
Executive Officer and Directors as a Group (3 persons):   2,168,253
 
Holders of 5% or More:
Barry Honig (7)
Michael Brauser (8)
324,814
   417,760
35,548
   30,125
*
    *
     
    43.9
     
     
    6.6
    8.5
%
 
 
%
%
(2)
* Represents less than one percent.
(1)The percentage is based upon 4,888,085 shares of common stock of Pyramid issued and outstanding on August 6, 2014.
Amounts reported by each director do not include shares held in the name of his spouse, adult children and other relatives
because the director does not have sole or shared voting or investment control over the shares, and each director disclaims
beneficial ownership of such shares.
Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and includes voting and/or investing power with
respect to securities. Pyramid believes that, except as otherwise noted and subject to applicable community property laws,
each person named in the above table has sole investment and voting power with respect to the securities shown as
beneficially owned by such person. Additionally, shares of Pyramid common stock subject to options that are currently
exercisable, or exercisable within 60 days, are deemed to be outstanding and to be beneficially owned by the person or group
(3)
holding such options for the purpose of computing the percentage ownership of such person or group, but are not treated as
outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage ownership of any other person or group.
(4) Includes 50,000 shares of Pyramid common stock that are subject to currently exercisable options.
(5)
(6)
(7) Mr. Honig’s address is 555 South Federal Highway, #450, Boca Raton, Florida 33432.
Includes 25,000 shares that are subject to currently exercisable options.
Includes 30,000 shares that are subject to currently exercisable options.
(8)
Includes 16,832 shares held by Grander Holdings, Inc. 401(k) Profit Sharing Plan, which shares are deemed to be indirectly
owned and controlled by Michael Brauser, its Trustee, and 215,865 shares held jointly by Mr. Brauser with his wife. Mr.
Brauser’s address is 440 Biscayne Blvd., Suite 850, Miami, Florida 33137.
126
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
AND MANAGEMENT OF PYRAMID UPON CONSUMMATION OF THE MERGER
The following sets forth information regarding the beneficial ownership of Pyramid upon consummation of the merger, by:
each person or group who is known to the management of Pyramid and Yuma to become the beneficial owner of more than 5%
·
of its outstanding shares of common stock of Pyramid upon consummation of the merger;
·each person expected to be a director or executive officer of Pyramid; and
· all directors and executive officers of Pyramid as a group.
The percent of common stock of Pyramid is based on 71,224,786 shares of common stock of Pyramid expected to be outstanding
after giving effect of the merger. Unless otherwise noted, the mailing address of each person or entity named below is 1177 West
Loop South, Suite 1825, Houston, Texas 77027.
Name
Executive Officers and Directors:
Sam L. Banks
Michael F. Conlon
Kirk F. Sprunger
Mark D. Hartman
James J. Jacobs
James W. Christmas
Frank A. Lodzinski (3)
Ben T. Morris
Richard K. Stoneburner
Richard W. Volk
 
Executive Officers and Directors as a Group (10 persons):  42,841,102
Common Stock (1)  Percent (2) 
 
   
%
  40,961,355
  200,680
 
 
  194,886
 
  148,999
 
  41,848
  940,887
%
 
  67,564
 
  165,888
 
  -
  118,995
 
 
   
%
57.5
    *
    *
    *
    *
    1.3
    *
    *
    -
    *
     
    60.1
* Represents less than one percent.
(1)Assumes that each share of Yuma common stock is exchanged for 756.34 shares of Pyramid common stock upon the closing
of the merger, which is subject to adjustment in the event of dissenting shares of Yuma preferred stock and/or common stock.
(2)The percent of common stock of Pyramid is based on 71,224,786 shares of common stock of Pyramid outstanding after giving
effect of the merger, and assuming no dissenting shares of Yuma common stock or Yuma preferred stock.
(3)
Includes 62,266 shares of Pyramid common stock to be held by in the name of Azure Energy, LLC (“Azure”) resulting from the
conversion of 162 shares of Yuma Series B preferred stock. Mr. Lodzinski is the manager of Azure and has the power to vote
and dispose of all shares held by Azure. Mr. Lodzinski disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares held by Azure, except to
the extent of his pecuniary interests therein.
127
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
On August 1, 2014, Pyramid Oil Company (“Pyramid”) and Yuma Energy, Inc. (“Yuma”), entered into an amended and restated
agreement and plan of merger and reorganization (the “merger agreement”) pursuant to which, and subject to the conditions set
forth therein, a newly formed subsidiary of Pyramid, Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., referred to herein as “Merger Subsidiary”
will be merged with and into Yuma. Pursuant to the merger agreement, at closing, Yuma stockholders will receive an aggregate
of 66,336,701 shares of Pyramid common stock. The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information
has been derived from and should be read together with the historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes of
Pyramid and Yuma, which are contained elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information and explanatory notes combine the historical financial
statements of Pyramid and Yuma as of March 31, 2014 with respect to the balance sheet information (using currently available
fair value information for Pyramid) and as of January 1, 2013 (with respect to the statements of operations information for the
three months ended March 31, 2014 and for the year ended December 31, 2013). The unaudited pro forma condensed combined
financial information shows the pro forma impact of the merger of Pyramid and Yuma on the historical financial position and
results of operations under the purchase method of accounting with Yuma treated as the acquirer. Under this method of
accounting, the assets and liabilities of Pyramid are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the date the merger is effective.
As part of the merger, Yuma’s outstanding preferred stock will be converted to common stock of the combined company and
Yuma’s derivative liability will be reclassified to equity of the combined company; and these adjustments have been made to
reflect the conversion of Yuma’s preferred stock to common stock.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information is presented for illustrative purposes only and does not
indicate the financial results of the combined companies had the companies actually been combined and had the impact of
possible revenue enhancements and expense efficiencies, among other factors, been considered. In addition, as explained in
more detail in the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information, the allocation of
the purchase price reflected in the pro forma condensed combined financial information is subject to adjustment and may vary
from the actual purchase price allocation that will be recorded at the time the merger becomes effective.
128
Yuma Energy, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Balance Sheet
As of March 31, 2014
Yuma
 
Historical
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts    14,778,576     985,568
Note receivable
$6,365,305
4,000
Pyramid
  
Historical
Merger
  
Pro Forma
Adjustments
     
     
  $6,697,532     -
    -
    -
-
Yuma
 
Pro Forma
Combined
    
 
 $13,062,837  
   15,764,144  
   4,000
7,909,603
    -
201,925
    281,700
    74,607
-
   256,973
    -
   146,964
   181,166
    -
 $21,732,984   $8,241,332     -
     
    
     
     
    
     
   25,563,673     -
    -
   153,309,206    20,295,802     (9,128,880 )(1)
   178,872,879    20,295,802     (9,128,880 )
Prepayments
Deferred taxes
Other deferred charges
Total current assets
 
Oil and natural gas properties (full cost method):
Not subject to amortization
Subject to amortization
TOTAL PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Less:  accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization   (90,138,293 )   (18,288,721)   18,288,721 (1)(6)
NET OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
 
Other operating property and equipment, at cost
Less: accumulated depreciation and amortization
Net other operating property and equipment
 
Other assets
Receivable from affiliate
Commodity derivatives
Long-term investments
Goodwill
Other noncurrent assets
TOTAL OTHER ASSETS
 
Total Assets
 
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable, principally trade
Commodity derivatives
Asset retirement obligations
Liability for deferred compensation
Other accrued liabilities
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES
 
Long-Term Debt, net of current maturities
Bank debt
 
Other Noncurrent Liabilities
Preferred stock derivative liability, Series A and B
Asset retirement obligations
Commodity derivatives
Deferred taxes
Restricted stock units
Other deferred credits
TOTAL NONCURRENT LIABILITIES
 
Preferred Stock
Subject to mandatory redemption
 
Equity
Preferred stock
Common stock
Capital in excess of par value of common stock
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Accumulated earnings (deficit)
TOTAL EQUITY
 
Total Liabilities and Equity
458,898
 
   428,664
   255,773
 
 $29,974,316  
    
 
    
 
   25,563,673  
   164,476,128 
   190,039,801 
   (90,138,293 )
   99,901,508  
   88,734,586     2,007,081     9,159,841
 
 
    
     
    
 
   7,702,242
 
    4,294,228     1,302,772
   2,105,242
(1)
   (1,849,555 )
   (1,849,555 )   (3,151,162 )   3,151,162
(1)
 
   5,852,687
    1,143,066     4,453,934
   255,687
 
 
    
     
     
    
 
    
 
     
    
     
 
 
   -
    -
    -
   -
 
 
   684,295
    -
   684,295
    -
 
 
   1,139,149
    1,139,149     -
   -
 
   7,909,603
 
   -
    -
(1)
   613,810
 
    261,380
   352,430
 
   10,346,857  
    1,400,529     7,909,603
   1,036,725
 
    
 
    
     
 
 $146,075,368 
 $111,759,982  $12,792,008   $21,523,378  
    
 
     
    
 
    
 
     
    
 
 $18,003,721  
  $-
 $17,424,428   $579,293
 
 
   1,762,788
    -
   1,762,788
 
   1,783,756
 
    -
   1,783,756
 
 
   282,314
    -
   -
 
   3,101,607
 
   1,394,422
    1,500,000
(2)
   24,934,186  
   22,365,394     1,068,792     1,500,000
 
    
 
     
    
 
    
 
    
     
 
   30,565,000  
   30,565,000     -
 
 
    
    
     
 
    
 
    
     
 
   -
 
   49,818,384     -
   10,357,840  
   9,042,561
   12,766
 
   12,766
   16,639,747  
   12,288,426     (413,500
 
   158,654
   158,654
   61,673
 
   61,673
 $27,230,680  
 $71,382,464   $901,779
    
 
     
    
 
    
    
     
 
   -
   35,948,291     -
 
    
     
    
    
 
    
     
 
   -
    -
   -
    -
   542
   71,225
 
    1,847,384     146,062,089(1)(6)(7)(8)   150,578,396 
   2,668,923
   2,383
   2,383
    -
 
   (51,173,015 )   8,974,053     (45,107,540 )(2)(7)
   (87,306,502 )
   63,345,502  
   (48,501,167 )   10,821,437     101,025,232 
    
    
 
 
 $111,759,982  $12,792,008   $21,523,378  
 $146,075,368
1,315,279     -
 
    -
    -
 
)   4,764,821
(1)
    -
 
    -
 
  $(45,053,563 )
     
 
     
 
    (35,948,291 )(7)
     
     
    -
    70,683
-
     
     
    (49,818,384 )(7)
-
    -
    282,314
    207,185
(7)(8)
-
-
    -
See accompanying Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Statements
129
Yuma Energy, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statement of Operations
For the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014
Yuma
 
Historical
-
-
-
    -
Pyramid
  
Historical
9,417
    -
    -
    -
    -
Revenues
Sales of natural gas and crude oil
Other revenue
TOTAL REVENUES
 
Expenses
Marketing cost of sales
Lease operating
Re-engineering and workovers
General and administrative - stock based compensation
General and administrative - other
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Asset retirement obligation accretion expense
(Gain) loss on asset disposal
Valuation allowances
Bad debt expense
Recovery of bad debts
TOTAL EXPENSES
 
Income (loss) from operations
 
Other Income (Expense)
Change in fair value of preferred stock derivative liability
Interest expense
Interest income
Bank mandated commodity derivatives novation cost
Other, net
TOTAL OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
 
NET INCOME (LOSS) FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Income tax expense (benefit)
 
NET INCOME (LOSS)
 
Preferred Stock, Series A and Series B
Accretion
Dividends paid in cash
 
Dividends paid-in-kind
 
 
 
NET INCOME (LOSS) AVAILABLE TO COMMON STOCKHOLDERS  $(576,927 ) $(158,579 ) $(1,386,900 )
 
 
EARNINGS (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE
Yuma
Merger
 
Pro Forma
  
Pro Forma
Combined
Adjustments
    
 
    
     
 
 $11,399,038 
 $10,355,439  $1,043,599    -
 
   241,493
 
   241,493
    -
 
   11,640,531 
   10,596,932    1,043,599    -
 
 
    
     
    
 
    
 
    
     
 
 $321,317
 
 $321,317
    -
 
   4,188,404  
   3,658,505     529,899     -
 
 
   1,510
    -
   1,510
 
   47,914
 
   47,914
    -
 
   3,774,124  
   3,150,071     624,053     -
 
(3)    6,132,851  
   5,726,083     103,970     302,798
 
   151,561
   142,144
 
 
   -
   -
 
 
   -
   -
 
 
   27,128
   27,128
 
   -
 
   -
 
 $14,644,809 
 $13,074,672  $1,267,339  $302,798
 
    
 
    
 
   (3,004,278 )
   (2,477,740 )   (223,740 )   (302,798 )
 
    
     
    
     
 
 
     
    
     
    
 
    (1,472,030 )(7)    -
   1,472,030     -
 
   (139,419 )
    -
   (139,419 )   -
 
 
   10,710
    -
   1,049
    9,661
 
   -
    -
   -
 
    -
 
   102
    -
   7,102
 
    7,000
 
   (121,607 )
    (1,472,030 )
   1,333,762     16,661
    
    
     
 
 
   (1,143,978 )   (207,079 )   (1,774,828 )
   (3,125,885 )
   (849,000 )   (48,500 )   (105,979 )(5)   (1,003,479 )
    
    
 
 
   (2,122,406 )
   (294,978 )   (158,579 )   (1,668,849 )
 
    
    
     
 
    
    
 
     
 
    (281,949 )(7)    -
 
   281,949
 
   -
    -
   -
 
   -
    -
   -
    
     
    
 
 $(2,122,406 )
-
    -
    -
-
    -
    -
    -
    -
Basic
Diluted
 
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON SHARES
OUTSTANDING
Basic
$(10.64
 $(10.64
) $(0.03
) $(0.03
) $(0.02
) $(0.02
)
)
$(0.03
 $(0.03
)
)
54,236
4,888,085    66,336,701
71,224,786
Diluted
54,236
4,888,085    66,336,701
71,224,786
See accompanying Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Statements
130
Yuma Energy, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statement of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, 2013
Revenues
Sales of natural gas and crude oil
Other revenue
TOTAL REVENUES
 
Expenses
Marketing cost of sales
Lease operating
Re-engineering and workovers
General and administrative - stock based compensation
General and administrative - other
Deferred compensation
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Asset retirement obligation accretion expense
(Gain) loss on asset disposal
Valuation allowances
Bad debt expense
Recovery of bad debts
TOTAL EXPENSES
 
Income (loss) from operations
 
Other Income (Expense)
Change in fair value of preferred stock derivative liability
Interest expense
Interest income
Bank mandated commodity derivatives novation cost
Other, net
TOTAL OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
 
NET INCOME (LOSS) FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Income tax expense (benefit)
 
NET INCOME (LOSS)
 
Preferred Stock, Series A and Series B
Accretion
Yuma
 
Historical
Pyramid
  
Historical
37,477
    -
)   (809,476 )   -
    151,243     (151,243
    -
)   -
Yuma
Merger
 
Pro Forma
  
Pro Forma
Combined
Adjustments
    
 
 
    
     
 $32,467,427 
 
 $28,075,603   $4,391,824    -
   1,066,969  
 
   1,066,969     -
    -
   33,534,396 
 
   29,142,572     4,391,824    -
 
    
 
     
     
    
    
 
 
     
    
     
 $1,234,308  
 
 $1,234,308     -
    -
   11,425,129 
 
   9,316,364     2,108,765    -
   2,521,707  
 
   2,521,707     -
    -
   616,471
 
 
   452,058
    164,413     -
   6,849,170  
 
   5,603,475     1,245,695    -
   1,063,445  
 
   -
    1,063,445    -
(3)    13,285,973 
   12,077,368     507,157     701,448
   705,974
 
 
   668,497
   (828,783 )
 
   (19,307
)(4)   -
 
   -
 
 
   193,601
   193,601
   (2,520
 
)
   (2,520
 $37,064,475 
 
 $32,045,551   $4,468,719  $550,205
 
    
 
    
   (3,530,079 )
)
   (2,902,979 )   (76,895 )   (550,205
 
    
 
     
     
    
 
     
 
    
    
     
    26,258,559 (7)    -
 
   (26,258,559)   -
 
   (567,676 )
    -
)   -
   (567,676
 
   47,855
    -
 
    40,519
   7,336
   (175,000 )
 
    -
)   -
   (175,000
   (72,953
    -
 
)
   (72,953
)   -
    (26,258,559)
   (767,774 )
   (27,066,852)   40,519
    
    
 
 
     
   (29,969,831)   (36,376 )   25,708,354  
   (4,297,853 )
)(5)   2,694,055  
   3,080,272     (193,645 )   (192,572
    
    
 
 
   (6,991,908 )
   (33,050,103)   157,269     25,900,926  
 
    
 
     
    
     
 
    
     
 
    
     
    (1,101,972 )(7)   -
   1,101,972     -
-
    -
Dividends paid in cash
Dividends paid-in-kind
 
 
NET INCOME (LOSS) AVAILABLE TO COMMON STOCKHOLDERS  $(39,710,256) $157,269   $32,561,079
)(7)   -
 
    (145,900
    (5,412,281 )(7)   -
 
    
 
     
 $(6,991,908 )
145,900
    -
   5,412,281     -
EARNINGS (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE
Basic
Diluted
 
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON SHARES
OUTSTANDING
Basic
Diluted
$(732.18
 $(732.18
) $0.03
) $0.03
$0.49
  $0.49
$(0.10
 $(0.10
)
)
54,236
   54,236
4,888,085    66,336,701  
    4,888,085    66,336,701
71,224,786 
   71,224,786
See accompanying Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Statements
131
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Statements
1.
These adjustments reflect the elimination of the components of Pyramid’s historical stockholders’ equity, the estimated value of
consideration to be paid by Yuma in the merger using the closing price of Pyramid common stock on May 28, 2014 and to
reflect the adjustments to the historical book values of Pyramid’s assets and liabilities as of March 31, 2014 to their estimated
fair values, in accordance with acquisition accounting. The following table reflects the preliminary allocation of the total
purchase price of Pyramid to the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed and the resulting goodwill based on the
preliminary estimates of fair value:
Purchase Price(i):
   4,888,085  
Shares of Pyramid common stock held by Pyramid stockholders
Total Pyramid common stock to be issued to Pyramid stockholders   4,888,085
Pyramid common stock price
 $5.60
 
Fair value of Pyramid common stock issued
 $27,373,276 
Total purchase price
 $27,373,276 
Estimated Fair Value of Liabilities Assumed:
    
 
Current liabilities
 $1,068,792  
Long-term deferred tax liability(ii)
   4,764,821  
Fair value of options assumed by Yuma(iv)
   206,718
 
Other non-current liabilities
   901,779
 
Amount attributable to liabilities assumed
 $6,942,110  
Total purchase price plus liabilities assumed
 $34,315,386 
Estimated Fair Value of Assets Acquired:
    
 
Current assets
 $8,241,332  
Natural gas and oil properties(iii)
   11,166,922 
Net other operating property and equipment
   5,597,000  
Other non-current assets
   1,400,529  
Amount attributable to assets acquired
 $26,405,783 
Goodwill(i)
 $7,909,603  
 
    
 
Eliminate Pyramid historical additional paid-in capital
 $(1,847,384 )
Fair value of Pyramid common stock to be issued net of par value    27,368,388 
Pro forma adjustments to additional paid-in capital
 $25,521,004
(i) Under the terms of the merger agreement, Pyramid stockholders will own 7% of the combined entity. The total purchase price
is based upon the closing price of $5.60 per share of Pyramid common stock on May 28, 2014 and 4,888,085 shares of Pyramid
common stock estimated to be outstanding at the effective time of the merger. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the
actual purchase price will be determined based on the fair value of Pyramid common stock issued on the closing date of the
merger.
Assuming 4,888,085 shares of common stock are issued to Pyramid stockholders to consummate the merger, a 10 percent
increase (decrease) in the closing price of Pyramid’s common stock would increase (decrease) goodwill by approximately $2.7
million.
(ii) Yuma will receive carryover tax basis in Pyramid’s assets and liabilities because the merger will not be a taxable transaction
under the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). Based upon the preliminary purchase price
allocation, a step-up in financial reporting carrying value related to the property to be acquired from Pyramid is expected to result
in a Yuma deferred tax liability of approximately $16.6 million, an increase of approximately $4.8 million to Pyramid’s existing
$11.9 million deferred tax liability.
(iii) Weighted average commodity prices utilized in the determination of the pro forma fair value of natural gas and oil properties
were $3.89 per Mcf of natural gas and $87.78 per barrel of oil, after adjustment for transportation fees and regional price
differentials. An increase or decrease in commodity prices as of the closing date of the merger will result in a corresponding
increase or decrease in the fair value of the properties and related deferred tax liabilities and a decrease or increase to goodwill.
(iv) To adjust for the outstanding stock options to purchase Pyramid common stock that will be assumed by Yuma after the
merger, assuming that no options are exercised prior to the effective time of the merger. The $206,718 fair value of the assumed
options was calculated using Black-Scholes valuation model with assumptions for the following variables: current Pyramid
common stock price, risk-free interest rates, and Pyramid’s stock volatility.
132
2.Pro forma adjustments to certain components of stockholders’ equity are as follows:
Eliminate Pyramid’s historical retained earnings
 $(8,974,053 )
Accrue estimated transaction costs to be incurred by Yuma(i)   (1,500,000 )
 $(10,474,053)
Pro forma adjustments to accumulated earnings (deficit)
(i) To accrue for estimated transaction costs of $1.5 million related to the merger with Pyramid not reflected in the financial
statements. No adjustments have been made to the unaudited pro forma income statement as these costs are non-recurring in
nature.
3.
To adjust the historical depletion, depreciation and amortization (DD&A) provision to the estimated total for the combination of
Yuma and Pyramid under the Full Cost method of accounting. The assets of Yuma at cost were combined with Pyramid’s
assets based on the fair market value of the oil and gas properties and other operating property and equipment of Pyramid as
estimated at the time of the merger. The DD&A was recalculated assuming the combined company’s assets under the Full
Cost method of accounting. For oil and gas properties, the units of production methodology was applied consistent with the Full
Cost method of accounting. For other property and equipment the assets were depreciated based upon the estimated useful life
of the properties. This resulted in an increase to DD&A of $701,448 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and $302,798 for
the three months ended March 31, 2014.
4.
To eliminate the historical oil and natural gas properties valuation allowance as valuation allowances of oil and natural gas
properties are evaluated on a country by country cost center basis under Full Cost rules as compared to a field by field basis
under Successful Efforts rules. There would not have been an impairment as measured under Full Cost accounting, therefore
an adjustment is necessary to eliminate the historical valuation allowance recorded in the year ended December 31, 2013.
5.To adjust the income tax provision for the estimated effects of combining Yuma’s and Pyramid’s operations and other, pre-tax
pro forma adjustments (which were adjusted for income taxes using a combined federal and state tax rate of 35%).
6.
To adjust Pyramid’s accumulated DD&A and valuation allowances in the amount of $1,225,799 to the accumulated DD&A that
Pyramid would have recorded had it been reporting its oil and gas operations under the Full Cost method of accounting.
7.
To record the conversion of Yuma’s Series A and Series B preferred stock to Yuma Common stock and to record the transfer
and elimination of the associated derivative liability. As part of the reorganization of Yuma and the merger, Yuma’s preferred
stock will be converted into Yuma common stock, and as a result there will be no future accretion expense or dividends related
to the Yuma preferred stock. The adjustments to the pro forma balance sheet relating to the derivative conversion takes place in
two steps. The first step is to mark the derivative liability to market (estimated at $34,633,487 at closing) increasing the overall
derivative liability to $84,451,871. The increase in the derivative liability results in an increase to accumulated deficit by
$34,663,487. The second step is to record the conversion of Yuma’s Series A and Series B preferred stock to Yuma common
stock $35,948,291 and to eliminate the derivative liability of $84,451,871 which results in a credit to capital in excess of par of
$120,378,311. In the adjustments to the pro forma income statement, the change in fair value of the preferred stock derivative
liability was eliminated along with the accretion and dividend expenses related to Yuma’s preferred stock.
8.
To record the issuance of 66.3 million shares of Pyramid common stock to the holders of Yuma common stock (including the
conversion of Yuma preferred stock to Yuma common stock) and the attribution of a par value to the 4,888,085 outstanding
shares of Pyramid common stock. This resulted in an increase of par value to $70,683.
133
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK AND DIVIDENDS
Pyramid
Pyramid common stock is listed on the NYSE MKT and traded under the symbol “PDO.” The following table sets forth, for the
calendar quarters indicated, the high and low reported sales prices per share of Pyramid common stock on the NYSE MKT.
High   Low  
 
    
 
Quarter Ended
 
    
 
    
 
2012
 $6.23  $3.82 
March 31
   5.20    4.05 
June 30
   4.85    4.07 
September 30
   4.56    3.75 
December 31
 
    
 
    
 
2013
 $4.48  $4.04 
March 31
   4.33    3.90 
June 30
   4.74    4.15 
September 30
   5.77    4.61 
December 31
    
 
 
    
 
2014
 $7.15  $4.86 
March 31
June 30
 $6.30  $5.03 
September 30 (through August 6, 2014) $5.92  $5.30
As of August 6, 2014, there were 190 record holders of Pyramid common stock.
Yuma
Historical market price information regarding Yuma common stock is not provided because there is no public market for Yuma
common stock.
As of August 6, 2014, there were 19 holders of Yuma common stock and approximately 132 holders of Yuma preferred stock.
Yuma has not paid any cash dividends on its common stock to date and does not intend to pay cash dividends prior to the
completion of the merger.
Pyramid Future Dividend Policy
The holders of Pyramid common stock receive dividends if and when declared by the board of directors out of legally available
funds. Pyramid (to be renamed Yuma Energy, Inc.) has neither declared nor paid any cash dividends on its common stock during
the past three years. Pyramid does not expect to declare or pay any cash or other dividends in the foreseeable future on its
common stock.
134
DESCRIPTION OF PYRAMID CAPITAL STOCK
Set forth below is a description of the material terms of Pyramid’s capital stock. However, this description is not complete and is
qualified by reference to Pyramid’s articles of incorporation and bylaws. Copies of Pyramid’s articles of incorporation and bylaws
have been filed with the SEC and are incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. Please read “Where You
Can Find More Information.” You should also be aware that the summary below does not give full effect to the provisions of
statutory or common law that may affect your rights as a Pyramid stockholder.
Common Stock
Pyramid is authorized to issue 50,000,000 shares of common stock, no par value per share. As of August 6, 2014, Pyramid had
approximately 4,888,085 shares of common stock outstanding, no shares of preferred stock outstanding and there were
outstanding options to purchase 105,000 shares of Pyramid’s common stock.
Upon filing of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid at the time of completion of the merger, Pyramid’s authorized
common stock will consist of 300,000,000 shares of common stock, no par value per share.
The following summary describes certain provisions of Pyramid’s common stock, but does not purport to be complete and is
subject to and qualified in its entirety by the applicable provisions of the California General Corporation Law and Pyramid’s
articles of incorporation and bylaws.
Pyramid has one class of common stock. Holders of its common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters to be voted
upon by stockholders, provided that stockholders have cumulative voting rights in the election of directors. Holders of shares of
common stock are entitled to receive on a pro rata basis such dividends, if any, as may be declared from time to time by the
Pyramid board of directors in its discretion from funds legally available for that use. They are also entitled to share on a pro rata
basis in any distribution to stockholders upon Pyramid’s liquidation, dissolution or winding up. Common stockholders do not
have preemptive rights to subscribe to any additional stock issuances by Pyramid, and neither the common stockholders nor
Pyramid have the right to require the redemption of their shares or the conversion of their shares into any other class of Pyramid
stock.
Preferred Stock
Pyramid is authorized to issue 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock. As of August 6, 2014, no shares of Pyramid preferred stock
were outstanding and no options to purchase shares of preferred stock were outstanding.
Pyramid’s board of directors has the authority to issue shares of preferred stock in one or more series and to fix the rights,
preferences, privileges and restrictions of each series, which may include dividend rights, conversion rights, voting rights, terms
of redemption, redemption prices, liquidation preferences, sinking fund terms and the number of shares that constitute any series.
The board of directors may exercise this authority without any further action by Pyramid’s stockholders.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for Pyramid common stock is Computershare Trust Company, N.A., 250 Royall Street, Canton,
Massachusetts 02021. Its telephone number is (800) 962-4284.
Listing
Yuma has reserved with the NYSE MKT the symbol “YUMA” in the event the merger agreement is approved and adopted, and
the merger is consummated. Upon the closing of the merger and the approval of Pyramid’s listing application, Pyramid will
announce the final symbol approved by the NYSE MKT.
135
FUTURE STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS
2014 Pyramid Annual Stockholder Meeting and Stockholder Proposals
If the merger agreement is approved and adopted by Pyramid’s stockholders and if the merger is completed in 2014, Pyramid will
not hold an annual meeting of stockholders in 2014. If Pyramid determines that the merger will not be completed in 2014,
Pyramid currently intends to hold an annual meeting of stockholders in 2014 on a date yet to be determined subsequently. In that
event, Pyramid will provide notice in a Current Report on Form 8-K or a Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of the date fixed for the
annual meeting, as well as the deadline for the submission of stockholder proposals to be included in its proxy statement for the
annual meeting.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Effective January 1, 1990, John H. Alexander, a former officer and director of Pyramid, participated with a group of investors that
acquired the mineral and fee interest on one of Pyramid’s oil and gas leases (“Santa Fe Energy lease”) in the Carneros Creek
field after Pyramid declined to participate. The thirty-three percent interest owned by Mr. Alexander represents a minority interest
in the investor group. Royalties on oil and gas production from this property paid to the investor group approximated $131,000 in
2013, $222,500 in 2012 and $226,200 in 2011.
While he was a director, Mr. Alexander abstained from voting on any of the above matters that were brought before the Pyramid
board of directors involving the Santa Fe Energy lease.
As described in Note 14. “Settlement Agreement” of the Notes to the Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid that are included
in this proxy statement/prospectus, on September 30, 2013, Pyramid and Mr. Alexander entered into several agreements in
connection with the resignation of Mr. Alexander as Pyramid’s President and Chief Executive Officer and as director. See Note
14. “Settlement Agreement,” of the Notes to the Historical Financial Statements of Pyramid.
Yuma Overriding Royalty Interest Plan
The Yuma overriding royalty interest plan (the “Yuma royalty plan”) was established in 1983 with the formation of Yuma’s
predecessor for the issuance of a portion of certain overriding royalty interests developed and leased on Yuma prospects from
time to time by Yuma to its employees and management. The purpose of the Yuma royalty plan is to provide an employee
incentive plan to reward the successful generation and drilling of Yuma prospects and provide for employee retention. The Yuma
royalty plan is administered and interpreted by the chief executive officer of Yuma and/or one or more independent directors of
Yuma.
From time to time, Yuma reserves approximately 3.5% of its net revenue interest (based on 100% of the net revenue interest) on
Yuma generated prospects as a pool to satisfy grants of overriding royalties under the Yuma royalty plan. This amount is subject
to the approval of Yuma’s partners in the applicable prospects via absorbing their proportionate share of the overriding royalty
interests. The amount of each actual grant is typically subject to the terms of applicable employment agreements and the vesting
schedules included therein, unless otherwise determined.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Yuma royalty plan provides that nothing in it prohibits Yuma from operating its
business in the ordinary course. Also, Yuma has no obligation to conduct any drilling operations or take any other action upon or
with respect to any property subject to the Yuma royalty plan or to continue to operate any well or to operate or maintain in force
any lease. In addition, Yuma has the right at any time to surrender, abandon or otherwise terminate any such lease in whole or in
part without any liability to any Yuma royalty plan participant.
Since 1983 Yuma has entered into assignments of overriding royalty interests (the “ORRI Assignments”) with certain of its
employees, including the Yuma named executive officers, pursuant to the Yuma royalty plan. An ORRI Assignment grants a
direct or indirect interest in an overriding royalty interest generally equal to 0.10 to 1.0 percent in any interests that Yuma acquires
within select counties in Texas and Louisiana. The table below discloses the revenues received by each of the Yuma named
executive officers during the three years ended December 31, 2013 resulting from ORRI Assignments received by each of the
Yuma named executive officers since the beginning of their employment with Yuma.
Sam L. Banks
Year Ended December 31,
 
 2013
  2011
 $1,492,136  $920,885  $475,659
2012
Michael F. Conlon $923,071   $303,131  $102,352 
Mark D. Hartman  $906,479   $285,988  $61,234
136
Yuma Working Interest Incentive Plan
The Yuma working interest incentive plan (the “working interest plan”) is intended to foster and promote the development and
execution of Yuma’s business by retaining and motivating the chief executive officer of Yuma, Sam L. Banks, imposing on Mr.
Banks the same risk incurred by Yuma in its core operations, and providing for liquidity for Mr. Banks outside of Yuma. The
working interest plan was originally adopted in 1983 and most recently amended by the Yuma board of directors on August 15,
2011 to limit the parameters of the plan. Mr. Banks has participated in the working interest plan since 1983. The Yuma board of
directors has the right to terminate the working interest plan after December 31, 2014 by providing written notice of termination to
Mr. Banks.
The working interest plan is administered and interpreted by Yuma’s board of directors. The board has the power to take any and
all action the board deems necessary of advisable for the proper operation or administration of the working interest plan.
Subsequent to August 15, 2011, the Yuma board of directors has approved all property acquisitions under the working interest
plan.
From time to time, Yuma may acquire certain real property interests upon which it will generate one or several oil and gas
prospects, or it may acquire a working interest in existing oil and gas prospects. Once Yuma has generated a drillable prospect,
or upon the acquisition of a working interest in an existing prospect from an unaffiliated third party, Mr. Banks has the option to
acquire from Yuma, or such unaffiliated third party directly, a working interest in such prospects in an amount up to a 2.5% of
Yuma’s working interest. In lieu of acquiring a working interest in the prospects from Yuma, Mr. Banks has the right, at his
election, to participate with Yuma on any production acquisitions in which Yuma undertakes in an amount up to 5% of the
working interest to be acquired. The terms under which Mr. Banks acquires any interests will be on no better terms than the terms
promoted to unaffiliated third parties who are drilling participants in Yuma generated prospects.
The purchase price for any interests acquired from Yuma will be determined using the same cost basis as Yuma acquired such
interest. The purchase price for any interests acquired from a third party in a transaction in which Mr. Banks participates will be
determined in arm’s length negotiations. The pricing and payment terms for any interests acquired will be no better than the terms
promoted to unaffiliated third parties who are drilling participants in Yuma generated prospects. Mr. Banks shall pay the purchase
price for any interests acquired from Yuma in cash at the closing of the acquisition, and he will be responsible for obtaining any
financing required to purchase any interests. In no event will Yuma advance the purchase price for any acquisition, assist Mr.
Banks in obtaining financing, or otherwise arrange such financing or any other extension of credit for Mr. Banks in connection
with the working interest plan, and will not provide any guarantee or other credit support to Mr. Banks.
Nothing in the working interest plan prohibits Yuma from operating its business in the ordinary course. The working interest plan
automatically terminates upon termination of Mr. Bank’s employment or upon his death. Participating in the working interest plan
does not give Mr. Banks any right to remain in the employ of or continue serving as a director of Yuma or any of its subsidiaries.
The following table sets forth, with respect to Mr. Banks’s working interests acquired under the working interest plan (since the
adoption of the plan in 1983), the oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids revenues he received, lease operating expenses he
paid, the resulting net cash flow before capital expenditures, capital expenditures he paid and net cash flow after capital
expenditures during each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013 and the three months ended March 31,
2014.
Natural gas and oil revenues
Lease operating expenditures
Three Months
 
Ended March
 31, 2014
 $ 277,704
 $ (111,669
Year Ended December 31,
2011
2012
2013
 
  $892,685   $1,302,791  $739,408  
) $(477,362) $(588,136 ) $(625,370)
Net cash flow
Capital expenditures
 
Net after capital expenditures and before income taxes $ (58,856
$ 166,035
 $ (224,891
$415,323   $714,655   $114,038  
) $(221,857) $(452,405 ) $(28,935 )
     
 
) $193,466   $262,250   $85,103
The foregoing information has been derived solely from Yuma’s company records. Accordingly, it may not include all revenues
and expenses for the Yuma working interest plan interests that are not operated by Yuma. Mr. Banks’s working interests are his
personal assets and Yuma does not restrict sales, dispositions or financing transactions involving Yuma working interests
previously assigned to him by Yuma. Mr. Banks pays Yuma for lease operating expenses and capital expenditures related to his
working interests acquired under the working interest plan promptly upon receipt of each invoice. As of the years ended
December 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011, Mr. Banks had outstanding payables to Yuma for such Yuma working interests in the
amounts of $135,080, $42,617, and $196,491, respectively, and each such payable was promptly paid upon receipt of the
invoices.
137
RESTATED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF PYRAMID OIL COMPANY PROPOSALS
Yuma and Pyramid agreed in the merger agreement that the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid would be in the form
attached as Annex F to this proxy statement/prospectus. Under the terms of the merger agreement, the restated articles of
incorporation would be adopted by Pyramid and its stockholders and become effective immediately prior to the completion of the
merger. The provisions of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid were negotiated by the parties to the merger
agreement and are considered by the parties to be an integral part of the larger negotiated transaction.
Under the merger agreement, approval of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals by the Pyramid stockholders
is a condition to the obligation of each of the parties to complete the merger. Accordingly, if Pyramid stockholders do not approve
each proposal related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, Yuma or Pyramid may determine not to complete the
merger and instead may terminate the merger agreement.
BECAUSE THE PARTIES WILL NOT BE OBLIGATED TO COMPLETE THE MERGER UNLESS EACH PROPOSAL
RELATED TO THE RESTATED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF PYRAMID IS APPROVED, A VOTE AGAINST ANY
PROPOSAL RELATED TO THE RESTATED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF PYRAMID MAY HAVE THE SAME
EFFECT AS A VOTE AGAINST THE MERGER.
The following are the provisions set forth in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that are being submitted to Pyramid
stockholders for approval:
Increase Authorized Number of Shares of Common Stock Proposal. The restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid increases
·
the authorized shares of common stock from 50 million to 300 million shares of common stock, no par value per share, of
Pyramid (the “increase authorized shares of common stock proposal,” item 2A);
Classification of Board Proposal. A provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that creates a classified board of
·
directors with two classes and staggered terms (the “board classification proposal,” item 2B);
No Cumulative Voting Proposal. A provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid eliminates cumulative voting in
·
the election of directors (the “elimination of cumulative voting proposal,” item 2C); and
Name Change Proposal. A provision in the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid that changes the name of Pyramid after
·
the merger to “Yuma Energy, Inc.” (the “name change proposal,” item 2D).
By approving each of the proposals related to the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, Pyramid stockholders will also be
approving the proposed restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid in its entirety.
The Pyramid board of directors unanimously has approved and recommends that you vote FOR the approval of each of the
restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals.
You should also carefully read the full text of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, which is attached as Annex F to
this proxy statement/prospectus. The following summary description of the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid is
qualified by reference to the attached full text of the form of restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid of Pyramid attached to
this proxy statement/prospectus.
Proposal 2A: The Increase Authorized Number of Shares of Common Stock Proposal
(Item 2A on the proxy card)
Approval of the increase in the number of shares of common stock of Pyramid from 50 million shares to 300 million shares of
common stock, no par value per share, of Pyramid.
Required Vote
The affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock is required to approve the
restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals. If you vote to abstain or fail to vote, it will have the same effect as voting
“AGAINST” these proposals. If you fail to vote, it will make it more difficult to have a quorum. Accordingly, it is important that you
provide Pyramid with your proxy or attend the special meeting in person so that your shares are counted towards the quorum and
this requirement.
The Pyramid board recommends a vote “FOR” the increase in the authorized shares of common stock proposal (Item 2A).
138
Proposal 2B: The Board Classification Proposal
(Item 2B on the proxy card)
Approval of the classification of the Pyramid board of directors with staggered terms. The Pyramid board of directors will be
divided into two classes with staggered two-year terms. Only one class of directors will be elected at each annual meeting of
stockholders, with the other class continuing for the remainder of its two-year term. The restated articles of incorporation of
Pyramid provides that any director elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the remainder of the full term of the class of
directors in which the vacancy occurred, rather than the next annual meeting of stockholders as would otherwise be the case,
and until his or her successor is elected and qualifies.
Required Vote
The affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock is required to approve the
restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals. If you vote to abstain or fail to vote, it will have the same effect as voting
“AGAINST” these proposals. If you fail to vote, it will make it more difficult to have a quorum. Accordingly, it is important that you
provide Pyramid with your proxy or attend the special meeting in person so that your shares are counted towards the quorum and
this requirement.
The Pyramid board recommends a vote “FOR” the board classification proposal (Item 2B).
Proposal 2C: The Elimination of Cumulative Voting Proposal
(Item 2C on the proxy card)
Approval of the elimination of cumulative voting in the election of directors is specifically denied in the restated articles of
incorporation of Pyramid. This allows stockholders one vote per share per candidate and does not allow stockholders to
cumulate their votes and cast them all for one or more candidates.
Required Vote
The affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock is required to approve the
restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals. If you vote to abstain or fail to vote, it will have the same effect as voting
“AGAINST” these proposals. If you fail to vote, it will make it more difficult to have a quorum. Accordingly, it is important that you
provide Pyramid with your proxy or attend the special meeting in person so that your shares are counted towards the quorum and
this requirement.
The Pyramid board recommends a vote “FOR” the elimination of cumulative voting proposal (Item 2C).
Proposal 2D: The Name Change Proposal
(Item 2D on the proxy card)
Approval of the change in Pyramid’s name from “Pyramid Oil Company” to “Yuma Energy, Inc.”
Required Vote
The affirmative vote of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Pyramid common stock is required to approve the
restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid proposals. If you vote to abstain or fail to vote, it will have the same effect as voting
“AGAINST” these proposals. If you fail to vote, it will make it more difficult to have a quorum. Accordingly, it is important that you
provide Pyramid with your proxy or attend the special meeting in person so that your shares are counted towards the quorum and
this requirement.
The Pyramid board recommends a vote “FOR” the name change proposal (Item 2D).
139
PYRAMID 2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN PROPOSAL
At the Pyramid special meeting, Pyramid stockholders will be asked to approve the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan, which we refer to as the 2014 Plan.
Summary of Principal Terms of the 2014 Plan
The following is a summary description of the material features of the 2014 Plan. The statements made in this proxy
statement/prospectus regarding the 2014 Plan should be read in conjunction with and are qualified in their entirety by reference
to the 2014 Plan, a copy of which is attached as Annex G to this proxy statement/prospectus.
The 2014 Plan if approved will be effective until the tenth anniversary of the date the 2014 Plan is adopted by the Pyramid
stockholders. The purposes of the 2014 Plan are to create incentives which are designed to motivate participants to put forth
maximum effort toward Pyramid’s success and growth and to enable it to attract and retain experienced individuals who, by their
position, ability and diligence are able to make important contributions to Pyramid’s success.
Under the 2014 Plan, Pyramid may grant stock options, restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, stock appreciation rights,
performance units, performance bonuses, stock awards and other incentive awards to Pyramid’s employees or those of
Pyramid’s subsidiaries or affiliates. Pyramid may also grant nonqualified stock options, restricted stock awards, restricted stock
units, stock appreciation rights, performance units, stock awards and other incentive awards to any persons rendering consulting
or advisory services and non-employee directors, subject to the conditions set forth in the 2014 Plan. Generally, all classes of
Pyramid’s employees are eligible to participate in the 2014 Plan.
The 2014 Plan currently provides that a maximum of 8,900,000 shares of Pyramid’s common stock may be issued in conjunction
with awards granted under the 2014 Plan. At December 31, 2013, approximately 84,643 shares of Pyramid’s common stock
remain available for awards to be granted under the Pyramid stock plan. If the 2014 Plan is approved and adopted as proposed
herein, approximately 8,900,000 shares of Pyramid’s common stock would be available for new awards to be granted under the
2014 Plan. Awards that are forfeited under the 2014 Plan will again be eligible for issuance as though the forfeited awards had
never been issued. Similarly, awards settled in cash will not be counted against the shares authorized for issuance upon
exercise of awards under the 2014 Plan.
The 2014 Plan as proposed provides that a maximum of 1,000,000 shares of Pyramid’s common stock could be issued in
conjunction with incentive stock options granted under the 2014 Plan. The 2014 Plan also limits the aggregate number of shares
of Pyramid’s common stock that may be issued in conjunction with stock options and/or stock appreciation rights to any eligible
employee in any calendar year to 1,500,000 shares. The 2014 Plan also limits the aggregate number of shares of Pyramid’s
common stock that may be issued in conjunction with the grant of restricted stock awards, restricted stock unit awards,
performance unit awards, stock awards and other incentive awards to any eligible employee in any calendar year to 700,000
shares.
Administration
Pyramid’s board of directors or the compensation committee will administer the 2014 Plan. The members of the compensation
committee will serve at the pleasure of Pyramid’s board of directors. With respect to awards to be made to any of Pyramid’s
directors, the compensation committee will make recommendations to Pyramid’s board of directors as to:
· which of such persons should be granted awards;
·the terms of proposed grants or awards to those selected by Pyramid’s board of directors to participate;
· the exercise price for options and stock appreciation rights; and
· any limitations, restrictions and conditions upon any awards.
Awards to any of Pyramid’s directors under the 2014 Plan must be approved by Pyramid’s board of directors.
In connection with the administration of the 2014 Plan, the board of directors or the compensation committee, with respect to
awards to be made to any officer, employee or consultant who is not one of Pyramid’s directors, will:
·determine which employees and other persons will be granted awards under the 2014 Plan;
· grant the awards to those selected to participate;
·determine the exercise price for options and stock appreciation rights; and
140
· prescribe any limitations, restrictions and conditions upon any awards.
In addition, the board of directors or the compensation committee will:
·
interpret the 2014 Plan; and
make all other determinations and take all other actions that may be necessary or advisable to implement and administer the
·
2014 Plan.
Types of Awards
The 2014 Plan permits the board of directors or the compensation committee to make several types of awards and grants,
including awards of shares of restricted stock, awards of restricted stock units, the grant of options to purchase shares of
Pyramid’s common stock, awards of stock appreciation rights, or SARs, awards of performance units, awards of performance
bonuses, stock awards and other incentive awards.
Restricted Stock.    Restricted shares of Pyramid’s common stock may be granted under the 2014 Plan subject to such terms and
conditions, including forfeiture and vesting provisions, and restrictions against sale, transfer or other disposition as Pyramid’s
board of directors or compensation committee may determine to be appropriate at the time of making the award. In addition to any
time vesting conditions determined by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee, vesting and/or the grant of
restricted stock awards may be subject to Pyramid’s achievement of specified performance criteria based upon Pyramid’s
achievement of certain operational, financial or stock performance criteria. In addition, Pyramid’s board of directors or
compensation committee may direct that share certificates representing restricted stock be inscribed with a legend as to the
restrictions on sale, transfer or other disposition, and may direct that the certificates, along with a stock power signed in blank by
the employee, be delivered to and held by Pyramid until such restrictions lapse. Shares of restricted stock will immediately vest
upon the occurrence of a change of control. Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee, in its discretion, may
provide for a modification or acceleration of vesting of restricted stock in the event of death or permanent disability of the
employee, or for such other reasons as Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee may deem appropriate in the
event of the termination of employment of the covered employee.
Restricted Stock Units.    A restricted stock unit entitles the recipient to receive a payment from Pyramid, following the lapse of
restrictions on the award, equal to the fair market value of a share of Pyramid’s common stock. The 2014 Plan provides for
payment in the form of shares of Pyramid’s common stock or cash. Restricted stock units may be granted under the 2014 Plan
subject to such terms and conditions, including forfeiture and vesting provisions, as Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation
committee may determine to be appropriate at the time of making the award. In addition to any time vesting conditions
determined by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee, vesting and/or the grant of restricted stock units may be
subject to Pyramid’s achievement of specified performance criteria based upon Pyramid’s achievement of certain operational,
financial or stock performance criteria. Restricted stock units would immediately vest upon the occurrence of a change of control.
Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee, in its discretion, may provide for a modification or acceleration of
vesting of restricted stock units in the event of death or permanent disability of the employee, or for such other reasons as
Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee may deem appropriate in the event of the termination of employment of
the covered employee.
The 2014 Plan also permits Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee to grant tandem cash dividend rights or
dividend unit rights with respect to restricted stock units. A cash dividend right is a contingent right to receive an amount in cash
equal to the cash distributions made by Pyramid with respect to a share of Pyramid’s common stock during the period the tandem
restricted stock unit is outstanding. A grant of cash dividend rights may provide that such cash payments shall be paid directly to
the participant at the time of payment of the related dividend, be credited to a bookkeeping account subject to the same vesting
and payment provisions as the tandem restricted stock unit award (with or without interest in the discretion of Pyramid’s board of
directors or compensation committee), or be subject to such other provisions or restrictions as determined in the discretion of
Pyramid’s board of directors or Compensation Committee. A dividend unit right is a contingent right to have an additional number
of restricted stock units credited to a participant in respect of a restricted stock unit award equal to the number of shares of
Pyramid’s common stock that could be purchased at fair market value with the amount of each cash distribution made by
Pyramid with respect to a share of Pyramid’s common stock during the period the tandem restricted stock unit is outstanding. A
grant of dividend unit rights may provide that such dividend unit rights shall be subject to the same vesting and payment
provisions as the tandem restricted stock unit award or be subject to such other provisions and restrictions as determined in the
discretion of Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee.
141
Stock Options.    Stock options are contractual rights entitling an optionee who has been granted a stock option to purchase a
stated number of shares of Pyramid’s common stock at an exercise price per share determined at the date of the grant. Options
are evidenced by stock option agreements with the respective optionees. The exercise price for each stock option granted under
the 2014 Plan will be determined by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee at the time of the grant. Either
Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee will also determine the duration of each option; however, no option may
be exercisable more than ten years after the date the option is granted. Within the foregoing limitations, either Pyramid’s board of
directors or compensation committee may, in its discretion, impose limitations on the exercise of all or some options granted
under the 2014 Plan, such as specifying minimum periods of time after grant during which options may not be exercised. The
2014 Plan provides for acceleration of the right of an individual employee to exercise his or her stock option in the event Pyramid
experiences a change of control. No cash consideration is payable to Pyramid in exchange for the grant of options.
The 2014 Plan provides that the stock options may either be incentive stock options within the meaning of Section 422 of the
Code, or nonqualified options, which are stock options other than incentive stock options within the meaning of Sections 82 and
421 of the Code.
Incentive Stock Options.    Incentive stock options may be granted only to Pyramid’s employees or employees of Pyramid’s
subsidiaries, and must be granted at a per share exercise price not less than the fair market value of Pyramid’s common stock on
the date the incentive stock option is granted. In the case of an incentive stock option granted to a stockholder who owns shares
of Pyramid’s outstanding stock of all classes representing more than 10% of the total combined voting power of all of Pyramid’s
outstanding stock of all classes entitled to vote in the election of directors, the per share exercise price may not be less than
110% of the fair market value of Pyramid’s common stock on the date the incentive stock option is granted and the term of such
option may not exceed five years. As required by the Code, the aggregate fair market value, determined at the time an incentive
stock option is granted, of Pyramid’s common stock with respect to which incentive stock options may be exercised by an
optionee for the first time during any calendar year under all of Pyramid’s incentive stock option plans may not exceed $100,000.
Nonqualified Options.    Nonqualified options are stock options which do not qualify as incentive stock options under the Code.
Nonqualified options may be granted to Pyramid’s directors and consultants, as well as to Pyramid’s employees, or those
directors, consultants, and employees of subsidiaries in which Pyramid has a controlling interest. The exercise price for
nonqualified options will be determined by the board of directors or compensation committee at the time the nonqualified options
are granted, but may not be less than the fair market value of Pyramid’s common stock on the date the nonqualified option is
granted. Nonqualified options are not subject to any of the restrictions described above with respect to incentive stock options.
Incentive stock options and nonqualified options are treated differently for federal income tax purposes as described below under
“—Tax Treatment.”
The exercise price of stock options may be paid in cash, in whole shares of Pyramid’s common stock, or in a combination of cash
and Pyramid’s common stock, equal in value to the exercise price. The 2014 Plan provides that the exercise price of stock
options may be paid (1) in cash, (2) subject to the prior approval by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee, in
whole shares of Pyramid’s common stock, (3) subject to the prior approval by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation
committee, by withholding shares of Pyramid common stock which otherwise would be acquired on exercise, or (4) subject to the
prior approval by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee, by a combination of the foregoing, equal in value to
the exercise price. Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee may also permit a stock option to be exercised by a
broker-dealer acting on behalf of a participant through procedures approved by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation
committee, as applicable.
Stock Appreciation Rights.    Awards of stock appreciation rights, which Pyramid refers to as SARs, entitle the recipient to receive
a payment from Pyramid equal to the amount of any increase in the fair market value of the shares of Pyramid’s common stock
subject to the SAR award between the date of the grant of the SAR award and the exercise date. The 2014 Plan provides for
payment in the form of shares of Pyramid’s common stock or cash. The 2014 Plan provides for acceleration of the right of an
individual employee to exercise his or her SAR in the event Pyramid experiences a change of control.
Performance Unit Awards.    Performance units entitle the recipient to receive a certain target, maximum or minimum value in
cash or Pyramid common stock per unit upon the achievement of performance goals established by Pyramid’s board of directors
or compensation committee.
Performance Bonuses.    A performance bonus entitles the recipient to receive a cash bonus upon the attainment of a
performance target established by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee. Payments of performance bonuses
are made within 60 days of the certification by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee that the performance
target(s) have been achieved. The maximum amount that may be made subject to the grant of performance bonuses to any
eligible employee in any calendar year may not exceed $1,500,000. The 2014 Plan permits payment of performance bonuses in
the form of cash or Pyramid’s common stock.
Stock Awards.    A stock award entitles the recipient to shares of Pyramid’s common stock not subject to vesting or forfeiture
restrictions. Stock awards are awarded with respect to such number of shares of Pyramid’s common stock and at such times as
Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee may determine, and Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation
committee may require a participant to pay a stipulated purchase price for each share of Pyramid’s common stock covered by a
stock award.
142
Other Incentive Awards.    The 2014 Plan permits the grant of other incentive awards based upon, payable in or otherwise related
to, in whole or in part, shares of Pyramid’s common stock if Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee determines
that such other incentive awards are consistent with the purposes of the 2014 Plan. Such other incentive awards may include,
but are not limited to, Pyramid’s common stock awarded as a bonus, dividend equivalents, convertible or exchangeable debt
securities, other rights convertible or exchangeable into Pyramid’s common stock, purchase rights for Pyramid’s common stock,
awards with value and payment contingent upon Pyramid’s performance or any other factors designated by Pyramid’s board of
directors or compensation committee, and awards valued by reference to the book value of Pyramid’s common stock or the value
of securities or the performance of specified subsidiaries. Long-term cash awards are also permitted under the 2014 Plan. Cash
awards are also permitted as an element of or a supplement to any awards permitted under the 2014 Plan. Awards are permitted
in lieu of obligations to pay cash or deliver other property under the 2014 Plan or under other plans or compensation
arrangements, subject to any applicable provision under Section 16 of the Exchange Act.
Performance Criteria
The performance criteria to be used for purposes of awards under the 2014 Plan are set in the sole discretion of Pyramid’s board
of directors or compensation committee and may be described in terms of objectives that are related to the individual participant
or objectives that are company-wide or related to a subsidiary, division, department, region, function or business unit of Pyramid
in which the participant is employed or with respect to which the participant performs services, and may consist of one or more or
any combination of the following criteria: operational criteria, including reserve additions/replacements, finding and development
costs, production volume and production costs; financial criteria, including earnings (net income, earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), earnings per share), free cash flow, cash flow, operating income, general and
administrative expenses, ratios of debt to equity, debt to cash flow, debt to EBITDA, EBITDA to interest, return on assets, return
on equity, return on invested capital, and profit returns/margins; and stock performance criteria, including stock price
appreciation, total stockholder return and relative stock price performance.
The 2014 Plan provides Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee discretion to determine whether all or any
portion of a restricted stock award, restricted stock unit award, performance unit award, performance bonus, stock award or other
incentive award is intended to satisfy the requirements for “performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code
(the “162(m) Requirements”). The performance criteria for any such award that is intended to satisfy the 162(m) Requirements
would be established in writing by a committee composed of two or more “outside directors” within the meaning of
Section 162(m) of the Code based on one or more performance criteria listed above not later than 90 days after commencement
of the performance period with respect to such award or any such other date as may be required or permitted for “performance-
based compensation” under the 162(m) Requirements, provided that the outcome of the performance in respect of the goals
remains substantially uncertain as of such time. At the time of the grant of an award and to the extent permitted under the 162(m)
Requirements, the committee may provide for the manner in which the performance goals would be measured in light of
specified corporate transactions, extraordinary events, accounting changes or other similar occurrences. All determinations made
by the committee as to the establishment or the achievement of performance goals, or the final settlement of an award intended to
satisfy the 162(m) Requirements would be required to be made in writing. The committee would have discretion to reduce, but
not to increase, the amount payable and/or the number of shares of Pyramid’s common stock to be granted, issued, retained or
vested pursuant to any such award.
Transferability
Nonqualified options are transferable on a limited basis. Other types of awards authorized under the 2014 Plan are not
transferable other than by will or by the laws of descent and distribution. In no event may a stock option be exercised after the
expiration of its stated term.
Termination
Rights to restricted stock, restricted stock units, SARs, performance units, performance bonuses and other incentive awards
which have not vested will generally terminate immediately upon the holder’s termination of employment with Pyramid or any of
its subsidiaries or affiliates for any reason other than disability or death. Unless Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation
committee specifies otherwise in an award agreement, if an employee’s employment with Pyramid or any of its subsidiaries or
affiliates terminates as a result of death, disability or retirement, the employee (or personal representative in the case of death)
may exercise any vested incentive stock options for a period of up to three months after such termination (one year in the case of
death or disability in lieu of the three-month period) and any vested nonqualified option during the remaining term of the option.
Unless Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee specifies otherwise in an award agreement, if an employee’s
employment with Pyramid or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates terminates for any other reason, the employee may exercise any
vested option for a period of up to three months after such termination. Unless Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation
committee specifies otherwise in an award agreement, if a consultant ceases to provide services to Pyramid or any of its
subsidiaries or affiliates or a director terminates service as Pyramid’s director, the unvested portion of any award will be forfeited
unless otherwise accelerated by Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee. Unless Pyramid’s board of directors or
compensation committee specifies otherwise in an award agreement, a consultant or director may have three years following the
date he or she ceases to provide consulting services or ceases to be a director, as applicable, to exercise any nonqualified
options which are otherwise exercisable on the date of termination of service. No stock option or SAR may be exercised
following the expiration date of the stock option or SAR.
143
Dilution; Substitution
The 2014 Plan provides protection against substantial dilution or enlargement of the rights granted to holders of awards in the
event of stock splits, recapitalizations, mergers, consolidations, reorganizations or similar transactions. The 2014 Plan provides
that, upon the occurrence of a change of control event, Pyramid’s board of directors or compensation committee would have
discretion, without the consent of any participant or holder of an award, to the extent permitted by applicable law, to cancel
awards and make payments in respect thereof in cash; replace awards with other rights or property selected by Pyramid’s board
of directors or compensation committee; provide that awards will be assumed by a successor or survivor entity (or a parent or
subsidiary thereof) or be exchanged for similar rights or awards based on the equity of the successor or survivor (or a parent or
subsidiary thereof); adjust outstanding awards as appropriate to reflect the change of control event; accelerate any vesting
schedule to which an award is subject; provide that awards are payable; and/or provide that awards terminate upon such event.
Amendment
Pyramid’s board of directors may amend the 2014 Plan at any time. However, without stockholder approval, the 2014 Plan may
not be amended in a manner that would increase the number of shares that may be issued under the 2014 Plan, materially
modify the requirements as to eligibility for participation in the 2014 Plan, or materially increase the benefits to participants
provided by the 2014 Plan.
Tax Treatment
The following is a brief description of the federal income tax consequences, under existing law, with respect to awards that may
be granted under the 2014 Plan. This summary is not intended to provide or supplement tax advice to eligible employees. This
summary is not intended to be exhaustive and does not describe state, local or foreign consequences, employment tax
consequences, or the effect, if any, of gift, estate and inheritance taxes.
Restricted Stock.    A recipient of restricted stock generally will not recognize taxable income until the shares of restricted stock
become freely transferable or are no longer subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. At that time, the excess of the fair market
value of the restricted stock over the amount, if any, paid for the restricted stock is taxable to the recipient as ordinary income. If a
recipient of restricted stock subsequently sells the shares, he or she generally will realize capital gain or loss (long-term or short-
term depending on the holding period) in the year of such sale in an amount equal to the difference between the amount realized
from the sale and his or her basis in the stock, equal to the price paid for the stock, if any, plus the amount previously included in
income as ordinary income with respect to such restricted shares.
A recipient has the opportunity, within certain limits, to fix the amount and timing of the taxable income attributable to a grant of
restricted stock. Section 83(b) of the Code permits a recipient of restricted stock, which is not yet required to be included in
taxable income, to elect, within 30 days of the award of restricted stock, to include in ordinary income immediately the difference
between the fair market value of the shares of restricted stock at the date of the award and the amount paid for the restricted
stock, if any. The election permits the recipient of restricted stock to fix the amount of income that must be recognized by virtue of
the restricted stock grant. Subject to Section 162(m) of the Code, Pyramid generally will be entitled to a deduction in the year the
recipient is required (or elects) to recognize income by virtue of receipt of restricted stock, equal to the amount of taxable income
recognized by the recipient.
Restricted Stock Units.    A recipient of restricted stock units generally will not recognize taxable income until the recipient
receives cash and/or the transfer of shares in satisfaction of the restricted stock unit award. At that time, an amount equal to the
aggregate of any cash and the fair market value of any shares received is taxable to the recipient as ordinary income. If a
recipient of restricted stock units subsequently sells any shares so transferred, he or she generally will realize capital gain or loss
(long-term or short-term depending on the holding period) in the year of such sale in an amount equal to the difference between
the amount realized from the sale and his or her basis, equal to the amount previously included in income as ordinary income
with respect to such shares received in satisfaction of a restricted stock unit award. Subject to Section 162(m) of the Code,
Pyramid generally will be entitled to a deduction in the year the recipient is required to recognize income by virtue of receipt of
cash or shares, equal to the amount of taxable income recognized by the recipient.
144
Incentive Stock Options.    An optionee will not realize taxable income upon the grant of an incentive stock option. As long as the
optionee has been an employee of Pyramid or of one of its permissible corporate subsidiaries from the date of grant through the
date the incentive stock option is exercised and if the incentive stock option is exercised during his or her period of employment
and within three months after termination, the optionee will not recognize taxable income upon exercise. Upon exercise,
however, the amount by which the fair market value of the shares with respect to which the incentive stock option is exercised
(determined on the date of exercise) exceeds the exercise price paid will be an item of tax preference to which the alternative
minimum tax may apply, depending on each optionee’s individual circumstances. If the optionee does not dispose of the shares
of Pyramid’s common stock acquired by exercising an incentive stock option within two years from the date of the grant of the
incentive stock option or within one year after the shares are transferred to the optionee, when the optionee later sells or
otherwise disposes of the stock, any amount realized by the optionee in excess of the exercise price will be taxed as a long-term
capital gain and any loss will be recognized as a long-term capital loss. Pyramid generally will not be entitled to an income tax
deduction with respect to the grant or exercise of an incentive stock option.
If any shares of Pyramid’s common stock acquired upon exercise of an incentive stock option are resold or disposed of before the
expiration of the prescribed holding periods, the optionee will realize ordinary income instead of capital gain. The amount of the
ordinary income realized will be equal to the lesser of (i) the excess of the fair market value of the stock on the exercise date over
the exercise price; or (ii) in the case of a taxable sale or exchange, the amount of the gain realized. Any additional gain would be
either long-term or short-term capital gain, depending on whether the applicable capital gain holding period has been satisfied. In
the event of a premature disposition of shares of stock acquired by exercising an incentive stock option, subject to
Section 162(m) of the Code, Pyramid generally would be entitled to a deduction equal to the amount of ordinary income realized
by the optionee.
If an optionee uses already owned shares of common stock to pay the exercise price under an incentive stock option, the
resulting tax consequences will depend upon whether the already owned shares of common stock are “statutory option stock,”
and, if so, whether the statutory option stock has been held by the optionee for the applicable holding period referred to in
Section 424(c)(3)(A) of the Code. In general, “statutory option stock” is any stock acquired through the exercise of an incentive
stock option or an option granted pursuant to an employee stock purchase plan, but not stock acquired through the exercise of a
nonqualified stock option. If the stock is statutory option stock with respect to which the applicable holding period has been
satisfied, or if the stock is not statutory option stock, no income will be recognized by the optionee upon the transfer of the stock in
payment of the exercise price of an incentive stock option. If the stock used to pay the exercise price is statutory option stock with
respect to which the applicable holding period has not been satisfied, the transfer of the stock will be a premature disposition, as
described above, which will result in the recognition of ordinary income by the optionee in an amount equal to the excess of the
fair market value of the statutory option stock at the time the incentive stock option covering the stock was exercised over the
amount paid for the stock.
If an optionee effects a net exercise of an incentive stock option by surrendering a portion of the shares of stock with respect to
which the option is exercisable to pay the exercise price, the surrender of the stock will be a premature disposition, as described
above, which will result in the recognition of ordinary income by the optionee in an amount equal to the fair market value of the
surrendered stock.
Nonqualified Options.    An optionee will not realize taxable income upon the grant of a nonqualified option. At the time the
optionee exercises the nonqualified option, the amount by which the fair market value, at the time of exercise, of the shares with
respect to which the nonqualified option is exercised exceeds the exercise price paid upon exercise will constitute ordinary
income to the optionee in the year of such exercise. Subject to Section 162(m) of the Code, Pyramid generally will be entitled to a
corresponding income tax deduction in the year of exercise equal to the ordinary income recognized by the optionee. If the
optionee thereafter sells such shares, the difference between any amount realized on the sale and the fair market value of the
shares at the time of exercise will be taxed to the optionee as a capital gain or loss, short-term or long-term depending on the
length of time the stock was held by the optionee before sale.
If an optionee uses already owned shares of Pyramid common stock to pay the exercise price under a nonqualified option, the
number of shares received pursuant to the nonqualified option which is equal to the number of shares delivered in payment of the
exercise price will be considered received in a nontaxable exchange, and the fair market value of the remaining shares received
by the optionee upon the exercise will be taxable to the optionee as ordinary income. If the already owned shares of Pyramid
common stock are not “statutory option stock” or are statutory option stock with respect to which the applicable holding period
referred to in Section 424(c)(3)(A) of the Code has been satisfied, the shares received pursuant to the exercise of the
nonqualified option will not be statutory option stock. However, if the already owned shares of Pyramid common stock are
statutory option stock with respect to which the applicable holding period has not been satisfied, it is not presently clear whether
the exercise will be considered a premature disposition of the statutory option stock, whether the shares received upon exercise
will be statutory option stock, or how the optionee’s basis will be allocated among the shares received.
Stock Appreciation Rights.    A recipient of SARs will not realize taxable income upon the grant of a SAR. At the time the
recipient exercises the SAR, an amount equal to the aggregate of any cash and the fair market value of any shares received is
taxable to the recipient as ordinary income in the year of such exercise. Subject to Section 162(m) of the Code, Pyramid
generally will be entitled to a corresponding income tax deduction in the year of exercise equal to the ordinary income
recognized by the recipient. If the recipient thereafter sells any shares received upon exercise, the difference between any
amount realized on the sale and the fair market value of the shares at the time of exercise will be taxed to the recipient as a
capital gain or loss, short-term or long-term depending on the length of time the stock was held by the recipient before sale.
145
Performance Units and Performance Bonuses.    A recipient of performance units or a performance bonus generally will not
realize taxable income upon the grant of such award. The recipient will recognize ordinary income upon the receipt of cash
and/or the transfer of shares in satisfaction of the award of performance units or performance bonus in an amount equal to the
aggregate of any cash and the fair market value of any shares received. If an award is “performance-based compensation” under
Section 162(m) of the Code, Pyramid generally will be entitled to a corresponding income tax deduction in the year of exercise
equal to the ordinary income recognized by the recipient. Otherwise, Pyramid’s deduction may be limited by Section 162(m) of
the Code as described below. If the recipient thereafter sells any shares received in satisfaction of the award, the difference
between any amount realized on the sale and the fair market value of the shares at the time of their receipt will be taxed to the
recipient as a capital gain or loss, short-term or long-term depending on the length of time the stock was held by the recipient
before sale.
Stock Awards.    A recipient of a stock award will recognize ordinary income upon the receipt of shares in an amount equal to the
fair market value of any shares received over the amount, if any, paid for the shares. Subject to Section 162(m) of the Code,
Pyramid generally will be entitled to a corresponding income tax deduction equal to the ordinary income recognized by the
recipient. If a recipient subsequently sells the shares, he or she generally will realize capital gain or loss (long-term or short-term
depending on the holding period) in the year of such sale in an amount equal to the difference between the net proceeds from the
sale and the price paid for the stock, if any.
Other Incentive Awards.    The specific tax consequences applicable with respect to other incentive awards granted under the
2014 Plan will depend on the terms and conditions applicable to the award.
Code Section 162(m).    Section 162(m) of the Code places a $1 million cap on the deductible compensation that may be paid to
certain executives of publicly-traded corporations. Amounts that qualify as “performance-based compensation” under
Section 162(m) of the Code are exempt from the cap and do not count toward the $1 million limit. In order to be “performance-
based compensation” exempt from the $1 million deductibility limitation, the grant or vesting of the award relating to the
compensation must (among other things) be based on the satisfaction of one or more performance goals specified by
compensation committee. Generally, stock options and stock appreciation rights will qualify as performance-based
compensation. Other awards may or may not so qualify, depending on their terms. In any event, Pyramid reserves the right to
award compensation that is not “performance-based compensation” and that is not deductible under Section 162(m) of the Code.
To ensure compliance with Treasury Department Circular 230, participants are hereby notified that (i) any discussion of U.S.
federal tax issues in this proxy statement/prospectus is not intended to be written or used, and cannot be used, for the purpose of
avoiding penalties that may be imposed under the Code, and (ii) participants should seek advice based on their particular
circumstances from an independent tax advisor.
Current Plan and Outstanding Options
The following table provides information as December 31, 2013, regarding compensation plans (including individual
compensation arrangements) under which equity securities of Pyramid are authorized for issuance. As of December 31, 2013,
Pyramid had not adopted, without the approval of its stockholders, any equity compensation plan under which its securities are
authorized for issuance.
Number of securities to be issued 
Weighted-average exercise 
Number of securities remaining available for 
future issuance under equity compensation plans 
  
  
upon exercise of outstanding 
price of outstanding 
 
(excluding securities reflected in column (a))
options, warrants and rights
options, warrants and rights
 (a)
  (b)
  (c)
Plan Category
Equity
compensation
plans
approved by
security
holders
Equity
compensation
plans not
approved by
security
105,000
$
5.17
184,643
0
-
—
holders
Total
105,000
$
5.17
184,643
Votes Required
Approval of the proposal to approve the 2014 Plan requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Pyramid common
stock represented in person or by proxy at the special meeting and voting on such proposal, provided that such shares voting
affirmatively must also constitute a majority of the required quorum for the meeting.
The Pyramid board of directors believes that approval and adoption of the proposed 2014 Plan will promote Pyramid’s interests
and the interests of Pyramid stockholders and continue to enable Pyramid to attract, retain and reward persons important to
Pyramid’s success and to provide incentives based on the attainment of corporate objectives and increases in stockholder value.
Members of Pyramid’s board of directors are eligible to participate in the 2014 Plan, and thus, have a personal interest in the
approval and adoption of the 2014 Plan.
The Pyramid board of directors unanimously proposes and recommends that Pyramid stockholders vote “FOR” the Pyramid Oil
Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan.
146
Significant Differences Between the Corporation Laws of California and Delaware
The following is a comparison of the provisions in the charters and bylaws of Yuma and Pyramid, as well as certain provisions of
California law and Delaware law. The comparison summarizes the important differences, but is not intended to list all differences,
and is qualified in its entirety by reference to such documents and to the respective corporation laws of the States of California
and Delaware. Stockholders of Yuma are encouraged to read the restated articles of incorporation of Pyramid, including the
proposed amendments, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit F and sometimes referred to as the “California
Articles,” and the amended and restated bylaws of Pyramid in the form attached hereto as Annex H and sometimes referred to as
the “California Bylaws.” The certificate of incorporation of Yuma is sometimes referred to as the “Delaware Certificate” and the
bylaws of Yuma are sometimes referred to as the “Delaware Bylaws.”
Provision
Pyramid
Authorized
Shares
The proposed authorized capital stock of Pyramid will consist of 300,000,000 shares of
 
common stock, no par value, and 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, no par value.
California law provides that, except in certain circumstances, when a tender offer or a proposal
for a reorganization or sale of assets is made by an interested party (generally, a person who
controls the corporation), the interested party must provide the other shareholders with an
affirmative written opinion as to the fairness of the consideration to be paid to the shareholders.
Yuma
 
 
The authorized
capital stock of
Yuma consists of
200,000 shares of
common stock,
$0.01 par value
 
per share, and
125,000 shares of
preferred stock,
$0.01 par value
per share.
Restrictions
on
Transactions
with
Interested
Stockholders
This fairness opinion requirement does not apply to corporations that have fewer than 100
shareholders of record or to a transaction that has been qualified under California state
securities laws. Furthermore, if a tender of shares or a vote is sought pursuant to an interested
party’s proposal and a later tender offer or proposal for a reorganization or sale of asset is
 
made by another party, the shareholders must be informed of the later offer and be afforded a
reasonable opportunity to withdraw their vote, consent or proxy, and to withdraw any tendered
shares.
No restrictions.
The so-called California 50/90 rule described below may also limit a corporation’s ability to
engage in certain business combinations.
California law requires the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the outstanding shares
to approve a merger of the company or a sale of substantially all the assets of the company.
Delaware law
requires the
affirmative vote of
not less than a
majority of the
outstanding
shares to approve
 
a merger of the
company or a sale
of substantially all
the assets of the
company.
Vote
Required to
Approve
Merger or
Sale of
Company
147
Provision
Pyramid
Yuma
Under California law, a merger may not be consummated for cash if the
purchaser owns more than 50% but less than 90% of the then-outstanding
shares of the target corporation unless either (i) all the stockholders of the target
corporation consent, which is not practical for a public corporation, or (ii) the
California Commissioner of Corporations approves the merger.
The 50/90 rule may make it more difficult for an acquiror to make an all cash
acquisition of the company which is opposed by the board of Pyramid California.
Specifically, the 50/90 rule encourages such an acquiror making an unsolicited
tender offer to either tender for less than 50% of the outstanding shares or more
than 90% of the outstanding shares. A purchase by such acquiror of less than
 
50% of the outstanding shares does not allow the acquiror to gain ownership of
the majority of the outstanding shares needed to approve a second step merger
(which merger would be used to enable the acquiror to acquire 100% of the
company’s equity) and, therefore, creates risk for such an acquiror that such a
favorable vote will not be obtained. Yet, a tender offer conditioned upon receipt
of tenders from at least 90% of the outstanding shares also creates risk for such
an acquiror since it may be very difficult to receive tenders from holders of at
least 90% of the outstanding shares. Consequently, it is possible that these risks
would discourage some potential acquirors from pursuing an all cash acquisition
of the company opposed by the board of Directors of Pyramid California.
50/90 Rule
Restriction
on Cash
Mergers
Delaware law does not have a
 
provision similar to the 50/90
rule in California.
The California Bylaws may be amended by stockholders owning a majority of
the outstanding shares, or by the board; provided, however, that a change in the
authorized number of directors requires approval by both the board and the
Bylaw
The Delaware Bylaws may be
 
amended by the Yuma board of
Amendments stockholders.
The California Bylaws provide that any action that may be taken at any annual
or special meeting of stockholders may be taken without a meeting and without
prior notice if a consent in writing, setting forth the action so taken, is signed by
holders of outstanding shares having not less than the minimum number of votes
that would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which
all shares entitled to vote thereon were present and voted.
Under California law, directors may not be elected by written consent except by
unanimous written consent of all outstanding shares entitled to vote for the
election of directors.
Stockholder
Action by
Written
Consent
148
Provision
Pyramid
Yuma
directors.
The Delaware Certificate and
the Delaware Bylaws provide
that any action that may be
taken at any annual or special
meeting of stockholders may be
taken without a meeting and
without prior notice if a consent
in writing, setting forth the
 
actions so taken, is signed by
holders of outstanding shares
having not less than the
minimum number of votes that
would be necessary to authorize
or take such action at a meeting
at which all shares entitled to
vote thereon were present and
voted.
Stockholder
Under California law, a special meeting of stockholders may be called
Ability to
by the board of directors, the chairman of the board, the president, the
Call Special
holders of shares entitled to cast not less than 10% of the votes at the
 
Stockholder
meeting or any additional persons as may be authorized by the
Meetings
company’s articles of incorporation or bylaws.
Stockholders owning capital stock
representing a majority of the votes of all
 
capital stock entitled to vote thereat may
call a special meeting.
The California Articles provide that the authorized number of directors of
Pyramid shall be not less than four nor more than seven, with the exact
number of directors within those limits to be determined from time to time
by the board of directors.
It is anticipated that the Pyramid board of directors will have six directors
after closing of the merger.
The Pyramid board of directors is not classified but the proposed
California Articles provide that the Pyramid board be classified into two
classes: Class I and Class II, each class having a two-year term of
 
office.
Under the California Bylaws, vacancies on the Pyramid board of
directors may be filled by a majority of the directors then in office,
although less than a quorum, or by a sole remaining director, at any
regular or special meeting of the Pyramid board of directors, except that
 
a vacancy created by the removal of a director by a vote or written
consent of the stockholders may be filled only by a vote or written
consent of the stockholders.
The Delaware Bylaws provide that the
Yuma board of directors shall consist of
one or more members, with the exact
 
number to be determined from time to time
by the board of directors.
The Delaware Certificate provides that
the Yuma board of directors is not
 
classified.
Under the Delaware Bylaws, vacancies
on the Yuma board of directors may be
filled by a majority of the directors then in
office, although less than a quorum, or by
 
a sole remaining director, at any regular
or special meeting of the Yuma board of
directors.
Number of
Directors
Classified
board
Filling
Vacancies
on the
board
149
Provision
Pyramid
Yuma
Cumulative
Voting
Vote Required
to Elect
Directors
Indemnification
Cumulative voting in the election of
directors is permitted under
California law. The proposed
 
California Articles will not permit
cumulative voting.
California laws provide that directors
are elected by the holders of a
plurality of the votes cast by the
holders of shares present in person
 
or represented by proxy at the
meeting and entitled to vote on the
election of directors.
California law requires
indemnification when the indemnitee
has defended the action successfully
on the merits. Expenses incurred by
an officer or director in defending an
action may be paid in advance, if the
director or officer undertakes to
repay such amounts if it is ultimately
determined that he or she is not
entitled to indemnification. California
law authorizes a corporation to
purchase indemnity insurance for the
benefit of its officers, directors,
employees and agents whether or
not the corporation would have the
power to indemnify against the
liability covered by the policy.
California law permits a corporation
to provide rights to indemnification
 
beyond those provided therein to the
extent such additional
indemnification is authorized in the
corporation’s articles of
incorporation. Thus, if so authorized,
rights to indemnification may be
provided pursuant to agreements or
bylaw provisions which make
mandatory the permissive
indemnification provided by
California law.
No cumulative voting is permitted under the Delaware Certificate.
The Delaware Bylaws provide that directors are elected by the holders of
a plurality of the votes cast by the holders of shares present in person or
represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote on the election of
 
directors.
Delaware law generally permits indemnification of expenses, including
attorneys’ fees, actually and reasonably incurred in the defense or
settlement of a derivative or third party action, provided there is a
determination by a majority vote of a disinterested quorum of the directors,
by independent legal counsel or by the stockholders that the person
seeking indemnification acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably
believed to be in the best interests of the corporation. Without court
approval, however, no indemnification may be made in respect of any
derivative action in which such person is adjudged liable for negligence
or misconduct in the performance of his or her duty to the corporation.
Expenses incurred by an officer or director in defending an action may be
paid in advance, if the director or officer undertakes to repay such
amounts if it is ultimately determined that he or she is not entitled to
indemnification. Delaware law authorizes a corporation to purchase
 
indemnity insurance for the benefit of its directors, officers, employees and
agents whether or not the corporation would have the power to indemnify
against the liability covered by the policy.
Delaware law permits a Delaware corporation to provide indemnification
in excess of that provided by statute.
The Delaware Certificate authorizes indemnification to the fullest extent
permissible under Delaware law.
The California Articles authorize
indemnification to the fullest extent
permissible under California law,
and such indemnification for the
company’s directors and officers is
provided for in the California Bylaws.
150
Provision
Pyramid
Yuma
California law permits a corporation to eliminate the
personal liability of a director for monetary damages in
an action brought by or in the right of the corporation
for breach of the director’s duties to the corporation and
its stockholders, except where such liability is based
on:
·    Intentional misconduct or knowing and culpable
violation of law;
·    Acts or omissions that a director believes to be
contrary to the best interests of the corporation or its
stockholders or that involve the absence of good faith
on the part of the director;
·    Receipt of an improper personal benefit;
·    Acts or omissions that show reckless disregard for
the director’s duty to the corporation or its stockholders,
where the director in the ordinary course of performing
a director’s duties should be aware of a risk of serious
 
injury to the corporation or its stockholders;
The DGCL permits a corporation to eliminate the personal
liability of directors for monetary damages, except where
such liability is based on:
·    Breaches of the director’s duty of loyalty to the
corporation or its stockholders;
·    Acts or omissions not in good faith or involving
intentional misconduct or knowing violations of law;
·    The payment of unlawful dividends or unlawful stock
repurchases or redemption; or
·    Transactions in which the director received an improper
personal benefit.
·    Acts or omissions that constitute an unexcused
pattern of inattention that amounts to an abdication of
the director’s duty to the corporation and its
stockholders;
·    Transactions between the corporation and a director
who has a material financial interest in such
transaction; or
·    Liability for improper distributions loans or
guarantees.
Such a limitation of liability provision also may not limit a
director’s liability for violation of, or otherwise relieve the
company or directors from the necessity of complying with,
federal or state securities laws, or affect the availability of
non-monetary remedies such as injunctive relief or
rescission.
The Delaware Certificate eliminates the liability of
directors to the company for monetary damages to the
fullest extent permissible under the DGCL.
The California Articles eliminate the liability of
directors for monetary damages to the fullest extent
permissible under California law.
Under the California Bylaws, the Pyramid board of
directors may declare dividends upon shares of its
 
capital stock, subject to the satisfaction by Pyramid of
financial requirements under California law.
Under the Delaware Bylaws, the Yuma board of directors
may declare dividends upon shares of its capital stock.
Elimination
of Director
Personal
Liability for
Monetary
Damages
Dividends
151
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the Pyramid common stock to be issued in connection with the merger and being offered by this proxy
statement/prospectus will be passed upon for Pyramid by TroyGould PC, Los Angeles, California. Certain United States federal
income tax consequences of the merger will be passed upon by TroyGould PC, Los Angeles, California.
EXPERTS
The financial statements for Pyramid Oil Company as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and for each of the three fiscal years in
the period ended December 31, 2013, included in this proxy statement/prospectus have been audited by SingerLewak LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report appearing elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus
and have been so included in reliance on such report of SingerLewak LLP given upon their authority as experts in accounting
and auditing.
Information about the estimated net proved reserves and the future net cash flows attributable to the oil and natural gas reserves
of Pyramid Oil Company as of December 31, 2013 and for the year ended December 31, 2013 and included in this proxy
statement/prospectus was prepared by MHA Petroleum Consultants, an independent reserve engineering firm, and is included
herein in reliance upon their authority as experts in reserves and present values.
The consolidated financial statements for Yuma Energy, Inc. as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended December 31, 2013, included in this proxy statement/prospectus and elsewhere in the registration
statement have been so included in reliance upon the report of Grant Thornton LLP, independent registered public accountants,
upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
Information about the estimated net proved reserves and the future net cash flows attributable to the oil and natural gas reserves
of Yuma Energy, Inc. as of December 31, 2013 and for the year ended December 31, 2013 and included in this proxy
statement/prospectus was prepared by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc., an independent reserve engineering firm, and is
included herein in reliance upon their authority as experts in reserves and present values.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
Pyramid has filed with the SEC under the Securities Act a registration statement on Form S-4 with respect to the meeting of
Pyramid stockholders described in this proxy statement/prospectus and the Pyramid common stock offered by this proxy
statement/prospectus. This proxy statement/prospectus, which constitutes part of the registration statement, does not contain all
of the information set forth in the registration statement or the exhibits which are part of the registration statement, portions of
which are omitted as permitted by the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Statements made in this proxy statement/prospectus regarding the contents of any contract or other document are summaries of
the material terms of the contract or document. With respect to each contract or other document that is filed as an exhibit to the
registration statement on Form S-4, reference is made to the corresponding exhibit.
Copies of the registration statement on Form S-4 and the exhibits to the registration statement may be inspected without charge
at the public reference room of the SEC located at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549, as may the other reports and
documents that Pyramid has filed, or will file, with the SEC. Copies of all or any portion of the registration statement or any exhibit
to the registration statement may be obtained from the SEC at prescribed rates. Information about the operation of the SEC’s
public reference room may be obtained by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. In addition, the SEC maintains a website that
contains reports, proxy and information statements and other documents that are filed with the SEC through the SEC’s EDGAR
System. The website can be accessed at http://www.sec.gov. No report, proxy or information statement or other document that
Pyramid has filed, or will file, with the SEC is incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus or into the
registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part.
Pyramid is subject to the requirements of the Exchange Act and files with the SEC annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy
statements and other documents. You may review and obtain copies of each such document filed by Pyramid with the SEC at the
SEC’s address or website described in the preceding paragraph. However, the annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy
statements and other documents filed by Pyramid with the SEC are not incorporated by reference into this proxy
statement/prospectus or into the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part.
Yuma is not subject to the requirements of the Exchange Act and, therefore, does not file with the SEC annual, quarterly or
current reports, proxy statements or other documents.
152
GLOSSARY OF OIL AND GAS TERMS
The following are abbreviations and definitions of certain terms commonly used in the oil and gas industry and this proxy
statement/prospectus:
Bcf. One billion cubic feet of natural gas.
BBbl. One billion barrels of crude oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
Bbl. One stock tank barrel, or 42 U.S. gallons liquid volume, used in reference to oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
Boe. Barrels of oil equivalent in which six Mcf of natural gas equals one Bbl of oil. This ratio does not assume price equivalency
and, given price differentials, the price for a barrel of oil equivalent for natural gas may differ significantly from the price for a
barrel of oil.
Development well. A well drilled within the proved area of an oil or gas reservoir to the depth of a stratigraphic horizon known to
be productive.
Gas. Natural gas.
Mbbl. One thousand barrels of oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
Mcf. One thousand cubic feet of gas.
Mcfe. One thousand cubic feet of gas equivalent.
Mmbbl. One million barrels of crude oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
MMBoe. One million barrels of oil equivalent.
Mmbtu. One million British Thermal units. One British thermal unit is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one
pound of water to one degree Fahrenheit.
Mmcf. One million cubic feet of gas.
Mmcfe. One million cubic feet of gas equivalent.
NGLs, natural gas liquids or liquids. Components of natural gas that are separated from the gas state in the form of liquids. These
include propane, butane, and ethane, among others.
Net revenue interest. An owner’s share of petroleum after satisfaction of all royalty and other non-cost bearing interests.
Oil. Crude oil, condensate and natural gas liquids.
Operator. The individual or company responsible for the exploration and/or exploitation and/or production of an oil or gas well or
lease.
Proved developed reserves. Proved reserves that can be expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing
equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor compared to the cost of a
new well, or through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the time of the reserves estimate if the
extraction is by means not involving a well.
153
Proved reserves. Those quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with
reasonable certainty to be economically producible—from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing
economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations—prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to
operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic
methods are used for the estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator must be
reasonably certain that it will commence the project within a reasonable time. The area of the reservoir considered as proved
includes (i) the area identified by drilling and limited by fluid contacts, if any, and (ii) adjacent undrilled portions of the reservoir
that can, with reasonable certainty, be judged to be continuous with it and to contain economically producible oil or gas on the
basis of available geoscience and engineering data. In the absence of data on fluid contacts, proved quantities in a reservoir are
limited by the lowest known hydrocarbons (“LKH”), as seen in a well penetration unless geoscience, engineering, or performance
data and reliable technology establishes a lower contact with reasonable certainty. Where direct observation from well
penetrations has defined a highest known oil (“HKO”), elevation and the potential exists for an associated gas cap, proved oil
reserves may be assigned in the structurally higher portions of the reservoir only if geoscience, engineering, or performance data
and reliable technology establish the higher contact with reasonable certainty. Reserves which can be produced economically
through application of improved recovery techniques (including, but not limited to, fluid injection) are included in the proved
classification when (i) successful testing by a pilot project in an area of the reservoir with properties no more favorable than in the
reservoir as a whole, the operation of an installed program in the reservoir or an analogous reservoir, or other evidence using
reliable technology establishes the reasonable certainty of the engineering analysis on which the project or program was based;
and (ii) the project has been approved for development by all necessary parties and entities, including governmental entities.
Existing economic conditions include prices and costs at which economic producibility from a reservoir is to be determined. The
price shall be the average price during the 12-month period prior to the ending date of the period covered by the report,
determined as an unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within such period, unless
prices are defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions.
Royalty. An interest in an oil and gas lease that gives the owner of the interest the right to receive a portion of the production from
the leased acreage (or of the proceeds of the sale thereof), but generally does not require the owner to pay any portion of the
costs of drilling or operating the wells on the leased acreage. Royalties may be either landowner’s royalties, which are reserved
by the owner of the leased acreage at the time the lease is granted, or overriding royalties, which are usually reserved by an
owner of the leasehold in connection with a transfer to a subsequent owner.
Spot market price. The price for a one-time open market transaction for immediate delivery of a specific quantity of product at a
specific location where the commodity is purchased “on the spot” at current market rates.
Tcfe. One trillion cubic feet of gas equivalent.
3-D Seismic. Advanced technology method of detecting accumulations of hydrocarbons identified through a three-dimensional
picture of the subsurface created by the collection and measurement of the intensity and timing of sound waves transmitted into
the earth as they reflect back to the surface.
2-D Seismic. Geophysical data that depicts the subsurface strata in two dimensions.
Working interest. An interest in an oil and gas lease that gives the owner of the interest the right to drill for and produce oil and
gas on the leased acreage and requires the owner to pay a share of the costs of drilling and production operations.
154
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page
 
Yuma Energy, Inc. and Subsidiaries
 
 
 
F-2
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-3
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
F-5
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
F-6
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
F-7
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity for the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
F-8
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
F-10
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
 
F-59
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 (Unaudited)
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 (Unaudited)
F-61
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 (Unaudited)F-62
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 (Unaudited)
F-63
F-64
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 (Unaudited)
F-66
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited)
 
 
Pyramid Oil Company
 
 
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-79
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Notes to Financial Statements
 
Balance Sheets as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 (Unaudited)
Statements of Operations for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 (Unaudited)
Statements of Cash Flows for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 (Unaudited)
Notes to Financial Statements (Unaudited)
F-80
F-82
F-83
F-84
F-86
 
F-104
F-106
F-107
F-108
F-1
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
Board of Directors
Yuma Energy, Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Yuma Energy, Inc. (a Delaware corporation) and
subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related consolidated statements of operations,
comprehensive income, changes in equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013.
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on
these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. We were not engaged to perform an audit of the Company’s internal control over
financial reporting. Our audits included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining,
on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of Yuma Energy, Inc. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the results of their operations and their cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013 in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
/s/ GRANT THORNTON LLP
Houston, Texas
April 24, 2014
F-2
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
2012
     
     
     
  $5,285,022
63,517
    151,538
    4,216
    454,882
    1,303,541
    -
    146,447
ASSETS
 
CURRENT ASSETS:
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts:
Trade
CEO and employees
Other
Note receivable
Derivative instruments
Prepayments
Deferred taxes
Other deferred charges
 
Total current assets
 
OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES, at cost (full cost method):
Not subject to amortization
Subject to amortization
 
 
Less:  accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
 
Net oil and gas properties
 
OTHER OPERATING PROPERTY  AND EQUIPMENT, at cost   2,066,760
Less:  accumulated depreciation and amortization
 
Net other operating property and equipment
 
OTHER ASSETS:
Receivables from affiliate
Derivative instruments
Other noncurrent assets
 
Total other assets
 
Total assets
December 31,
 
 2013
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 $4,194,511
 
    
 
   10,833,211     5,792,210
 
   155,080
 
   417,850
 
   4,000
 
   -
 
   433,991
 
   146,964
 
   162,416
    
 
   16,348,023     13,201,373  
    
 
    
 
   24,051,278     21,306,325  
   152,863,988    124,391,475 
    
 
   176,915,266    145,697,800 
   (84,438,840 )   (72,510,968 )
    
 
   92,476,426     73,186,832  
 
    
 
   (1,822,925 )   (1,732,467 )
    
 
 
   243,835
 
    
 
    
   95,634
 
 
   818,637
 
   1,649,413
 
    
   2,563,684
 
    
 
 $111,631,968  $87,015,020
313,017
     
     
    93,141
    1,360
    219,297
     
    313,798
2,045,484
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-3
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS - CONTINUED
-
    632,975
    978,449
2012
     
     
     
  $183,601
December 31,
 
 
 2013
 
 
    
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
 
    
 
 
    
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
 $178,027
 
Current maturities of debt
   15,116,560     7,905,349  
Accounts payable, principally trade
 
   677,132
Derivative instruments
   1,755,650
 
Asset retirement obligations
 
   1,127,283
Other accrued liabilities
    
 
 
   18,854,652     9,700,374  
Total current liabilities
    
 
 
    
 
LONG-TERM DEBT, net of current maturities:
   31,215,000     17,875,000  
Bank debt
 
    
 
    
 
OTHER NONCURRENT LIABILITIES:
   51,290,414     25,031,855  
Preferred stock derivative liability, Series A and B
    3,600,807  
   8,942,029
Asset retirement obligations
   218,649
    -
 
Derivative instruments
   13,160,205     10,077,292  
Deferred taxes
 
   102,532
Restricted stock units
 
   69,998
Other deferred credits
    
 
 
   73,783,827     38,721,715  
Total other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
    
PREFERRED STOCK, Series A and B, subject to mandatory redemption   35,666,342     29,152,089  
 
 
     
    
EQUITY:
 
     
    
    540
Common stock
 
   542
    2,182,293  
Capital in excess of par value of common stock
   2,668,923
   38,770
Accumulated other comprehensive income
    268,841
 
Accumulated earnings (deficit)
   (50,596,088 )   (10,885,832)
 
    
 
    
 
 
   (47,887,853 )   (8,434,158 )
Total equity
 
    
 
 $111,631,968  $87,015,020  
Total liabilities and equity
-
    11,761
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-4
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
REVENUES:
Sales of natural gas and crude oil
Other revenue
 
Total revenues
2012
Years ended December 31,
 
 2013
    
 
 $28,075,603   $21,282,115   $18,954,437 
   1,066,969     601,794
 
    
 
   29,142,572     21,883,909     19,431,539
477,102
2011
EXPENSES:
Marketing cost of sales
Lease operating
Re-engineering and workovers
General and administrative - stock based compensation
General and administrative - other
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Asset retirement obligation accretion expense
(Gain) loss on asset disposal
Bad debt expense
Recovery of bad debts
 
Total expenses
 
INCOME (LOSS) FROM OPERATIONS
 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE):
Change in fair value of preferred stock  derivative liability - Series A in all years,
 Series B in 2013 and 2012
Interest expense
Interest income
Bank mandated derivative instruments novation cost
Other, net
 
Total other income (expense)
 
NET LOSS FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS BEFORE TAXES
 
Income tax expense
 
NET LOSS FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
 
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS - PIPELINE SEGMENT
 
NET LOSS
 
LESS NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO NONCONTROLLING INTEREST
 
NET LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO YUMA ENERGY, INC.
 
Preferred Stock, Series A and Series B
Accretion
Dividends paid in cash
Dividends paid in kind
 
NET LOSS AVAILABLE TO COMMON STOCKHOLDERS
 
EARNINGS (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE
Basic
Diluted
 
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON SHARES OUTSTANDING
Basic
Diluted
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-5
-
1,234,308     891,118
    4,152,979  
   9,316,364     5,098,868     4,792,117  
   2,521,707     433,599
    1,340,127  
   452,058
 
    -
   5,603,475     4,339,362     3,485,172  
   12,077,368     5,074,070     2,865,878  
   668,497
 
 
   (19,307
 
   193,601
   (2,520
 
    
 
   32,045,551     16,253,580     17,251,880 
    
 
   (2,902,979 )   5,630,329     2,179,659
265,323
)   9,674
    210,187
)   (68,621
239,612
    138,174
    237,821
)   -
(26,258,559)   (17,098,504)   (5,604,231 )
-
(18,038
)   (210,083
    8,138
)   -
)   (1,039
)   (597,223 )
   (567,676
 
    14,178
   7,336
 
    -
   (175,000
 
)   166,296
   (72,953
     
 
    
   (27,066,852)   (17,301,488)   (6,020,980 )
    
 
   (29,969,831)   (11,671,159)   (3,841,321 )
    
 
 
   3,080,272     3,098,309     853,496
    
 
   (33,050,103)   (14,769,468)   (4,694,817 )
    
 
)
   -
    
 
   (33,050,103)   (14,769,468)   (4,712,855 )
    
 
 
   -
    
 
   (33,050,103)   (14,769,468)   (4,715,380 )
 
    
    
 
 
   1,101,972     963,900
 
   145,900
   5,412,281     -
 
    
     
 
 $(39,710,256) $(17,095,805) $(5,153,530 )
 
    
 
    
 $(732
)
)
 $(732
 
    
 
    
   54,236
 
 
   54,236
) $(317
) $(317
     
     
    54,000
    54,000
) $(95
) $(95
     
     
    54,000
    54,000
2,525
1,362,437     438,150
-
-
-
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
NET LOSS
 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Change in fair value of derivative instruments
Less income taxes
 
Change in fair value of derivative instruments, net of income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain on settled commodity derivatives
Less income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain on settled commodity derivatives, net of income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain from amortization of derivative instruments sold
Less income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain from amortization of derivative instruments sold, net of income
taxes
 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
 
COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
 
LESS COMPREHENSIVE INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO NONCONTROLLING
INTEREST
 
COMPREHENSIVE LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO YUMA ENERGY, INC.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-6
Yuma Energy, Inc.
2011
2012
Years ended December 31,
 
 2013
  
 
 $(33,050,103) $(14,769,468) $(4,712,855)
 
    
     
     
    
 
    1,075,885     (776,933 )
   -
   -
    414,217
    (299,119 )
     
     
    
 
    (477,814 )
    661,668
   -
     
     
    
 
   (301,499
)   (398,604
)   (198,885 )
)
)   (76,571
)   (153,463
   (116,077
     
     
    
 
)   (122,314 )
)   (245,141
   (185,422
    
     
     
 
 
)   -
)   (128,513
   (72,600
 
)   -
)   (49,478
   (27,951
(44,649
)   (79,035
)   -
)   337,492
(600,128 )
   (230,071
    
     
 
   (33,280,174)   (14,431,976)   (5,312,983)
-
-
2,525
$(33,280,174) $(14,431,976) $(5,315,508)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
COMMON STOCK:
Balance at beginning of period - 54,000 shares, $.01 par
Employee restricted stock awards (236 shares)
Years ended December 31, 
 2013
 
 
  
 
    
 
 $540
   2
2012
   
     
  $540
    -
-
540
542
Balance at end of period - 54,236 shares, $.01 par
 
    
 
    
 
CAPITAL IN EXCESS OF PAR VALUE OF COMMON STOCK:
   2,182,293     2,182,293  
Balance at beginning of period
   486,630
 
Employee restricted stock awards (236 shares)
    
 
 
   2,668,923     2,182,293  
Balance at end of period
 
    
 
    
 
ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS):
)
Balance at beginning of period
   268,841
 
Comprehensive income (loss) from derivative instruments, net of income taxes   (230,071
 
 
    
Balance at end of period
 
   38,770
 
 
    
    
ACCUMULATED EARNINGS (DEFICIT):
 
   (10,885,832)   6,209,973  
Balance at beginning of period
Net income (loss) attributable to Yuma Energy, Inc.
   (33,050,103)   (14,769,468)
   (1,101,972 )   (963,900
Preferred stock accretion (Series A and B)
)
)   (1,362,437 )
   (145,900
Preferred stock cash dividends (Series A and B)
 
   (5,412,281 )   -
Preferred stock dividends paid in kind (Series A and B)
 
    
     
 
   (50,596,088)   (10,885,832)
Balance at end of period
    
 
 
   (47,887,853)   (8,434,158 )
TOTAL STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY IN YUMA ENERGY, INC.
 
    
 
 
    
NONCONTROLLING PARTNERSHIP INTEREST:
 
   -
Balance at beginning of period
)
   -
Buy out partnership interests
 
    
 
 
   -
Balance at end of period
    
 
 
TOTAL EQUITY
 $(47,887,853) $(8,434,158 )
(68,651
)   337,492
     
    268,841
241,938
    (241,938
     
    -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-7
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
Reconciliation of net loss to net cash provided by operating activities:
Net loss
Loss from operations of discontinued pipeline segment
Increase in fair value of preferred stock liability
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of  property and equipment
Accretion of asset retirement obligation
Stock-based compensation net of capitalized cost
Amortization of other assets and liabilities
2011
2012
Years ended December 31,
 
 2013
 
  
 
    
    
 
 $(33,050,103) $(14,769,468) $(4,712,855)
   -
 
   26,258,559     17,098,504     5,604,231  
   12,077,368     5,074,070     2,865,878  
 
   668,497
 
   452,058
   166,608
265,323
    -
    86,421
239,612
    -
    838,303
-
18,038
Deferred tax expense
Bad debt expense
3,080,272     3,098,309     853,496
   193,601
    237,821
210,187
-
)   -
    138,174
    104,112
)   -
)   (68,621
   (2,520
Recovery of bad debts
 
)   9,674
   (19,307
(Gain) loss on disposal of property and equipment
 
    30,000
Write off credit financing costs
   313,652
)   (112,508
 
Amortization of benefit from derivative instruments (sold) and purchased, net   (72,600
    (1,256,918 )   (231,847 )
Net derivative instrument mark-to-market (gain) loss
   231,886
 
    3,484
   499
Other
    
 
     
 
   10,298,470     9,668,457     5,954,963  
Cash flow from direct operations
 
    
 
     
     
    
Changes in current operating assets and liabilities:
 
    (1,382,013)
   (5,589,957 )   407,732
Accounts receivable
)   -
   216
Note receivable
 
Other current assets
   869,550
)   (1,052,802)
   -
Restricted cash
)
    (5,172
   7,211,211     (4,770,660 )   (480,460 )
Accounts payable
 
   148,834
Other current liabilities
 
    
 
 
   69,998
Noncurrent payable to commodity hedge advisor
 
    
 
    
NET CASH PROVIDED (USED) BY OPERATING ACTIVITIES
 
CONTINUING OPERATIONS
   13,008,322     4,896,736     3,371,434  
    (636,113 )
   -
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
    
 
     
 
NET CASH PROVIDED BY OPERATING ACTIVITIES
   13,008,322     4,896,736     2,735,321
)   336,918
     
    -
(56,514
     
    -
(4,216
    (689,537
    341,474
-
F-8
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS - CONTINUED
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Capital expenditures on property, plant and equipment
Proceeds from sale of property
Increase in noncurrent receivable from affiliate
 
NET CASH USED BY INVESTING ACTIVITIES
 
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Proceeds from borrowings
Payments on borrowings
Change in borrowing on line of credit
Line of credit financing costs
Deferred offering costs
Net proceeds from issuance of preferred stock
Cash dividends to preferred stockholders
Distributions to common stockholders
Buy-out Yuma Production 1985, Ltd. minority interest partners
Derivative instruments sold (purchased)
Decrease in noncurrent payable to affiliate
 
NET CASH PROVIDED (USED) BY FINANCING ACTIVITIES
)   (2,481
)   (280,166
2011
2012
606,238
)   (659,101
1,386,649     -
)   (2,486
Years ended December 31,
 
 2013
 
  
    
 
 $(26,248,133) $(31,796,630) $(10,676,504)
 
   902,166
   (2,493
)
    
 
   (25,348,460)   (30,412,467)   (10,678,985)
 
    
 
    
   872,754
 
   (878,328
)
   13,340,000     14,900,000     (12,983,696)
)
   (681,739
   (1,257,160 )   -
 
    17,183,705     13,333,604  
   -
)
)   (1,362,437 )   (438,150
   (145,900
)
    -
   -
   -
    (245,422
 
 
    (16,004
   -
)
    (247,092
   -
 
    
     
   11,249,627     29,879,721     (40,856
)
(8,123
)   -
)   294,862
)   (2,800
640,777
)   (679,051
)   (198,279
    -
NET INCREASE (DECREASE) IN CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS   (1,090,511 )   4,363,990     (7,984,520 )
     
 
 
    8,905,552  
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT BEGINNING OF PERIOD
 
 
     
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT END OF PERIOD
 
 
 
 
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
 
Interest payments (net of interest capitalized)
Interest capitalized
 
 
Income tax payments for continuing operations
 
Income tax payments for discontinued operations
 
Supplemental disclosure of significant non-cash activity:
Preferred dividends paid in kind
 
 
Dividend of Argentina property to common shareholder
5,285,022     921,032
    
 $4,194,511   $5,285,022   $921,032
     
    
     
    
 $22,210
  $160,720
 $1,031,816   $681,090
  $-
 $-
  $-
 $-
    
     
 $5,412,281   $-
  $-
 $-
$383,103
  $108,060
  $58,399
  $456,952
     
  $-
  $250,000
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-9
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE A – ORGANIZATION, CONSOLIDATION AND NATURE OF BUSINESS
The Yuma Companies, Inc. formally changed its name to Yuma Energy, Inc. on August 21, 2013. The management of the
Company believes that the new name more clearly denotes the nature of Yuma’s business operations and strategy.
Yuma Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“YEI”, and together with its subsidiaries and affiliated companies, “Yuma”, “the
Company” or “Companies”) was incorporated on October 30, 1996 and has a majority common stockholder, Sam L. Banks (99.6
percent at year-end 2013 and effectively 100 percent before 2013). Yuma is an independent energy company engaged in oil and
natural gas exploration and production and natural gas marketing.
The Consolidation
YEI has four wholly owned subsidiaries as listed below. Their financial statements are consolidated with those of YEI.
Company name
 
Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc. “Exploration” Delaware
 “Petroleum”  Delaware
Yuma Petroleum Company
 “TSM”
Texas Southeastern Gas Marketing Company
Yuma Production Company
 “YPD”
Exploration identifies and captures
economic deposits of hydrocarbons by
using: (i) 3-D seismic imaging and
other advanced technologies, with an
emphasis on acquiring proprietary 3-D seismic to systematically explore, exploit and develop onshore and offshore crude oil and
natural gas provinces; (ii) unconventional oil resource plays; and (iii) high impact deep structural prospects located beneath
known producing trends. This approach is bolstered by strategic producing property acquisitions. Historically, Exploration has
sold working interests in prospects to industry partners on traditional terms. Exploration’s operations are primarily conducted in
the Gulf Coast region, with Yuma having interests in approximately 300 wells.
Reference  incorporation incorporation
01/16/92
 12/19/91
 09/12/96
 08/12/85
Texas
 Texas
State of
Date of
Yuma Petroleum Company was incorporated in Texas on July 15, 1983 and was re-domesticated in Delaware on December 19,
1991. Petroleum became relatively inactive during 1998 due to the transfer of substantially all exploration and production
activities to Exploration.
TSM is primarily engaged in the marketing of natural gas in Louisiana.
YPD acted as the general partner of Yuma Production 1985, Ltd. (“Yuma 85”), which was dissolved on January 1, 2012.
F-10
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
1.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements include the accounts of Yuma on a consolidated basis. All significant intercompany
accounts and transactions between YEI, Exploration, Petroleum, TSM, and YPD have been eliminated in the consolidation.
The companies maintain their accounts on the accrual method of accounting in accordance with United States Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). Each of the Companies has a fiscal year ending December 31.
2.
Management’s Use of Estimates
In preparing financial statements in conformity with GAAP, Management is required to make informed estimates and
assumptions with consideration given to materiality. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of
revenues and expenses for the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates, and changes in these estimates
are recorded when known. Significant items subject to such estimates and assumptions include: estimates of proved reserves
and related estimates of the present value of future net revenues; the carrying value of oil and gas properties; estimates of fair
value; asset retirement obligations; income taxes; derivative financial instruments; valuation allowances for deferred tax assets;
uncollectible receivables; useful lives for depreciation; future cash flows associated with assets; obligations related to employee
benefits; and legal and environmental risks and exposures.
3.
Reclassifications
When required for comparability, reclassifications are made to the prior period financial statements to conform to the current year
presentation.
4.
Fair Value
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date (exit price). The standard characterizes inputs used in determining fair
value according to a hierarchy that prioritizes inputs based upon the degree to which they are observable. The three levels of the
fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1 – inputs represent quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (for example, exchange-traded
commodity derivatives).
Level 2 – inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or
indirectly (for example, quoted market prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets or quoted market prices for identical
assets or liabilities in markets not considered to be active, inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or
liability, or market-corroborated inputs).
F-11
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
Level 3 – inputs that are not observable from objective sources, such as the Company’s internally developed assumptions about
market participant assumptions used in pricing an asset or liability (for example, an estimate of future cash flows used in the
Company’s internally developed present value of future cash flows model that underlies the fair value measurement.)
In determining fair value, the Company utilizes observable market data when available, or models that utilize observable market
data. In addition to market information, the Company incorporates transaction-specific details that, in Management’s judgment,
market participants would take into account in measuring fair value.
If the inputs used to measure the financial assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the category is
based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument (see Note G – Fair Value
Measurements).
The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts payable reported on the balance sheet
approximates fair value.
Nonfinancial assets and liabilities initially measured at fair value include asset retirement obligations and exit or disposal costs.
Level 3 Valuation Techniques – Financial assets are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing
models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model assumption or input is
unobservable. Level 3 financial liabilities consist of the Series A Preferred Stock issued July 1, 2011, and the Series B Preferred
Stock issued July and August of 2012, for which there is no current market for these securities such that the determination of fair
value requires significant judgment or estimation (see Note I – Series A and Series B Preferred Stock). Yuma has valued certain
possible financial scenarios relating to its securities using a Monte Carlo simulation model with the assistance of an independent
valuation consultant. (Yuma’s securities have certain provisions, including automatic conditional conversion, re-pricing/down-
round, change of control, default and follow-on offering that necessitate financial modeling.) These models incorporate
transaction details such as the stock price of comparable companies in the same industry, contractual terms, maturity, and risk
free interest rates, as well as assumptions about future financings, volatility, and holder behavior as of issuance, and each
quarter thereafter for each of the Series A and the Series B Preferred Shares (see Note J – Preferred Stock Derivative Liability).
5.
Statement of Cash Flow
Cash on hand, deposits in banks and short-term investments with original maturities of three months or less are considered cash
and cash equivalents. The cash flow of a derivative instrument of an identifiable transaction is classified in the same category as
the cash flow from the item being hedged.
6.
Trade Receivables
Accounts receivable are stated net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $55,000 and $125,000 at December 31, 2013 and 2012,
respectively.
F-12
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
Management evaluates accounts receivable quarterly on an individual account basis, making individual assessments of
collectability, and reserves those amounts it deems potentially uncollectible.
7.
Natural Gas Imbalances
Pipeline gas imbalances represent the differences in measured volumes between gas receipts from suppliers and/or transporters
and gas deliveries to end users, transporters and/or other purchasers. Most imbalances are settled monthly through cash-out
mechanisms provided for in sales and transportation contracts. Other imbalances are carried forward until over or under
deliveries in succeeding months can offset them. Gas imbalances are valued at cost utilizing the weighted average method.
Exploration utilizes the “sales method” to account for natural gas production volume imbalances. Under this method, income is
recorded based on Exploration’s net revenue interest in production taken for delivery. At December 31, 2013, Exploration had a
net payable of approximately 23,669 Mcf under various natural gas balancing agreements, as compared to a 22,771 Mcf net
payable at December 31, 2012.
8.
Inventories
Inventories, consisting principally of oilfield equipment, are carried at the lower of cost or market. The Company will often have
tangible materials purchased for a well carried for the joint account (oil and gas property full cost pool on the balance sheet)
pending sale or disposition.
9.
Derivative Instruments
All derivative instruments (including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts) are recorded in Yuma’s
Consolidated Balance Sheets as either an asset or liability and measured at fair value. Changes in the derivative instrument’s
fair value are recognized currently in earnings, unless the derivative instrument was designated as a cash flow hedge. Under
cash flow hedge accounting, unrealized gains and losses were reflected in stockholders’ equity as accumulated other
comprehensive income (“AOCI”) to the extent they were effective until the forecasted transaction occurred. Yuma discontinued
cash flow hedge accounting effective January 1, 2013. The result of this change in policy is that the amount carried in AOCI at
December 31, 2012 is amortized to oil and gas revenues during the month the hedges settle. Subsequent to December 31, 2012,
all hedges are treated as non-qualifying derivative instruments and all new mark-to-market adjustments are in “Sales of natural
gas and crude oil” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
For cash flow hedge accounting, a company must formally document, designate and assess the effectiveness of transactions that
receive hedge accounting. Only derivative instruments that are expected to be highly effective in offsetting anticipated gains or
losses on the hedged cash flows and that are subsequently documented to have been highly effective can qualify for hedge
accounting. Effectiveness must be assessed both at inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis. Any ineffectiveness in
derivative instruments whereby gains or losses do not exactly offset anticipated gains or losses of hedged cash flows is
measured and recognized in earnings in the period in which it occurs. When using hedge accounting, hedge effectiveness is
assessed quarterly based on total changes in the derivative instrument’s fair value by performing regression analysis. A hedge is
considered effective if certain statistical tests are met. Yuma recorded hedge ineffectiveness in “Sales of natural gas and crude
oil” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
F-13
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
10.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Investments in oil and natural gas properties are accounted for using the full cost method of accounting. Under this method, all
costs directly related to the acquisition, exploration, exploitation and development of oil and natural gas properties are
capitalized.
Costs of reconditioning, repairing, or reworking of producing properties are expensed as incurred. Costs of workovers adding
proved reserves are capitalized. Projects to deepen existing wells, recomplete to a shallower horizon, or improve (not restore)
production to proved reserves are capitalized.
Sales of proved and unproved properties are accounted for as adjustments of capitalized costs with no gain or loss recognized,
unless such adjustments would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves.
Abandonments of properties are accounted for as adjustments of capitalized costs with no loss recognized.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization – The capitalized cost of oil and natural gas properties, excluding unevaluated
properties, is amortized using the unit-of-production method (equivalent physical units of 6 Mcf of natural gas to each barrel of oil
equivalent, or “Boe”) using estimates of proved reserve quantities. Investments in unproved properties are not amortized until
proved reserves associated with the projects can be determined or until impairment occurs. If the results of the assessment
indicate that the properties are impaired, the amount of impairment is added to the proved oil and gas property costs to be
amortized. The amortizable base includes future development, abandonment and restoration costs. The rate for depreciation,
depletion and amortization (“DD&A” or “depletion”) per Boe for Yuma was $23.87, $19.84 and $16.26 for 2013, 2012 and 2011,
respectively. DD&A expense for oil and natural gas properties was $11,927,872, $4,956,196 and $2,772,890 for 2013, 2012 and
2011, respectively.
Impairments – Total capitalized costs of oil and gas properties are subject to a limit, or so-called “ceiling test.” The ceiling test
limits total capitalized costs less related accumulated DD&A and deferred income taxes to a value not to exceed the sum of
(i) the present value, discounted at a ten percent annual interest rate, of future net revenue from estimated production of proved
oil and gas reserves, based on current economic and operating conditions less future development costs (excluding retirement
costs); plus (ii) the cost of properties not subject to amortization (which includes all unproved properties); less (iii) income tax
effects related to differences in the book and tax basis of oil and gas properties. If unamortized capitalized costs less related
deferred income taxes exceed this limit, the excess is charged to DD&A in the quarter the assessment is made. An expense
recorded in one period may not be reversed in a subsequent period even though higher oil and gas prices may have increased
the ceiling applicable to the subsequent period. These net unamortized costs, tested each calendar quarter, have not exceeded
the cost center ceiling for 2013, 2012 and 2011, the report periods.
F-14
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
Oil and natural gas properties not subject to amortization consist of undeveloped leaseholds and exploratory and developmental
wells in progress before the assignment of proved reserves. Management reviews the costs of these properties periodically for
impairment, with the impairment provision included in the cost of oil and natural gas properties subject to amortization. Factors
considered by Management in impairment assessments include drilling results by the Company and other operators, the terms of
oil and gas leases not held for production, and available funds for exploration and development.
The table below shows the cost of unproved properties and well and development costs in progress not subject to amortization at
December 31, 2013, and the year in which those costs were incurred.
Leasehold acquisition cost
Year of acquisition
 
 2013
  2012
  
 
   
 $1,704,190  $15,349,192  $6,788,539  $(2,890,695) $20,951,226
Total
2011
Prior
Capitalized Interest –
Capitalized interest is
included as part of the cost
of oil and gas properties.
The Company capitalized $1,031,816, $681,090 and $108,060 of interest associated with the line of credit (see Note N – Debt
and Change in Banking Line and Agent Bank) during 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The capitalization rates are based on
the Company’s weighted average cost of borrowings used to finance prospect generation.
1,242,627  
Exploration and development cost   1,059,262    111,910
    1,857,425  
   829,456     670,190
Capitalized interest
    
 
     
 
 $3,592,908  $16,131,292  $6,923,859  $(2,596,781) $24,051,278 
Total
62,727
    72,593
8,728
    285,186
Capitalized Internal Costs – Internal costs incurred that are directly identified with acquisition, exploration and development
activities undertaken by the Company for its own account, and that are not related to production, general corporate overhead or
similar activities, are also capitalized. Yuma capitalized $2,702,952, $2,589,342 and $2,779,203 of allocated indirect costs,
excluding interest, related to these activities during 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
The Company develops oil and gas drilling projects called “prospects” by industry participants and markets participation in these
projects. In doing this, the Company typically receives an amount in excess of its hard costs in seismic, land, brokerage,
brochuring and marketing costs. It typically markets interests in the project on a “third for a quarter” basis, whereby the participant
pays a percentage of the cost to casing point or through prospect payout and then has their participation interest reduced by
twenty-five percent (25%) with the Company earning the difference. This difference is referred to as the “carried interest.”
F-15
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
The Company assembles 3-D seismic survey projects and markets participating interests in the projects. The Company typically
recovers all of its costs plus allocated overhead, and receives a quarterly general and administrative (“G&A”) cost reimbursement
paid by the various participants in the project during the 3-D seismic acquisition phase and the 3-D seismic interpretation phase.
The proceeds from the sale of the 3-D seismic survey along with the quarterly G&A reimbursements are included in the full cost
pool caption “Not subject to amortization.” In addition, the participants in the 3-D seismic survey typically carry the Company for a
percentage of the costs associated with the 3-D survey acquisition, ranging from 25 to 35 percent. The Company received G&A
cost reimbursements of $42,329, $172,173 and $985,544 in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
11.
Other Property and Equipment
Other property and equipment are recorded at cost. Expenditures for major additions and improvements are capitalized, while
maintenance, repairs and minor replacements which do not improve or extend the life of such assets are charged to operations
as incurred. Property and equipment sold, retired or otherwise disposed of are removed at cost less accumulated depreciation,
and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in “(Gain) Loss on asset disposal” in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of
Operations.
In compliance with the Tax Reform Act of 1986, assets placed in service subsequent to January 1, 1987 are depreciated using
the modified accelerated cost recovery system (“MACRS”) for both financial reporting and federal income tax purposes. MACRS
depreciation methods approximate depreciation expense computed under GAAP using the double declining balance method.
Leasehold improvements, principally office space, are depreciated by the straight line method over the term of the lease.
Estimated   
 
 useful
 
 life in years 2013
 
  
 
 3 - 5
Office business machines
 7
Furniture and fixtures
 5
Leasehold improvements
  
 
  
Total other property and equipment
 
  
Less:  Accumulated depreciation and leasehold improvement amortization  
  
 
Net book value
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 
  
 
 $1,350,568
 
   383,585
 
   332,607
 
    
 
   2,066,760
    
 
   (1,822,925 )   (1,732,467 )
 
    
 $243,835
2012
   
  $1,332,558
    380,319
    332,607
     
    2,045,484
$313,017
Depreciation and leasehold improvement amortization expense totaled $149,496, $117,874 and $92,989 for the years ended
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
F-16
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
12.
Accounts Payable
Accounts payable consist principally of trade payables and costs associated with oil and natural gas exploration.
13.
Commitments and Contingencies
Liabilities for loss contingencies arising from claims, assessments, litigation or other sources, along with liabilities for
environmental remediation or restoration claims, are recorded when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the
amount can be reasonably estimated. Expenditures related to environmental matters are expensed or capitalized in accordance
with the Company’s accounting policy for property and equipment.
14.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized by Exploration when deliveries of crude oil, natural gas and condensate are delivered to the purchaser
and title has transferred. Crude oil sales in Louisiana, representing a significant portion of the company’s production, are typically
indexed to Light Louisiana Sweet (“LLS”). TSM recognizes revenue from sales of gas primarily to other marketing companies and
industrials in the period in which the gas is delivered and billed to the customer. Sales are based on index prices per MMBtu or
the daily “spot” price as published in national publications with a mark-up or mark-down defined by contract with each customer.
15.
Income Taxes
The Company files a consolidated federal tax return (with the exception of Yuma 85). Deferred taxes have been provided for
temporary differences. These differences create taxable or tax-deductible amounts for future periods (see Note P – Income
Taxes).
16.
Other Taxes
Taxes incurred, other than income taxes, are as follows:
Production and severance tax $ 2,403,263
Ad valorem tax
Sales tax
State franchise taxes
 
Total
December 31,  December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
732,302
   180,498
   41,072
    
 $ 3,357,135
2012
   
  $ 2,002,397
    114,261
    40,146
    2,390
     
  $ 2,159,194
2011
   
  $ 1,543,868
    65,716
    77,647
    7,688
     
  $ 1,694,919
F-17
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
The Company reports oil and gas sales gross and, accordingly, includes net production, severance, and ad valorem taxes on the
accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of lease operating expenses. Sales taxes are collected
from customers on sales of natural gas by TSM, and remitted to the appropriate state agency. Exploration accrues sales tax on
applicable purchases of materials, and remits funds directly to the taxing jurisdictions.
17.
Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments consist of cash, receivables, payables, long-term debt, oil and natural gas derivatives, and
Series A and Series B Preferred Stock. The carrying amount of cash, receivables and payables approximates fair value because
of the short-term nature of these items. The carrying amount of long-term debt as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 approximates
fair value because the interest rate on this instrument is variable. The fair value of the oil and natural gas derivative instruments is
included below in Note H – Commodity Derivative Instruments. The embedded derivative associated with each of the Series A
and Series B Preferred Stock has been bifurcated and is carried at fair value and is further described in Note I – Series A and
Series B Preferred Stock and Note J – Preferred Stock Derivative Liability.
18.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
AOCI includes changes in equity that are excluded from the Consolidated Statements of Operations and were recorded directly
into a separate section of equity on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company’s AOCI shown on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets and the Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity consists of unrealized income and losses on cash flow
hedges; however, Yuma discontinued hedge accounting effective January 1, 2013. AOCI is now comprised of the balance as of
December 31, 2012 for the derivative instruments that qualified for hedge accounting at that time less those contracts that have
expired since. AOCI will continue to be adjusted for the contracts as they settle.
19.
General and Administrative Expenses - Other
G&A expenses are reported net of amounts capitalized pursuant to the full cost method of accounting.
Reimbursements of G&A expenses, if received from working interest owners of producing oil and gas properties operated by the
Company (COPAS, or Council of Petroleum Accountants Societies, overhead), are reported as a reduction to G&A expense.
Reimbursements of G&A expenses, if received from joint venture participants in 3-D seismic acquisition surveys, are initially
reported as a reduction of capitalized G&A expenses on the Consolidated Balance Sheets in the full cost pool caption “Not
subject to amortization”.
20.
Stock-Based Compensation Plans
The Company adopted the 2011 Stock Option Plan on June 21, 2011 (see Note O – Stockholders’ Equity).
The Company adopted an Annual Incentive Plan for 2013 and 2012 (see Note R – Employee Benefit Plans).
F-18
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
21. General and Administrative Expenses – Stock-Based Compensation
This includes payments to employees in Restricted Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Units. As such, these amounts are non-
cash Company stock-based awards. See Note L – Stock Awards and Their Treatment for valuation and recognition procedures.
22.
Re-engineering and Workovers
One of the Company’s core business strategies is to perform a comprehensive field re-engineering and design to increase and
maintain production, lower per-unit operating expenses, and improve field economics. Re-engineering projects are undertaken
with the intent of lowering per-unit operating expenses and/or reducing field down-time. In addition, the Company seeks to
implement more efficient production practices in order to increase production and/or arrest natural field production declines.
These practices are often deployed in fields in connection with or in anticipation of further field development activities such as
installation of secondary recovery operations or additional drilling. Workovers included within this category relate to significant
non-recurring operations.
24.
Other Noncurrent Assets
Included in the noncurrent assets are deferred offering costs. During 2013, Yuma explored several options to go public, including
a possible listing on the Australian Stock Exchange (“ASX”). To accomplish this, the Company engaged numerous legal,
accounting, and reserve engineering specialists to assist in this process.
25.
Changes in Accounting Principles
Not Yet Adopted
In June 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ratified the Emerging Issues Task Force consensus which
requires that an unrecognized tax benefit (or a portion thereof) be presented as a reduction to a deferred tax asset for an
available net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss or tax credit carryforward. This accounting standards update is
effective for Yuma beginning in the first quarter of 2014 and should be applied prospectively to unrecognized tax benefits that
exist as of the effective date. Early adoption and retrospective application are permitted. Adoption of this accounting standards
update will not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
F-19
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
In February 2013, an accounting standards update was issued to provide guidance for the recognition, measurement, and
disclosure of obligations resulting from joint and several liability arrangements for which the total amount of the obligation is fixed
at the reporting date, which are separately addressed within GAAP. An entity is required to measure obligations resulting from
joint and several liability arrangements for which the total amount of the obligation is fixed at the reporting date as the sum of 1)
the amount the entity agreed to pay on the basis of its arrangement among its co-obligors and 2) any amount the entity expects to
pay on behalf of its co-obligors. Disclosure of the nature of the obligation, including how the liability arose, the relationship with
other co-obligors and the terms and conditions of the arrangement is required. In addition, the total outstanding amount under the
arrangement, not reduced by the effect of any amounts that may be recoverable from other entities, plus the carrying amount of
any liability or receivable recognized must be disclosed. This accounting standards update is effective for the Company
beginning in the first quarter of 2014 and should be applied retrospectively for those in-scope obligations resulting from joint and
several liability arrangements that exist at the beginning of 2014. Early adoption is permitted. Adoption of this accounting
standards update will not have a significant impact on Yuma’s consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
Recently adopted
In February 2013, an accounting standards update was issued to improve the reporting of reclassifications out of accumulated
other comprehensive income. This standard requires an entity to provide information about the amounts reclassified out of
accumulated other comprehensive income by component. In addition, an entity is required to present, either on the face of the
statement where net income is presented or in the notes, significant amounts reclassified out of accumulated other
comprehensive income by the respective line items of net income, but only if the amount reclassified is required under GAAP to
be reclassified to net income in its entirety in the same reporting period. For other amounts that are not required under GAAP to
be reclassified in their entirety to net income, an entity is required to cross-reference to other disclosures required under GAAP
that provide additional detail about those amounts. This accounting standards update was effective for the Company beginning
the first quarter of 2013. Adoption of this standard did not have a significant impact on Yuma’s consolidated results of operations,
financial position or cash flows.
In December 2011, an accounting standards update designed to enhance disclosures about offsetting assets and liabilities was
issued. Further clarification limiting the scope of these disclosures to derivatives, repurchase agreements and reverse
repurchase agreements, and securities borrowing and securities lending transactions was issued in January 2013. The
disclosures are intended to enable financial statement users to evaluate the effect or potential effect of netting arrangements on
an entity’s financial position. Entities are required to disclose both gross information and net information about in-scope financial
instruments that are either offset in the statement of financial position or subject to an enforceable master netting arrangement or
similar agreement, irrespective of whether they are offset. These disclosures were effective for the Company beginning the first
quarter of 2013 and must be made retrospectively for comparable periods. Adoption of this amendment did not have a significant
impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
The FASB amended the reporting standards for comprehensive income in June 2011 to eliminate the option to present the
components of AOCI as part of the statement of changes in stockholders’ equity. The new guidance allows companies only two
choices for presenting net income and other comprehensive income: in a single continuous statement, or in two separate, but
consecutive, statements. In the two statement approach, the first statement should present total net income and its components
followed consecutively by a second statement that should present total other comprehensive income, the components of AOCI,
and total comprehensive income. The amendments did not change the items that must be reported in AOCI or when an item of
AOCI must be reclassified to net income. Adoption had no impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations, financial
position or cash flows, but only changed presentation of AOCI.
F-20
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE B – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES – Continued
In May 2011, the FASB issued an update amending the accounting standards for fair value measurement and disclosure,
resulting in common principles and requirements under GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”). The
amendments change the wording used to describe certain of the GAAP requirements either to clarify the intent of existing
requirements, to change measurement or expand disclosure principles or to conform to the wording used in IFRS, and are
applied prospectively for interim and annual periods beginning with the first quarter of 2012. The adoption of the amendments
had no impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
NOTE C – ADDISON ACQUISITION
On April 5, 2013, Yuma acquired approximately 51,460 net acres held by production adjacent to Yuma’s current 25,926 net acres
in the Austin Chalk from Addison Oil, L.L.C. (“Addison”). This acquisition increased the Company’s acreage holdings in the
Austin Chalk to over 77,000 net acres. The purchase price was $7.5 million, with an effective date of January 1, 2013. The
Company granted a two percent overriding royalty to the sellers, and sellers have a right to participate in new wells or new side
tracks for a twenty-five percent (25%) working interest. This acquisition complemented Yuma’s existing acreage position and
substantially increased the Company’s number of proved undeveloped drilling locations and proved reserve value.
In conjunction with this acquisition, Yuma recorded $6,043,412 for the associated future asset retirements and $1,440,702 in
suspended royalty and revenue obligations, net of related receivables.
NOTE D – ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
The Company records the cost of obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets at fair value when the
asset is acquired. The asset retirement obligations (“ARO’s”) are recorded as liabilities and the associated costs are capitalized
as part of the related long-lived assets and then depreciated over the remaining useful lives. Changes in the liabilities resulting
from the passage of time are recognized as operating (accretion) expenses and are allocated using the interest method. For
Yuma, ARO’s relate to the abandonment of Exploration’s oil and gas producing facilities.
Since Exploration uses the full cost method, settlement recognition is impacted. If a liability is settled for an amount other than the
recorded amount, an adjustment is made to the full cost pool, with no gain or loss recognized, unless the adjustment would
significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves. In addition, Exploration carries ARO assets on
the balance sheet as part of its full cost pool, and includes these ARO assets in its amortization base for the purposes of
calculating depreciation, depletion and amortization expense. For the purposes of calculating the ceiling test, the future cash
outflows associated with settling the ARO liability are excluded from the computation of the discounted present value of
estimated future net revenues.
The net increase to ARO during 2013 from the Addison acquisition was $6,043,412. An initial Addison ARO estimate of
$10,967,986 was recorded in the second quarter but the lives and costs were subsequently reevaluated with a resulting
reduction of $4,924,574.
F-21
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE D – ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS – Continued
Asset Retirement Obligations
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
2012
$4,233,782
Beginning of year balance
   11,178,614     106,846
Liabilities incurred during year
   (1,278,774 )   (371,717
Liabilities settled during year
Accretion expense
   668,497
    265,323
Revisions in estimated cash flows   (4,104,440 )   438,303
 
End of year balance
$10,697,679   $ 4,233,782
$ 3,795,027
)
NOTE E – RECEIVABLES AND PAYABLES WITH AFFILIATES, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND EMPLOYEES
The following table provides information with respect to related party transactions with affiliates, the Chief Executive Officer
(“CEO”) of the Company, and employees. The trade receivable from the CEO is primarily for invoiced costs on prospects and
wells (see Note F – Related Party Transactions).
Receivables from affiliates, CEO and employees:    
    
Current:
 $ 135,080
Yuma CEO
Employees
   20,000
    
 
   155,080
 
 
    
    
Noncurrent:
   95,634
Yuma Gas Corporation
    
 
Total
 $ 250,714
December 31,  December 31, 
 2013
2012
   
     
     
  $ 42,617
    20,900
     
    63,517
     
     
    93,141
     
  $ 156,658
F-22
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE F – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Chief Executive Officer
Effective August 15, 2011, the Company entered into a Working Interest Incentive Plan (“WIIP”) with the Company’s CEO,
Samuel L. Banks. Under the WIIP, Mr. Banks may purchase:
Working interests in prospects from the Company or from unaffiliated third parties up to 2.5% of the Company’s working interest;
·
and
Working interests in production acquisitions that the Company undertakes in an amount up to 5% of the aggregate cost of the
·interest to be acquired.
The purchase price for any interests acquired from the Company shall be determined using the same cost basis as the Company
acquired such interest. The terms under which the Executive acquires any interests shall be no better than the terms agreed to by
unaffiliated third parties.
Working interests acquired during 2013 and 2012 under this plan are listed below:
Amount
 paid
Year Well, prospect or project W.I.
 
2013 Austin Chalk
2013 Addison Acquisition
2012 Sequoia
2012 Amazon
2012 Piranha
2012 Musial
1.0000% $9,412
  2.0000%   150,000 
  0.7366%   6,506
 
  0.2260%   30,043  
 
  0.7106%   5,330
  0.7158%   5,726
Prior to the issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock in 2011, the Company declared the following distributions to the CEO and
majority common stockholder:
All right, title and interest in and to 4,289 shares of Arelauquen Golf and Country Club S. A. (valued at $250,000 by the
·
Company);
Rights to receive performance payments under that certain Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement dated January 28, 2010 by and
among Texas Southeastern Gas Gathering Company, Yuma Energy, Inc., High Point Energy, LLC, and High Point Gas
·
Gathering Company, L.P. The Company assigned no value to these performance payments, as there was no expectation that
any of the contract bonus payment thresholds would be reached; and
An after project payout 17.5781% working interest in the Cote de Mer prospect (value to be determined at the time payout is
·
reached and the interest is earned by the Company and the assignment is made to the CEO, no value was assigned by the
Company since the initial test well in this prospect was in the process of being plugged and abandoned at year-end 2013).
F-23
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE F – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS – Continued
In 2006, the Company entered into participation agreements with several unrelated industry participants under which it would
receive a 20% back-in interest after payout to the participants and the CEO would receive a 5% back-in interest. The agreements
were renegotiated in 2010 reducing the total back-in interest by 40% with the Company receiving 12.5% and the CEO receiving
2.5%. The project, named La Posada, achieved multiple discrete payouts during 2013 based on differing participant cost basis
and the participants assigned the agreed working interests directly to the Company and the CEO at time of payout.
NOTE G – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
Certain financial instruments are reported at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Under fair value measurement
accounting guidance, fair value is defined as the amount that would be received from the sale of an asset or paid for the transfer
of a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants, i.e., an exit price. To estimate an exit price, a three-level
hierarchy is used. The fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs, which refer broadly to assumptions market participants would
use in pricing an asset or a liability, into three levels (see the Fair Value section of Note B – Summary of Significant Accounting
Policies). Yuma uses a market valuation approach based on available inputs and the following methods and assumptions to
measure the fair values of its assets and liabilities, which may or may not be observable in the market.
Fair Value of Other Financial Instruments – The carrying values of financial instruments comprising current assets and current
liabilities approximate fair values due to the short-term maturities of these instruments.
Derivatives – The fair values of the Company’s commodity derivatives are based on third-party pricing models which utilize
inputs that are either readily available in the public market, such as natural gas and oil forward curves and discount rates, or can
be corroborated from active markets or broker quotes. These values are then compared to the values given by Yuma’s
counterparties for reasonableness. The Company is able to value the assets and liabilities based on observable market data for
similar instruments, which results in the Company using market prices and implied volatility factors related to changes in the
forward curves. Derivatives are also subject to the risk that counterparties will be unable to meet their obligations. Because the
Company’s derivative counterparty was BP at December 31, 2012 (and Société Générale starting in April 2013) (see Note H –
Commodity Derivative Instruments and Note X – Subsequent Events), Yuma has not considered non-performance risk in the
valuation of the Company’s derivatives.
F-24
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE G – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS – Continued
Assets:
Commodity derivatives - oil
 
Total assets
 
Liabilities:
Commodity derivatives - gas
Commodity derivatives - oil
Significant
Significant
Fair value measurements at December 31, 2013
  
 Quoted prices  other
 in active
 markets
 (Level 1)
  
  
 $
  
 $
  
  
 $
observable  unobservable   
  inputs
  inputs
   
  (Level 3)
  Total
  (Level 2)
   
   
   
     
     
     
  $818,637   $-
  $818,637
     
     
     
  $818,637
  $818,637   $-
     
     
     
     
     
     
  $472,564
  $472,564   $-
    423,217     -
    423,217
-
 
-
 
 
-
-
Preferred stock derivative liability  
  
 
Total liabilities
 $
-
 
-
51,290,414     51,290,414 
    -
     
 
     
  $895,781   $51,290,414   $52,186,195
Significant
Significant
Fair value measurements at December 31, 2012
 
  
 
 Quoted prices  other
 
 in active
 
 markets
 
 (Level 1)
 
  
 
  
Assets:
 $
Commodity derivatives - gas
  
Commodity derivatives - oil
  
 
 $
Total assets
  
 
Liabilities:
  
Preferred stock derivative liability $
observable  unobservable   
 
   
  inputs
  inputs
 
  Total
  (Level 2)
  (Level 3)
 
   
   
   
 
     
     
     
 
  $348,430
  $348,430   $-
 
    107,812
    107,812     -
 
     
     
     
 
  $456,242   $-
  $456,242
 
     
     
     
     
     
 
     
  $25,031,855   $25,031,855 
  $-
-
-
 
-
 
 
-
Total liabilities
$
-
$-
$25,031,855   $25,031,855
Derivative instruments listed above include collars, swaps, and 3-way collars. For additional information on the Company’s
derivative instruments and derivative liabilities, see Note H – Commodity Derivative Instruments and Note J – Preferred Stock
Derivative Liability.
F-25
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE G – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS – Continued
Debt – The Company’s debt is recorded at the carrying amount on its Consolidated Balance Sheets. For further discussion of the
Company’s debt, please see Note N – Debt and Change in Banking Line and Agent Bank. The carrying amount of floating-rate
debt approximates fair value because the interest rates are variable and reflective of market rates.
Asset Retirement Obligations (ARO’s) – The Company estimates the fair value of ARO’s based on discounted cash flow
projections using numerous estimates, assumptions and judgments regarding such factors as the existence of a legal obligation
for an ARO, amounts and timing of settlements, the credit-adjusted risk-free rate to be used and inflation rates. See Note D –
Asset Retirement Obligations for a summary of changes in ARO’s.
A summary of the value and the changes in Yuma’s assets (liabilities) classified as Level 3 measurements during 2013 and 2012
is presented below:
Preferred
stock
 derivative
 liability
$51,290,414 
2013
   25,031,855 
2012
 
    
 
Total change $26,258,559
NOTE H – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
Objective and Strategies for Using Derivative Instruments – In order to mitigate the effect of commodity price uncertainty and
enhance the predictability of cash flows relating to the marketing of the Company’s crude oil and natural gas, Yuma enters into
crude oil and natural gas price derivative instruments with respect to a portion of the Company’s expected production. The
derivative instruments used include variable to fixed price commodity swaps, two-way and three-way collars.
The fixed price swap and two-way collar contracts entitle Yuma (floating price payor) to receive settlement from the counterparty
(fixed price payor) for each calculation period in amounts, if any, by which the settlement price for the scheduled trading days
applicable for each calculation period is less than the fixed strike price or floor price. Yuma would pay the counterparty if the
settlement price for the scheduled trading days applicable for each calculation period is more than the fixed strike price or selling
price. The amount payable by Yuma, if the floating price is above the fixed or selling price, is the product of the notional quantity
per calculation period and the excess of the floating price over the fixed or ceiling price in respect of each calculation period. The
amount payable by the counterparty, if the floating price is below the fixed or floor price, is the product of the notional quantity per
calculation period and the excess of the fixed or floor price over the floating price in respect of each calculation period.
F-26
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE H – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
A three-way collar consists of a two-way collar contract combined with a put option contract sold by Yuma with a strike price
below the floor price of the two-way collar. The Company receives price protection at the purchased put option floor price of the
two-way collar if commodity prices are above the sold put option strike price. If commodity prices fall below the sold put option
strike price, Yuma receives the cash market price plus the difference between the two put option strike prices. This type of
instrument allows Yuma to capture more value in a rising commodity price environment, but limits the benefits in a downward
commodity price environment.
While these instruments mitigate the cash flow risk of future reductions in commodity prices, they may also curtail benefits from
future increases in commodity prices.
See Note G – Fair Value Measurements for a discussion of methods and assumptions used to estimate the fair values of the
Company’s derivative instruments.
Counterparty Credit Risk – Derivative instruments expose Yuma to counterparty credit risk. The Company’s commodity derivative
instruments at December 31, 2012 were with British Petroleum (“BP”) Corporation North America Inc., a subsidiary of BP Energy
Company. Starting in April of 2013, all hedges were moved (novated) to Société Générale (“SocGen”). SocGen is rated “A” by
Standard and Poor’s, “A2” by Moody’s, “A” by Fitch, and “AA” by BBRS. Commodity derivative contracts are executed under
master agreements which allow Yuma, in the event of default, to elect early termination of all contracts. If Yuma chooses to elect
early termination, all asset and liability positions would be netted and settled at the time of election.
Derivative instruments open as of January 1, 2014 are provided below. Natural gas prices are New York Mercantile Exchange
(“NYMEX”) Henry Hub prices, and crude oil prices are NYMEX West Texas Intermediate, except for the oil swaps noted below
that are based on Argus Light Louisiana Sweet.
F-27
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE H – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
2015
2016
$4.08
$4.47
  $4.00
  $3.25
2014
 
 
 Settlement   Settlement   Settlement  
 
 
  
NATURAL GAS (MMBtu):
    
 
3-way collars
    
 
Volume
   779,285     2,377,371    1,122,533 
Ceiling sold price (call)
  $4.35
 
 $4.47
Floor purchased price (put)
  $4.10
 $4.15
 
Floor sold price (short put)
  $3.25
 
 $3.35
 
 
     
    
Swaps
 
    
     
Volume
   2,189,984    458,622     -
 
Price
 
    -
 $4.08
 
 
     
    
Reverse Swaps
 
    
     
Volume
 
   142,233     293,234     -
Price
  $4.32
 $4.27
    -
 
 
     
 
     
    
CRUDE OIL (Bbls):
     
 
     
    
3-way collars
     
 
     
    
Volume
    89,512
   50,900
    70,263
 
Ceiling sold price (call)
  $104.36
 
  $106.39
 $103.57
Floor purchased price (put)
  $86.49
 
  $92.38
 $90.88
Floor sold price (short put)
  $65.82
 
  $72.38
 $69.41
 
     
    
     
 
Swaps
 
     
    
     
Volume
 
    -
   276,126     -
 
    -
    -
Price
 $94.07
 
    
     
     
 
 
     
     
Swaps at Argus Light Louisiana Sweet    
 
    -
    -
Volume
 
    -
    -
Price
 
     
     
 
 
     
     
Sold puts
Volume
    -
    -
22,816
 $99.40
    
    
   54,000
Floor sold price (short put)
 
Put Spread
Volume
Floor purchased price (put)
Floor sold price (short put)
$70.00
    
    
   -
   -
   -
-
     
     
    27,588
  $90.00
  $75.00
-
     
     
    -
*   -
*   -
* Contracts include a premium to be paid by Yuma of $5.56 per barrel as the contracts mature ($153,389 total premium). The
premium is not included in these prices.
F-28
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE H – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
Derivatives for each commodity are netted on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as they are all contracts with the same
counterparty. The following table presents the fair value and balance sheet location of each classification of commodity
derivative contracts on a gross basis without regard to same-counterparty netting:
Fair value as of
 
 
 December 31,  December 31, 
 
 
 2013
 
  
 
 
 
    
Asset commodity contracts:
 
    
Contracts designated as hedging instruments:
 
 $-
Current assets
   -
 
Noncurrent assets
 
    
 
 
   -
 
 
 
    
Contracts not designated as hedging instruments:    
 
   1,109,403
 
Current assets
   2,861,225
 
Noncurrent assets
    
 
 
   3,970,628
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
Liability commodity contracts:
    
 
Contracts designated as hedging instruments:
   -
Current liabilities
)
   -
)
Noncurrent liabilities
    
 
 
)
   -
 
    
 
 
Contracts not designated as hedging instruments:    
 
   (1,786,535 )   (1,035,917 )
Current liabilities
)
   (2,261,237 )   (621,818
Noncurrent liabilities
 
    
 
   (4,047,772 )   (1,657,735 )
2012
   
     
     
  $800,407
    370,080
     
    1,170,487
     
     
    1,100,900
    636,748
     
    1,737,648
     
     
     
    (410,508
    (383,650
     
    (794,158
$(77,144
) $456,242
Total derivative instruments
F-29
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE H – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
Sales of natural gas and crude oil on the Consolidated Statements of Operations are comprised of the following:
Sales of natural gas and crude oil
)   228,557
Gains (losses) realized on commodity derivatives
Gains (losses) on ineffectiveness of cash flow hedges
    712,681
Gains (losses) unrealized on non-qualifying commodity/derivatives   (231,886 )   544,237
Amortized gains from benefit of sold qualified options
    128,512
    (16,004
Amortized losses from cost of purchased nonqualified oil calls
 
     
Total sales of natural gas and crude oil
Years ended December 31,
 
 2013
 
  
 $28,235,413  $19,684,132  $18,083,210 
 
   (524
 
   -
)
 
   72,600
 
   -
    
 
 $28,075,603  $21,282,115  $18,954,437
639,380
    273,786
    (41,939
    -
)   -
2012
2011
A reconciliation of the components of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the Consolidated Statements of
Changes in Equity is presented below:
2011
2012
2013
 
 Before tax  After tax   Before tax   After tax   Before tax   After tax  
   
  
 
 $437,140   $268,841   $(111,628 ) $(68,651 ) $864,190
  $531,477  
    1,075,885    661,668     (1,071,796)   (659,155)
   -
   -
    (398,604 )   (245,141)   (198,885 )   (122,314)
    181,341  
    -
   -
294,863
-
    -
    -
-
(72,600 )   (44,649 )   (128,513 )   (79,035 )   -
(301,499)   (185,422)   -
-
-
-
-
$63,041   $38,770   $437,140   $268,841   $(111,628 ) $(68,651 )
Balance, beginning of period
Net change in fair value
Gains reclassified to income
Proceeds from sale of commodity hedging instruments
Amortized gains from benefit of sold qualified options
realized in income
Other reclassifications due to expired contracts
previously subject to hedge accounting rules
 
Balance, end of period
F-30
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE I – SERIES A AND SERIES B PREFERRED STOCK
The Company is authorized to issue up to 50,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share. During
July 2011, the Company issued 14,605 shares of Series A Preferred Stock in connection with a private placement, realizing
gross proceeds of $14,605,000 offset by offering expenses of $1,271,396 resulting in net proceeds of $13,333,604. The stated
value and issue price of the Series A Preferred Stock is $1,000.00 per share and each share is convertible into one share of
YEI’s common stock. The Series A Preferred Stock pays a cumulative dividend on a semi-annual basis of $30.00 per share out
of funds legally available (subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of any stock dividend, stock split, combination or other
similar recapitalization with respect to the Series A Preferred Stock and subject to increase as further described below) as
declared by the Board of Directors. These dividends are cumulative from the date of issuance, whether or not such dividends are
declared, and are payable semi-annually, when and as declared by the Board of Directors, on June 30 and December 31 in each
year. At the election of the Board of Directors, the dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock may be paid in additional shares of
Series A Preferred Stock. Since the Required Event, as defined below, had not occurred by September 30, 2013, the semi-
annual dividend rate on the Series A Preferred Stock increased, commencing on October 1, 2013, to a semi-annual rate of
$60.00. Further, since the Required Event had not occurred by December 31, 2012, March 31, 2013 or June 30, 2013, then on
each date the Series A Conversion Price then in effect decreased by an amount such that the Series A Preferred Stockholders
increased their aggregate ownership in the Company by one percent. The “Required Event”, or “Liquidity Event”, means the
conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock to common stock and registration of these shares under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, and the listing on a national securities exchange, quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or quoted on the Pink Sheets. At
December 31, 2012, the Company had not met the requirements of the Required Event and, as a result, the conversion rate to
common stock for shares of Series A Preferred Stock changed from one to one to a conversion rate of one share of Series A
Preferred Stock to 1.067579 shares of common stock, effectively providing a one percent increase in equity ownership in the
Company to the Series A Preferred Stock stockholders. During 2013, the Company did not meet the requirements of the
Required Event and, as a result of the required adjustments in the conversion rate at March 31, 2013 and June 30 2013, the
conversion rate of one share of Series A Preferred Stock increased to 1.207101257 shares of common stock.
Unless prohibited by Delaware law governing distributions to stockholders, if the Required Event has not occurred on or before
June 30, 2016, the Company shall offer to purchase all shares of the Series A Preferred Stock then outstanding at a price per
share equal to the greater of (A) the Series A original issue price per share, plus any accrued but unpaid dividends, whether or
not declared, together with any other dividends declared but unpaid, and (B) the fair market value of a single share of Series A
Preferred Stock as determined by a third party appraiser.
The Company is authorized to issue up to 35,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share. During July and
August 2012, the Company issued 18,590 shares of Series B Preferred Stock in a private placement, realizing gross proceeds of
$18,590,000 offset by offering expenses of $1,406,295, resulting in net proceeds of $17,183,705. The stated value and issue
price of the Series B Preferred Stock was $1,000.00 per share, and each share is convertible into 0.508185 shares of common
stock. The Series B Preferred Stock pays a cumulative dividend on a semi-annual basis of $30.00 per share out of funds legally
available, subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of any stock dividend, stock split, combination or other similar
recapitalization. Such dividend shall be cumulative from the date of issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, whether or not
such dividends are declared, and shall be payable semi-annually, when and as declared by the Board of Directors, on June 30
and December 31 in each year. At the election of the Board of Directors, the dividends on the Series B Preferred Stock may be
paid in additional shares of Series B Preferred Stock. Unless prohibited by Delaware law governing distributions to stockholders,
if the Required Event, as defined above, has not occurred by June 30, 2017, the Company shall offer to purchase all shares of
the Series B Preferred Stock then outstanding, so long as no shares of the Series A Preferred Stock remain to be converted. If
shares of the Series A Preferred Stock remain outstanding, then the conversion date for the Series B Preferred Stock will be
extended for so long as any shares of Series A Preferred Stock have not been converted or the Company has not funded in full
the offer to purchase pursuant to a Required Event.
F-31
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE I – SERIES A AND SERIES B PREFERRED STOCK – Continued
Upon any liquidation, dissolution, or winding-up of the Company, whether voluntary or involuntary, the holders of the Series A
Preferred Stock then outstanding will be entitled to be paid out of the assets of the Company available for distribution to its
stockholders before any payment may be made to the holders of the Series B Preferred Stock, an amount per share equal to the
greater of (i) the original issue price, plus accrued but unpaid dividends or (ii) such amount per share as would have been
payable had all shares of the Series A Preferred Stock been converted into common stock immediately prior to such liquidation,
dissolution or winding up. After the payment of all preferential amounts required to be paid to the holder of shares of Series A
Preferred Stock, the holders of Series B Preferred Stock will be entitled to be paid out of the assets of the Company legally
available for distribution to its stockholders, an amount per share equal to the greater of (i) the original issue price, plus any
accrued but unpaid dividends thereon or (ii) such amount per share as would have been payable had all shares of Series B
Preferred Stock been converted into Common Stock pursuant to such liquidation, dissolution or winding up.
The Series A and Series B Preferred Stock is presented on the Company’s balance sheet between Other Noncurrent Liabilities
and Equity (the mezzanine section) since it has characteristics of both debt and equity. The carrying amount on the Company’s
balance sheets represents the net proceeds increased by accretion of stock issue costs less the value at time of origination of the
embedded conversion feature as described in Note J – Preferred Stock Derivative Liability. The accretion of issue costs
increases the Preferred Stock by amortizing the costs to equity through the trigger date for the Company’s repurchase of such
shares, June 2016 for Series A Preferred Stock and June 2017 for Series B Preferred Stock.
NOTE J – PREFERRED STOCK DERIVATIVE LIABILITY
The Company issued Series A Preferred Stock in July 2011 and Series B Preferred Stock in July and August 2012 with certain
embedded anti-dilution provisions (embodied weighted average ratchet or reset provisions) which provide for conversion price
adjustments (“down-round protection”) should additional shares of common or preferred stock be issued by the Company at a
lower valuation than the valuation used at the time the Series A or Series B Preferred Stock was issued. In addition, the Series A
and Series B Preferred Stock provides that the Company is obligated to repurchase these shares should the Required Event not
occur by June 20, 2016 in the case of the Series A Preferred Stock and June 30, 2017 in the case of the Series B Preferred
Stock. The down-round provision and the ability to “put” the stock back to the Company have the features of an option or
derivative. The provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivatives and Hedging, require the Company to
bifurcate the embedded derivative from the carrying value of the Series A and Series B Preferred Stock and record it on the
Company’s balance sheet as a derivative liability, at fair value. Accordingly, at each reporting date, the Company must mark the
derivative liability to estimated fair value, with the resulting changes being recognized in earnings. Management has elected to
determine the fair value of this derivative using a Monte Carlo option pricing model with Level 3 inputs (see the Fair Value
section of Note B – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for Level 3 Valuation Techniques). The assumptions used are
reviewed on a quarterly basis and are subject to change based primarily on Management’s assessment of the probability of
various events. Accordingly, changes to these assessments could materially affect the valuation. After the initial valuation,
changes in fair value are made with the increase or decrease flowing to the Consolidated Statements of Operations as “Change
in fair value of preferred stock derivative liability”. Upon issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock in July 2011, the fair value of
the associated derivative was $89.86 per share of Series A Preferred Stock, or an aggregate of $1,312,405. The December 31,
2013 and 2012 fair value of the Series A derivative was $2,581.00 and $1,565.00, respectively, per share of Series A Preferred
Stock, or an aggregate of $40,361,678 and $22,856,825, respectively. Upon issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock in July and
August 2012, the fair value of the associated derivative was $55.00 for July and $52.79 for August per share of Series
B Preferred Stock, or an aggregate of $1,016,715. The December 31, 2013 and 2012 fair value of the Series B derivative was
$556.00 and $117.00, respectively, per share of Series B Preferred Stock, or an aggregate of $10,928,736 and $2,175,030,
respectively. At December 31, 2013, the level 3 inputs to the Monte Carlo option pricing model were an assumed valuation
market value of equity of $266.5 million based on a discount to net asset value, resulting in a value per share on a fully diluted
and as-converted bases of $3,099. The evaluation assumed a likely reverse merger or initial public offering with a probability of
25% in the second quarter, 60% in the third quarter and 20% in the fourth quarter of 2014, with some sale or other exit of the
Company soon after 2014 if not completed in 2014. The volatility was assumed to be 36.55% and was derived from implied
volatilities of a number of public companies (tickers: AXAS, CRK, CRZO, GDP, PQ, SFY, and WRES) adjusted for relatively
lower amount of debt in Yuma at year-end 2013.
F-32
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE K – PAYMENT OF PREFERRED DIVIDENDS IN KIND
On June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2013, the Company elected to pay the semi-annual dividends to the preferred stockholders
in additional preferred shares (in kind), with cash payments being made in lieu of any fractional shares. The following shares and
cash payments were issued to the existing preferred stockholders as of the record dates:
Series A Preferred Stock   403
Series B Preferred Stock   533
June 30, 2013
 Additional   
 preferred   Cash
 shares
December 31, 2013  
 
  Additional   
  preferred   Cash
 
  payments 
   
 
  $45,360  
  $40,690
payments  shares
   
  $35,150     630
  $24,700     533
F-33
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE K – PAYMENT OF PREFERRED DIVIDENDS IN KIND – Continued
The payment in kind to preferred stockholders was recorded at fair value using the valuation of the common stock performed by
an outside consulting firm as further described in Note G – Fair Value Measurements, at the preferred conversion rate to common
stock as of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2013. Components of the total fair value of $5,412,281 for the preferred stock
dividends consist of:
Series A Preferred Stock   403
Series B Preferred Stock   533
December 31, 2013
  Additional
June 30, 2013
 Additional   
 
 preferred   Dividends   preferred   Dividends  
 shares
 
  in kind
   
 
  
  $2,347,583 
  $836,153
in kind
   
  $1,431,938    630
  $796,607     533
shares
YEI issued the above additional preferred shares to each class of preferred stock. The outstanding shares after the preferred
dividend in kind are as follows:
Series A Preferred Stock  14,605
Series B Preferred Stock  18,590
Preferred   Preferred  Preferred
 shares
 outstanding  dividend   dividend
 prior to
 dividend
June 30,   December 31,  at December 31, 
  2013
 
 
   
 
   403
   533
2013
   
    630
    533
stock
stock
Preferred
  shares
  outstanding
2013
   
    15,638
    19,656
NOTE L – STOCK AWARDS AND THEIR TREATMENT
Under the terms of the 2011 Stock Option Plan (See Note O – Stockholders’ Equity), on April 1, 2013, the Company issued 1,278
Restricted Stock Awards (“RSA’s”) to employees that vest one-third immediately, one-third at December 31, 2013 and one-third
at December 31, 2014 subject to the successful completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter lock-up period. Should an
employee leave the Company, any unvested RSA’s are forfeited.
On April 1, 2013, the Company granted 236 RSA’s to employees in lieu of cash awards for 2012 under the Annual Incentive Plan
(see Note R – Employee Benefit Plans) that vest immediately at the completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter lock-up
period, but no later than June 30, 2016. These RSA’s are not forfeited should the employee leave the Company and have
therefore been recorded at the same per share valuation determined in conjunction with the valuation of the derivative liability as
of March 31, 2013. These rewards are equity-based and compensation expense is calculated as the number of shares awarded
multiplied by the value calculated for each share by the outside valuation consultant as of the date of issue. Once the value has
been recorded, it does not change in subsequent periods.
F-34
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE L – STOCK AWARDS AND THEIR TREATMENT – Continued
On April 1, 2013, the Company granted 33 RSA’s to the then non-employee members of the Board of Directors with a vesting
schedule of one-third immediately, one-third at December 31, 2013 and one-third at December 31, 2014 subject to the
completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter lock-up period. Should a Director leave the Board, any unvested shares are
forfeited.
On April 1, 2013, the Company granted 225 RSA’s to Mr. Volk, a Board member, and long-term advisor to the Company. The
vesting period for this award is one-third immediately, one-third at December 31, 2013 and one-third at December 31, 2014
subject to the completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter lock-up period. Should Mr. Volk leave the Board, any unvested
shares are forfeited.
On June 1, 2013, the Company issued 1,173 RSA’s to employees that vest one-third at December 31, 2013, one-third at
December 31, 2014 and one-third at December 31, 2015 subject to the successful completion of a Liquidity Event and any
underwriter lock-up period. Should an employee leave the Company, any unvested shares are forfeited.
A Liquidity Event shall occur upon the closing of an initial public offering raising gross proceeds of at least $40 million or a sale of
YEI’s common stock under the Securities Act of 1933, and the listing on a national securities exchange, quoted on the OTC
Bulletin Board or quoted on the Pink Sheets.
A summary of the status of the RSA’s and changes during 2013 is presented below.
Number of  Weighted
 unvested   average
 RSA
grant-date
Unvested shares as of January 1, 2013
Granted on April 1, 2013
Granted on April 1, 2013
Granted on April 1, 2013
Granted on April 1, 2013
Granted on June 1, 2013
Vested
Forfeited
 
Unvested shares as of December 31, 2013  2,739
shares
  
  -
  1,278
  236
  33
  225
  1,173
  -
  (206
fair value
   
   
  $2,062 per share
  $2,062 per share
  $2,062 per share
  $2,062 per share
  $3,289 per share
   
) $2,670 per share
   
  $2,542 per share
On April 1, 2013, the Company granted 163 Restricted Stock Units or “RSU’s”. In order to vest, an employee must have
continuous service with the Company from time of issue through April 1, 2016, the Vesting Date. The shares may be settled in
cash and do not require the eventual issuance of common stock (although it is an election available to the Company);
consequently, the rewards are liability based and the booked valuation will change as the market value for common stock (as
determined by an outside consulting firm) changes. Compensation expense will be recognized over the three-year vesting
period.
F-35
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE L – STOCK AWARDS AND THEIR TREATMENT – Continued
A summary of the status of the unvested shares of RSU’s and changes during 2013 is presented below.
Unvested shares as of January 1, 2013
Number of  Weighted
 unvested   average
 RSU
 shares
  
   -
grant-date
  fair value
Granted on April 1, 2013
Vested
Forfeited
 
Unvested shares as of December 31, 2013   158
163
   -
   (5
$2,062 per share
   
) $2,062 per share
   
  $2,062 per share
NOTE M – EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE
Earnings per common share are computed by dividing earnings available to common stockholders by the weighted average
number of common shares outstanding during the period. Potential common stock equivalents are determined using the “if
converted” method.
Potentially dilutive securities for the computation of diluted weighted average shares are as follows:
Twelve months ended  
 
 December 31,
 
 
 2013   2012   2011  
 
 
  
 
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock  17,119   14,608   7,312 
 
Series B Convertible Preferred Stock  9,585    4,050    -
 
   -
Restricted Stock Awards
  1,940    -
 
   -
Restricted Stock Units
   -
  121
 
    
 
   
    
  28,765   18,658   7,312
The Company excludes stock options and other stock-based awards whose effect would be anti-dilutive from the calculation. For
the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, adjusted earnings were losses, therefore common stock equivalents were
excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per common share, as their effect was anti-dilutive.
F-36
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE N – DEBT AND CHANGE IN BANKING LINE AND AGENT BANK
Variable rate revolving credit facility payable to Société Générale and OneWest Bank, FSB,
maturing May 20, 2017, with possible  acceleration (see below), secured by oil and natural gas
reserves held by Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc. and guaranteed by YEI.
 
Variable rate revolving credit facility payable to Union Bank, N.A. and Amegy Bank National
Association, maturing August 10, 2015, secured by oil and natural gas reserves held by Yuma
Exploration and Production Company, Inc. and guaranteed by YEI.
-
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
2012
$31,215,000   $-
17,875,000
Installment loan due February 28, 2014, originating from the financing of insurance premiums at
4.29% interest rate.
 
Installment loan due March 1, 2013, originating from the financing of insurance premiums at
3.24% interest rate.
 
 
Less:  Current portion
 
Total long-term debt
178,027
-
-
183,601
31,393,027     18,058,601  
   (178,027
)
    
 
 $31,215,000   $17,875,000
)   (183,601
On August 10, 2011, Exploration entered into a $125 million syndicated senior credit facility with Amegy Bank National
Association (“Amegy”) as Administrative Agent. The facility was for four years, with a maturity of August 10, 2015. The maximum
available under the revolving credit facility is determined by a formula based on the discounted value of the producing and non-
producing crude oil and natural gas reserves (the borrowing base). Interest on the facility accrued at Yuma’s option based on
prime as published by the Wall Street Journal, or a rate based on London Interbank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”).
The prime and LIBOR base rates were increased by the following margins:
LIBOR 
 
 
 margin 
Borrowing base utilization Prime margin 
 
  
 
 
  
%  3.50 %
Utilization > 75%
   1.25
%  3.25 %
50% < utilization < 75%    1.00
25% < utilization < 50%    0.75
%  3.00 %
%  2.75 %
   0.50
Utilization < 25%
F-37
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE N – DEBT AND CHANGE IN BANKING LINE AND AGENT BANK – Continued
On September 24, 2012, the credit facility was amended whereby Union Bank N. A. (Union) came in as a participant at 64%
(Amegy reduced to 35%) and took over from Amegy as Administrative Agent. Amegy, however, has remained Yuma’s bank for
regular operational banking functions. The amendment changed the interest rate margins as follows:
LIBOR 
 
 
 margin 
Borrowing base utilization Prime margin 
 
  
 
  
 
   2.00
%  3.00 %
Utilization > 90%
%  2.75 %
75% < utilization < 90%    1.75
%  2.50 %
50% < utilization < 75%    1.50
Utilization < 50%
   1.25
%  2.25 %
On February 13, 2013, the credit facility was further amended to bring SocGen in as a new participant and as a replacement for
Union as the Administrative Agent, and to remove Amegy from the syndication (although still remaining Yuma’s bank for
operations). The participation allocation became 68.75% for SocGen and 31.25% for Union. The new interest rate margins are as
follows:
LIBOR
Borrowing base utilization Prime margin 
 margin 
  
 
 
  
 
%  3.25 %
Utilization > 90%
   2.25
%  3.00 %
75% < utilization < 90%    2.00
%  2.75 %
50% < utilization < 75%    1.75
25% < utilization < 50%    1.50
%  2.50 %
%  2.25 %
   1.25
Utilization < 25%
On May 20, 2013, a third amendment to the credit agreement brought in OneWest Bank, FSB (“OneWest”) to replace Union with
new participation equal for SocGen and OneWest at 50/50. With the new amendment, the credit agreement now matures May 20,
2017; provided, however, that if the Series A Preferred Stock is not terminated or the redemption date of that series is not
extended past May 20, 2018, and changed on or prior to January 1, 2016, the maturity date of the credit agreement accelerates to
no later than April 30, 2016.
On September 27, 2013, the Borrowing Base Redetermination Agreement and Assignment brought in View Point Bank, N.A.
(“View Point”) as a third lender in the credit agreement. Participating percentages are now 37.5% for SocGen, 37.5% for
OneWest and 25% for View Point.
F-38
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE N – DEBT AND CHANGE IN BANKING LINE AND AGENT BANK – Continued
Costs paid to SocGen to bring them into the syndicate include a $150,000 arrangement fee, an $88,000 upfront fee, and $87,598
in attorney fees. Costs paid to replace Union with OneWest were a $50,000 arrangement fee and a $216,000 upfront fee and
$37,061 in attorney fees. On September 27, 2013, Yuma paid SocGen a $24,000 redetermination fee whereby the borrowing
base was increased $4 million to $40 million. Attorney fees for the redetermination were $4,080. All these costs are being
amortized over the life of the loan. SocGen was also paid an annual administrative fee of $25,000 to be amortized over the year.
The unamortized Amegy and Union costs of $123,925 and $189,727 were written off immediately upon their exit from the
syndicate. SocGen also required all commodity hedges be moved from BP to SocGen and charged a fee of $175,000 for the
novation. This fee was fully expensed.
Cash paid for interest year ended December 31, 2013 to Union as administrator was $74,839 and to SocGen as administrator
was $870,718. All the interest paid to Union was prime-based at 4.75%. On June 14, 2013, $5,000,000 of outstanding debt was
converted to LIBOR and on July 15, another $15,000,000 was converted to LIBOR. Except for a brief period (November 15th to
December 5th) when only $5,000,000 was in LIBOR, Yuma has kept $20,000,000 in LIBOR. Yuma’s all-in rates for LIBOR have
ranged from 2.92% to 3.21% per annum. SocGen interest rates for prime-based debt have primarily been 5% with two short
periods (46 days and 8 days) at 5.25% per annum.
Cash paid to Union as the Administrative Agent for both participating banks for interest during 2012 was $201,731 and was
prime-based. Costs to amend the credit agreement in 2012 paid to Union to bring them in with Amegy were $150,000 for upfront
facility fees and $88,916 for attorneys and other professional fees. The Union start-up fees were being amortized along with the
Amegy fees until the original maturity date.
During 2012 until September 24, 2012 while Amegy was the lone participating bank, Yuma elected the LIBOR option on a
portion of the revolver starting January 23, 2012 through May 23, 2012. LIBOR-based debt started at $2 million and went to $12
million on February 21, 2012 for one day and was $10 million from the next day, February 22, 2012, through May 23, 2012.
LIBOR-based rates for Yuma during this period ranged from 3.2789% to 3.7789% per annum. Otherwise, interest was prime
based at 3.75% to 4.5% per annum for 2012 up until the credit facility was amended to bring in Union as a participating bank and
new Administrative Agent. Cash paid to Amegy during 2012 up until that date was $428,259 prime-based and $97,269 LIBOR-
based.
The terms of the loan agreement require Exploration to meet a specific current ratio, interest coverage ratio, and a funded debt to
EBITDA ratio. In addition, the facility requires the guarantee of YEI. Exploration was in compliance with the loan covenants as of
December 31, 2013.
F-39
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE N – DEBT AND CHANGE IN BANKING LINE AND AGENT BANK – Continued
Cash paid to loan administrators for commitment fees consists of the following:
SocGen $ 52,431
Union    3,679
Amegy   
  
 
 
 $ 56,110
Year ended   Year ended  
 December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
-
2012
   
  $ -
    16,452
    52,994
   
  $ 69,446
Aggregate principal payments based on Yuma’s current borrowings as of December 31, 2013 for the next five years are shown
below:
2014 $178,027
 
2015   -
2016   -
 
2017   31,215,000 
2018   -
NOTE O – STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
1.
Common Stock
The Company is authorized to issue up to 130,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01. With the issuance of the Series A
Preferred Stock, each then-outstanding share of common stock (1,141 shares) was converted into 47.3269 shares of common
stock (54,000 total shares). The holders of common stock are entitled to one vote for each share of common stock, except as
otherwise required by law; holders of common stock are not entitled to vote on any amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation
that relates solely to the terms of the Preferred Stock. So long as any shares of Series A or Series B Preferred Stock are
outstanding, no dividends may be declared or paid or set apart for payment and no other distribution may be declared or made or
set apart for payment, in each case except for certain property distributions as defined in the Certificate of Incorporation, and
detailed in Note F – Related Party Transactions.
2.
2011 Stock Option Plan
Effective June 21, 2011, the Company adopted the 2011 Stock Option Plan (“Stock Plan”). The Stock Plan provides, among
other things, for the granting of up to 6,000 shares of common stock as awards to key employees, officers, directors, and
consultants of the Company by the Board of Directors. An award may take the form of stock options, stock appreciation rights
(“SARS”), or restricted stock.
F-40
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE P – INCOME TAXES
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently due
plus deferred taxes related primarily to differences between the basis of property and equipment for financial reporting versus
income tax reporting. The deferred taxes represent the future tax return consequences of those differences that will either be
taxable or deductible when the differences in the basis of assets and liabilities reverse.
The Company recognizes and measures income tax benefits that are more likely than not to be sustained on eventual
examination or settlement. Deferred tax assets are recorded to the extent the Company believes these assets will more likely
than not be realized.
The Company does not have any unrecognized tax benefits for the years 2013 and 2012. In addition, the Company does not
anticipate any unrecognized tax benefits during the next twelve months from the report date, April 24, 2014.
The Company did not incur any income tax deficiencies during 2011, 2012, and 2013, and therefore had no interest or penalties
assessed during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2012, and 2013.
The tax years of the Company that remain subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities are
2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013.
The Company follows the liability and asset approach in accounting for income and state franchise taxes as required by the
provisions of FASB concerning accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined using the tax
rates for the period in which those accounts are expected to be paid or received.
Provisions for income taxes are composed of the following for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011:
December 31,  December 31,  December 31, 
 
 
 2013
 
  
 
 
 
    
Continuing operations:
 
    
Current income taxes:
 
 $ -
Federal
 
   -
State
    
 
 
 
   -
Total
 
 
    
 
Deferred income taxes (benefit):    
Federal
 
 
State
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
Total taxes (benefit) on income  $ 3,080,272
2012
   
     
     
  $ -
    -
     
    -
     
     
    2,744,068
    354,241
     
    3,098,309
     
  $ 3,098,309
2011
   
     
     
  $ -
    -
     
    -
     
     
    769,573
    83,923
     
    853,496
     
  $ 853,496
2,705,688
   374,584
    
   3,080,272
F-41
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE P – INCOME TAXES – Continued
Deferred tax liabilities (assets) that are recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and
carryforwards at year-end are as follows:
Current:
Deferred tax asset (stock based compensation)
 
Noncurrent:
Deferred tax liability (hedges)
Deferred tax liability from excess of book basis over tax basis of certain assets including property,
plant and equipment
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
 
  
 
    
 $146,964
 
 
    
 
    
 $24,262
2012
   
     
  $-
     
     
  $168,297
23,116,582     16,307,945
Stock based compensation
Alternative minimum tax credit carryforwards
Net operating loss carryforwards
 
Deferred tax asset
 
Net deferred tax liability
)   -
)   (121,686
23,140,844     16,476,242  
 
    
 
   (27,079
   (121,686
)
   (9,831,874 )   (6,277,264 )
    
 
   (9,980,639 )   (6,398,950 )
    
 
 $13,160,205   $10,077,292
The deferred tax assets at December 31, 2013 and 2012 of $9,980,639 and $6,398,950, respectively, consist of deductible
temporary differences related to operating loss carryforwards, unrealized losses from oil and gas hedges, and tax credit
carryforwards and stock based compensation generated by the consolidated group:
Year NOL NOL
generated remaining
 
2013
2012
2011
2009
2007
2002
 
Total
$9,472,693     2034
   8,082,421     2033
   5,511,938     2032
   4,844,318     2030
   1,095,474     2028
   3,050,662     2023
    
     
 $32,057,506
Year of
 
  expiration
The tax provisions differ from the amounts that would be calculated by using federal statutory rates of 35 percent to calculate
income taxes because (i) no tax benefit has been recognized for nondeductible operating expenses; (ii) the Companies are
subject to various state income taxes; and (iii) the tax provisions consider the effect of graduated rates.
F-42
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE P – INCOME TAXES – Continued
When the Company believes that it is more likely than not that a net operating loss or credit carryforward may expire unused, it
establishes a valuation allowance against the loss or credit. No valuation allowance has been established as of December 31,
2013 or 2012. Income taxes are allocated among the companies in the consolidated group on the basis of the tax effect each
company contributed to income taxes for the years 2013 and 2012.
NOTE Q – CONTINGENCIES
1.
Certain Legal Proceedings
From time to time, the Company is party to various legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. While the
outcome of lawsuits cannot be predicted with certainty, the Company is not currently a party to any proceeding that it believes, if
determined in a manner adverse to the Company, could have a potential material adverse effect on the Company’s financial
condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
2. Environmental Remediation Contingencies
As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, there were no known environmental or other regulatory matters related to the Company’s
operations that were reasonably expected to result in a material liability to the Company. The Company’s operations are subject
to numerous laws and regulations governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to
environmental protection.
Yuma has been named as one of 97 defendants in a matter entitled Board of Commissioners of the Southeast Louisiana Flood
Protection Authority – East, Individually and As the Board Governing the Orleans Levee District, the Lake Borgne Basin Levee
District, and the East Jefferson Levee District v. Tennessee Gas Pipeline Company, LLC, et al., Civil District Court for the Parish
of Orleans, State of Louisiana, No. 13-6911, Division “J” - 5, now removed as Civil Action No. 13-5410, before the United Stated
District Court, Eastern District of Louisiana. Plaintiff filed the suit on July 24, 2013 seeking damages and injunctive relief arising
out of defendants’ drilling, exploration, and production activities from the early 1900s to the present day in coastal areas east of
the Mississippi River in Southeast Louisiana.
The suit alleges that defendants’ activities have caused “removal, erosion, and submergence” of coastal lands resulting in
significant reduction or loss of the protection such lands afforded against hurricanes and tropical storms. Plaintiff alleges that it
now faces increased costs to maintain and operate the man-made hurricane protection system and may reach the point where
that system no longer adequately protects populated areas.
Plaintiff lists hundreds of wells, pipelines, and dredging events as possible sources of the alleged land loss. Yuma is named in
association with 11 wells, four rights-of-way, and one dredging permit. The suit does not specify any deficiency or harm caused
by any individual activity or facility.
Although the suit references various federal statutes as sources of standards of care, plaintiff claims that all causes of action arise
under state law: negligence, strict liability, natural servitude of drain, public nuisance, private nuisance, and as third-party
beneficiary under breach of contract.
F-43
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Q – CONTINGENCIES – Continued
The lawsuit is in its early stages. No broad activity is expected until after the federal court decides whether to remand the matter
to state court. The court retaining jurisdiction will then set a scheduling order under which preliminary motions will be heard,
likely over the next several months. Potential motions to dismiss are numerous, including, challenges to plaintiff’s right to bring
suit, no cause of action, and improper parties. At this time, the Company cannot predict the outcome of this case and, in
Management’s opinion, assess any potential liability; therefore no liability has been recorded on the Company’s books.
NOTE R – EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
The Company has a defined contribution 401(k) plan (the “Plan”) for its qualified employees. Employees may contribute any
amount of their compensation to the Plan, subject to certain Internal Revenue Service annual limits and certain limitations for
employees classified as high income. The Plan provides for discretionary matching contributions by the Company, and the
Company currently provides a match for non-highly compensated employees only at a rate of 100 percent of each employee’s
contribution up to 4 percent of the employee’s base salary. The Company contributed $33,412 and $32,120 under this policy for
2013 and 2012, respectively.
The Company provides medical, dental, and life insurance coverage for both employees and dependents, along with long-term
disability and accidental death and dismemberment coverage for employees only. The Company pays the full cost of coverage
for all insurance benefits except medical. The Company’s contribution toward medical coverage is 85 percent for the employee
portion of the premium, and a variable percentage of the dependent portion, depending on employee compensation levels.
The Company offers paid vacations to employees in time increments determined by longevity and individual employment
contracts. The Company policy provides a limited carry forward of vacation time not taken during the year. The Company
recorded an accrued liability for compensated absences of $123,406 and $118,201 for 2013 and 2012, respectively.
The Company maintains employment contracts with members of its exploration staff and with certain key employees of the
Company. As of December 31, 2013, future employment contract salary commitments were $1,562,833, excluding automatic
renewals, evergreen and month-to-month provisions, and potential Annual Incentive Plan awards as described below.
The Company adopted a Stock Plan as described in Note O – Stockholders’ Equity.
During December 2011, the Company adopted an employee Annual Incentive Plan (“AIP”). Under the AIP, the Board of Directors
establishes certain performance metrics by which Management is to be measured annually. These metrics are changed each
year and awards of either restricted stock, cash, or some combination of both may be made to members of the Company’s
management team. The Board will meet during 2014 to evaluate the Company’s management team and determine any awards
that may be due for 2013 (see Note X – Subsequent Events). To the extent compensation costs relate to employees directly
involved in exploration and development activities, such amounts are capitalized to oil and natural gas properties. Amounts not
capitalized to oil and natural gas properties are recognized as general and administrative expense.
F-44
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE S – FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS WITH OFF-BALANCE SHEET RISK, CONCENTRATIONS OF CREDIT RISK, AND
CONCENTRATIONS IN GEOLOGIC PROVINCES
1.
Off-Balance Sheet Risk
The Company does not consider itself to have any material financial instruments with off-balance sheet risks.
2.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
The Company maintains cash deposits with banks that at times exceed applicable insurance limits. The Company reduces its
exposure to credit risk by maintaining such deposits with high quality financial institutions. The Company has not experienced
any losses in such accounts.
Substantially all of Exploration’s accounts receivable result from oil and natural gas sales, joint interest billings and prospect
sales to oil and gas industry partners. This concentration of customers, joint interest owners and oil and gas industry partners
may impact the Company’s overall credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these entities may be similarly affected by
industry-wide changes in economic and other conditions. Such receivables are generally not collateralized; however, certain
crude oil purchasers have been required to provide letters of guaranty from their parent companies.
3.
Concentrations in Geologic Provinces
The Company has a significant portion of its crude oil production and associated infrastructure concentrated in St. Bernard
Parish, Louisiana. These properties are in state waters and as such, have exposure to named windstorms. The Company carries
appropriate property coverage limits, but does not carry business interruption coverage for the potential lost production. The
Company has changed its strategic direction to onshore geological provinces with little or no hurricane exposure.
NOTE T – OTHER DISCLOSURES
1.
Other Income (Expense)
Louisiana sales tax settlement
Louisiana Mineral Board audit
Write off of liabilities net of assets   -
   -
Private equity expenses
Other
   (5,118
  
 
Total
 $ (72,953
December 31,  December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
 
  
 $ (44,149
 
 
   (23,686
 
)
)
2012
   
) $ -
-
)  
-
   
-
   
)  
(1,039
   
 
) $ (1,039
2011
   
  $ -
    -
    265,656
    (96,810
)   (2,550
     
) $ 166,296
F-45
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE T – OTHER DISCLOSURES – Continued
2.
Other Receivables
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 
 2013
 
 
  
Debit balances for trade payables
 $ 163,802
 
 
Blowout insurance premium adjustment   162,075
 
Refund from PPI for duplicate charges    89,544
 
Cash flow hedge settlement
Parish sales tax refund
 
 
Other
 
 
Total
2012
   
  $ -
    -
    89,544
    44,064
    14,375
    3,555
     
  $ 151,538
-
   -
   2,429
    
 $ 417,850
3.
Prepayments
Insurance
Exploration and drilling costs
Software maintenance agreements
Other subscriptions
Software licenses
Geological well database subscription   -
Other
 
Total
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
  
 
 
 $ 209,415
 
   187,145
 
   14,099
   13,560
 
 
   8,593
2012
   
  $ 185,890
    1,015,904
    78,092
    4,282
    5,819
    12,375
    1,179
     
  $ 1,303,541
1,179
    
 $ 433,991
4.
Other Current Deferred Charges
Loan fees
Primary office space rent   -
    
 
Total
 $ 162,416
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
 
  
 
 $ 162,416
2012
   
  $ 133,893
    12,554
     
  $ 146,447
F-46
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE T – OTHER DISCLOSURES – Continued
Other Noncurrent Assets
5.
Deferred offering costs
Loan fees
Security deposits on leased office and storage spaces   7,300
 
Total
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
 
  
 
 $ 1,257,160
   384,953
2012
   
  $ -
    211,997
    7,300
     
  $ 219,297
$ 1,649,413
Other Accrued Liabilities
6.
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
2012
$ 184,072
Salaries and bonuses
   170,531
Severance taxes
   158,368
Accounting and audit
   123,406
Vacation
   259,223
Pre-initial public offering expenses
   98,818
Sales and use tax
   62,631
Fees for commodity hedging advisor
   46,946
Interest expense
   21,463
Commodity hedge settlement
Louisiana sales tax audit (contested)
   -
Louisiana Mineral Board audit (contested)   -
Franchise taxes
   -
   1,825
Other
    
 
Total
 $ 1,127,283
$ 427,478
    4,045
    118,648
    118,201
    -
    30,683
    -
    2,460
    -
    217,721
    56,158
    1,523
    1,532
     
  $ 978,449
7.
Other Noncurrent Deferred Credits
Fees for commodity hedging advisor $ 69,998
Primary office space rent
 
Total
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
2012
   
  $ -
    11,761
   
  $ 11,761
-
$ 69,998
F-47
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE U – SALES TO MAJOR CUSTOMERS
Yuma generally sells crude oil and natural gas to numerous customers on a month-to-month basis. In 2013, four customers
accounted for approximately 78 percent of unaffiliated oil and gas sales. In 2012, four customers accounted for approximately
79 percent of unaffiliated oil and gas sales, and in 2011, approximately 65 percent of unaffiliated oil and gas sales were made to
three customers.
NOTE V – LEASES
Yuma leases its primary office space of 15,180 square feet for $26,565 per month, plus $50 per month for each employee or
contractor parking space. The lease term, as amended on July 30, 2010, expires on December 31, 2017. On November 1, 2012,
the monthly rent reduced to $21,821 on a triple-net basis, and then escalates by 1.45 percent for the period November 1, 2013
through October 31, 2014. The lease then escalates by approximately 2.8 percent each year thereafter
Yuma currently leases approximately 2,000 square feet of office space at an off-site location as a storage facility. The current
lease was effective December 28, 2004, and expired on January 31, 2012. The Company extended this lease for two additional
years at the same terms. The lease called for a security deposit of $1,300, and monthly rent of $1,455 commencing on
February 1, 2012.
Aggregate rental expense for 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $534,275, $378,192 and $367,212, respectively. As of December 31,
2013, future minimum rentals under all noncancellable operating leases are as follows:
2014 $523,521 
2015   531,083 
2016   520,762 
2017   525,492 
2018   2,197
NOTE W – DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
Texas Southeastern Gas Gathering Company (“TSEGG”) was a wholly owned subsidiary of YEI and operated approximately
76 miles of gathering lines in Louisiana. On March 12, 2010, TSEGG closed on the sale of its pipeline assets located in
Cameron, Iberville, Plaquemine and St. Bernard Parishes, Louisiana, for total proceeds of $7.5 million. The sale was effective
January 1, 2010, and resulted in the recognition of a gain on the sale of $3,957,057 after estimated taxes of $2,633,524.
Accordingly, the Company’s financial statements have been prepared with the net assets and liabilities, results of operations,
and cash flows of this entity displayed separately as “discontinued operations.”
F-48
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE W – DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS – Continued
The terms of the sale call for an “Earn Out” calculation for each of the successive five years whereby the Company can earn
$100,000, $250,000, or $500,000 if the revenues from the pipeline assets surpass certain prescribed hurdles. The total maximum
“Earn Out” payments for the five years may not exceed $2.5 million. For 2013, 2012 and 2011, the revenues did not surpass any
of the hurdles necessary to generate an “Earn Out” payment to TSEGG. Prior to the dissolution of TSEGG, the rights under the
“Earn Out” provision were assigned to the Company’s CEO (see Note F – Related Party Transactions).
A summary of the results of operations of the discontinued company follows:
December 31,  December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Results of operations:
 
 $
Gas transportation revenue
 
  
Operations and maintenance
  
)
General and administrative
 
  
Depreciation and amortization
 
  
 
)
  
Income (loss) from operations
  
 
 
 
  
Gain on sale of pipeline assets
)
  
Other income (expense)
 
  
 
  
)
Net income (loss) before taxes
)
  
Income tax expense (benefit)
 
 
  
Income from discontinued operations $
)
2011
   
     
  $ -
    -
    (110,211
    -
     
    (110,211
     
    -
    (8,755
     
    (118,966
    (100,928
     
  $ (18,038
-
-
-
-
 
-
 
-
-
 
-
-
 
-
2012
   
   
  $
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
-
-
-
-
 
-
 
-
-
 
-
-
 
-
TSEGG was formally dissolved as of December 31, 2011. Subsequent to the dissolution, there are no reported current or
noncurrent liabilities of discontinued operations for 2013 or 2012, and no income from discontinued operations in 2013 or 2012.
NOTE X – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company has evaluated subsequent events through April 24, 2014, the date these financial statements were available to be
issued. The Company is not aware of any subsequent events which would require recognition or disclosure in the financial
statements, except as noted below or already recognized or disclosed.
1. Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization with Pyramid Oil Company
On February 6, 2014, Pyramid Oil Company (“Pyramid”) and Yuma jointly announced a definitive merger agreement (the “merger
agreement”) for an all-stock transaction. The transaction is subject to the approval of the stockholders of Yuma’s common stock
and each class of Preferred Stock, and the stockholders of Pyramid.
F-49
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE X – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS – Continued
As part of the merger, Pyramid will reincorporate as a Delaware corporation and change its name to Yuma Energy, Inc. Under the
terms of the merger agreement, Pyramid will issue an aggregate of 66,336,701 shares of newly issued Pyramid common stock,
subject to certain adjustments, to Yuma stockholders, resulting in former Yuma stockholders owning approximately 93 percent of
the post-merger company. The transaction is expected to qualify as a tax-deferred reorganization under Section 368(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code. Pyramid common stock is traded on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “PDO”. Upon closing, all Yuma
executive officers and directors will assume the same roles with the combined company. The transaction is expected to close
mid-2014.
2.
Deferred Offering Costs
As a result of the merger agreement with Pyramid Oil Company, the expenses of approximately $1.3 million incurred by the
Company in exploring several alternative options to go public will be written off during the first quarter of 2014.
3. Annual Incentive Plan Awards for 2013 and Restricted Stock Awards
During the March 6, 2014 meeting of the Board of Directors, the AIP awards for performance in 2013 were evaluated and
approved. Participants will be offered the choice of cash, restricted stock, or a combination of cash and restricted stock. No
shares of restricted stock will vest until the Company has a Liquidity Event.
During the March 6, 2014 meeting, the Board also awarded 22 shares of restricted stock to two non-employee members of the
Board and awarded 237 shares of restricted stock to two employees. All of these awards have three year vesting schedules and
all are subject to the occurrence of a Liquidity Event prior to vesting.
F-50
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED)
1.
Costs Incurred
Costs incurred in oil and natural gas property acquisition, exploration and development activities, all of which are conducted
within the continental United States, are summarized below:
2011
2012
 
   
 
  $17,025,756   $4,815,285
Property acquisition costs - unproved $3,865,932
    1,800,385
    (186,273
   8,539,134
Property acquisition costs - proved
)   (1,386,649 )   -
Sales proceeds - unproved
   (679,266
    -
)   -
   (718,000
Sales proceeds - proved
    2,090,462
   2,504,087
Exploration costs
    4,931,623
    3,922,267
Development costs
   11,910,179     7,699,903
Capitalized asset retirements costs    5,795,400
    283,509
 
     
Total costs incurred
December 31,  December 31,  December 31, 
 2013
 
 
  
 
)
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 $31,217,466   $30,244,450   $10,925,250
173,432
The Company sells oil and natural gas prospects. The gains or losses from these sales are recorded as adjustments to the full
cost pool under U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) guidelines. Prospect profits were $50,346, $234,105 and $-
0- for 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
F-51
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
2. Capitalized Costs Relating to Oil and Gas Producing Activities
The following table illustrates the total amount of capitalized costs relating to natural gas and crude oil producing activities and
the total amount of related accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization:
2012
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
Oil and gas properties, full cost method:
    
 
Not subject to amortization:
 $14,587,986   $12,845,654  
Prospect inventory
 
   8,202,369
Property acquisition costs - unproved
 
   1,249,718
Well development costs - unproved
    
 
Subject to amortization:
   36,999,813     28,832,235  
Property acquisition costs - proved
   56,460,276     49,657,267  
Well development costs - proved
   50,849,905     43,132,174  
Capitalized costs - unsuccessful
   8,565,199
 
Capitalized asset retirement costs
Total capitalized costs
   176,915,266     145,697,800  
Less accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization   (84,438,840 )   (72,510,968 )
 $92,476,426   $73,186,832  
Net capitalized costs
7,511,033
    949,638
2,769,799
3.
Reserves
Proved natural gas and oil reserves are those quantities of natural gas and oil, which, by analysis of geosciences and
engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible – from a given date forward, from
known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations – prior to the time at
which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of
whether deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the estimation. Existing economic conditions include prices and costs
at which economic producibility from a reservoir is to be determined. Based on reserve reporting rules, the price is calculated
using the average price during the 12-month period prior to the ending date of the period covered by the report, determined as an
unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within such period (if the first day of the month
occurs on a weekend or holiday, the previous business day is used), unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements,
excluding escalations based upon future conditions. A project to extract hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator
must be reasonably certain that it will commence the project within a reasonable time. The area of the reservoir considered as
proved includes: (i) the area identified by drilling and limited by fluid contacts, if any, and (ii) adjacent undrilled portions of the
reservoir that can, with reasonable certainty, be judged to be continuous with it and to contain economically producible natural
gas or oil on the basis of available geosciences and engineering data. In the absence of data on fluid contacts, proved quantities
in a reservoir are limited by the lowest known hydrocarbons as seen in a well penetration unless geosciences, engineering or
performance data and reliable technology establish a lower contact with reasonable certainty. Where direct observation from well
penetrations has defined a highest known oil elevation and the potential exists for an associated natural gas cap, proved oil
reserves may be assigned in the structurally higher portions of the reservoir only if geosciences, engineering or performance data
and reliable technology establish the higher contact with reasonable certainty.
F-52
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
Developed natural gas and oil reserves are reserves of any category that can be expected to be recovered through existing wells
with existing equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor compared to the
cost of a new well.
The information below on our natural gas and oil reserves is presented in accordance with regulations prescribed be the SEC,
with guidelines established by the Society of Petroleum Engineers’ Petroleum Resource Management System, as in effect as of
the date of such estimates. The Company’s reserve estimates are generally based upon extrapolation of historical production
trends, analogy to similar properties and volumetric calculations. Accordingly, these estimates will change as future information
becomes available and as commodity prices change. Such changes could be material and could occur in the near term.
The Company does not prepare engineering estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserve quantities for all wells. The
Company only prepares engineering studies of estimated oil and natural gas quantities on a consolidated basis. The Company
has a quantity of interests that, individually, are immaterial and are excluded from prepared engineering studies. Accounting
sales volumes and receipts differ from amounts prepared by internal engineers and included in the following tables.
F-53
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
2012
2011
2013
 
 
  
 
 
Barrels of oil:
   
 
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:   
  6,164,340    1,484,550   1,224,683 
Beginning of year
  (861,854 )  (132,352 )  122,335  
Revisions of previous estimates
  6,481,816    4,777,048   12,780
 
Purchases of oil and gas properties
   225,063    236,583  
  92,152
Extensions and discoveries
  -
   -
 
Sale of oil and gas properties
  (201,473 )  (154,186 )  (110,124 )
Production
   
 
 
  11,614,811   6,200,123   1,486,257 
End of year
   
 
 
  1,130,465    1,123,623   981,391  
Proved developed reserves - January 1,
   
 
 
  1,607,229    1,130,465   1,123,623 
Proved developed reserves - December 31,
   
 
 
  5,033,875    360,922    243,292  
Proved undeveloped reserves - January 1,
 
 
   
Proved undeveloped reserves - December 31,  10,007,582   5,033,875   360,922
-
2013
 
  
 
   
Barrels of natural gas liquids:
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:   
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
2011
   
    
    
  1,575,624   354,875    -
  (280,800 )  -
   -
2012
-
   -
1,477,784   1,199,186   -
Purchases of oil and gas properties
   354,873 
  -
Extensions and discoveries
  -
   -
 
Sale of oil and gas properties
  (65,629 )  (14,220 )  (1,705 )
Production
   
 
 
  2,706,979   1,539,841   353,168 
End of year
 
   
    
 
 
  343,550    112,379    -
Proved developed reserves - January 1,
   
    
 
 
  492,472    343,550    112,379 
Proved developed reserves - December 31,
 
   
    
 
 
  1,232,074   242,501    -
Proved undeveloped reserves - January 1,
   
    
 
 
Proved undeveloped reserves - December 31,  2,274,677   1,232,074   242,501
F-54
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
2012
2011
2013
 
 
  
 
 
   
Thousands of cubic feet of natural gas
 
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:   
  31,071,137   17,020,496   10,831,934 
Beginning of year
  (8,281,139 )  (463,712 )  (2,802,945 )
Revisions of previous estimates
  16,495,803   12,931,203   5,626
 
Purchases of oil and gas properties
   2,163,825    9,463,335  
  362,806
Extensions and discoveries
  -
   -
 
Sale of oil and gas properties
  (1,276,238 )  (580,675 )  (477,454 )
Production
   
 
 
  38,372,369   31,071,137   17,020,496 
End of year
   
 
 
  10,156,754   5,287,966    2,403,165  
Proved developed reserves - January 1,
   
 
 
  10,316,516   10,156,754   5,287,966  
Proved developed reserves - December 31,
   
 
 
  20,914,383   11,732,530   8,428,769  
Proved undeveloped reserves - January 1,
   
 
 
Proved undeveloped reserves - December 31,  28,055,853   20,914,383   11,732,530
-
Revisions to previously estimates reserves for both natural gas and crude oil were primarily caused by (i) commodity price
reductions causing wells to reach their economic limits sooner thus producing fewer reserves and causing some proved
undeveloped locations to become uneconomic; (ii) downward revisions to the La Posada field Broussard #2 well when the well
was recompleted up hole in the “B” sand; and, (iii) a downward revision in the DS&B #119 well due to well performance.
F-55
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
4. Internal Controls Over Reserve and Future Net Revenue Estimation
The Company’s principal engineer, who is primarily responsible for overseeing the preparation of proved reserve estimates and
future net revenues, has over 14 years of experience in the oil and gas industry. His experience includes detailed evaluation of
reserves and future net reserves for acquisitions, divestments, bank financing, long range planning, portfolio optimization,
strategy and end of year financial reports. He has a B.S. in Petroleum Engineering from Texas A&M University, M.S. in Finance
from University of Houston, and MBA from Rice University. He is a member of the Society of Petroleum Engineers (the “SPE”).
The procedures and methods used by the principal engineer in preparing internal estimates of proved reserves and future net
cash flows are approved by the SPE’s Petroleum Resource Management System (“PMRS”) with no risks applied.
At December 31, 2012 and 2011, Pressler Petroleum Consultants (“Pressler”) performed an independent engineering evaluation
using the same guidelines established by PMRS to obtain an independent estimate of the proved reserves and future net
revenues. During 2013, Yuma changed outside engineering firms for the evaluation of its reserves. Yuma hired Netherland,
Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”) to evaluate its reserve portfolio, replacing Pressler Petroleum Consultants. At December 31,
2013, NSAI performed an independent engineering evaluation using the same guidelines established by PMRS to obtain an
independent estimate of the proved reserves and future net revenues.
5.
Third Party Procedures and Methods Review
The review consisted of 22 fields which included the Company’s major assets in the United States and encompassed
approximately 95 percent of Yuma’s proved reserves and future net cash flows as of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011. The
principal engineer presented the outside engineering firm with an overview of the data, methods and assumptions used in
estimating reserves and future net revenues for each field. The data presented included pertinent seismic information, geologic
maps, well logs, production tests, material balance calculations, well performance data, operating expenses and other relevant
economic criteria.
6.Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows Relating to Proved Oil and Gas Reserves
The following information has been developed utilizing procedures from the FASB concerning disclosures about oil and gas
producing activities, and based on natural gas and crude oil reserve and production volumes estimated by the Company’s
engineering staff. It can be used for some comparisons, but should not be the only method used to evaluate the Company or its
performance. Further, the information in the following table may not represent realistic assessments of future cash flows, nor
should the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows be viewed as representative of the current value of the
Company.
F-56
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
The Company believes that the following factors should be taken into account when reviewing the following information:
·Future costs and selling prices will probably differ from those required to be used in these calculations;
Due to future market conditions and governmental regulations, actual rates of production in future years may vary significantly
·
from the rate of production assumed in the calculations;
A 10 percent discount rate may not be reasonable as a measure of the relative risk inherent in realizing future net oil and gas
·
revenues; and
· Future net revenues may be subject to different rates of income taxation.
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to the Company’s ownership interests in proved crude oil
and natural gas reserves as of year-end is shown for Exploration for 2013, 2012 and 2011.
December 31,
  December 31,   December 31, 
 
 2013
 
  2012
 
  
   
 
Future cash inflows
 $1,450,469,000  $823,280,251   $252,662,388  
Future oil and natural gas operating expenses
   (334,883,800 )   (151,140,007)   (51,468,360 )
Future development costs
   (424,256,900 )   (209,618,885)   (13,306,206 )
Future income tax expenses
   (163,704,120 )   (111,946,653)   (45,117,996 )
 
    
 
Future net cash flows
   527,624,180     350,574,706     142,769,826  
10% annual discount for estimating timing of cash flows
   (202,270,201 )   (139,021,820)   (57,685,959 )
 
    
 
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows $325,353,979   $211,552,886   $85,083,867
2011
Estimates of future net cash flows from proved reserves of gas, oil, and condensate for 2013, 2012 and 2011 are computed using
the average first-day-of-the-month price during the 12-month period including the impact of cash flow hedges for 2012 and 2011
only. Since the Company discontinued cash flow hedge accounting as of January 1, 2013, the impact of cash flow hedges are
excluded as of that date. Prices used in computing year-end future cash flows were $96.94, $94.04 and $96.04 for crude oil and
$3.67, $2.93 and $4.04 for natural gas for 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
The ceiling test for many companies following the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties, including
Yuma, could be negatively impacted by prolonged unfavorable crude oil and natural gas prices. Future operating expenses and
development costs are computed primarily by the Company’s petroleum engineer by estimating the expenditures to be incurred
in developing and producing the Company’s proved oil and natural gas reserves at the end of the year, based on the year-end
costs and assuming continuation of existing economic conditions.
F-57
Yuma Energy, Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - CONTINUED
NOTE Y – SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES (UNAUDITED) – Continued
Future income taxes are based on year-end statutory rates, adjusted for tax basis and applicable tax credits. A discount factor of
ten percent was used to reflect the timing of future net cash flows. The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
is not intended to represent the replacement cost or fair market value of the Company’s oil and natural gas properties. An
estimate of fair value would also take into account, among other things, the recovery of reserves not presently classified as
proved, anticipated future changes in prices and costs, and a discount factor more representative of the time value of money and
the risks inherent in reserve estimates.
7.
Change in Standardized Measure
Changes in the standardized measure of future net cash flows relating to proved oil and natural gas reserves for Exploration are
summarized below:
Changes due to current year operation:
Sales of oil and natural gas, net of oil and natural gas operating expenses
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of oil and gas properties
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development
costs
Changes due to revisions in standardized variables:
Prices and operating expenses
Income taxes
Estimated future development costs
Quantities
Sale of reserves in place
Accretion of discount
Production rates, timing and other
 
Net change
Beginning of year
 
End of year
2012
December 31,   December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
  
 
    
 
 $(17,255,824 ) $(13,250,556 ) $(12,877,813 )
   37,750,617     40,013,415     50,163,527  
   215,427,459     177,412,984     17,132,467
2011
100,500
5,432,652
-
-
(30,773,529 )   (37,028,314 )   20,364,851  
   (38,340,467 )   (40,922,146 )   (14,624,083 )
   32,430,504     (5,173,677 )   (794,080
)
   (107,070,514)   (12,905,019 )   (19,926,711 )
   -
 
   27,910,664     11,055,659     5,083,613
 
    (1,475,127 )
   (6,378,317
    
     
 
   113,801,093     126,469,019     43,046,644  
   211,552,886     85,083,867     42,037,223  
    
 
 $325,353,979   $211,552,886   $85,083,867
)   1,834,021
-
Sales of oil and natural gas, net of oil and natural gas operating expenses, are based on historical pretax results. Sales of oil and
natural gas properties, extensions and discoveries, purchases of minerals in place and the changes due to revisions in
standardized variables are reported on a pretax discounted basis.
F-58
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
 
CURRENT ASSETS:
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts:
Trade
CEO and employees
Other
Note receivable
Prepayments
Deferred taxes
Other deferred charges
March 31,
  December 31, 
 2014
 
  2013
 (Unaudited)
 
     
    
 
     
    
     
 
    
 
  $4,194,511
 $6,365,305
    
     
 
   14,490,629     10,833,211  
   96,651
 
 
   191,296
 
   4,000
 
   256,973
   146,964
 
 
   181,166
155,080
    417,850
    4,000
    433,991
    146,964
    162,416
Total current assets
 
OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES, at cost (full cost method):
Not subject to amortization
Subject to amortization
 
 
Less:  accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
 
Net oil and gas properties
2,066,760
21,732,984     16,348,023  
 
    
    
 
   25,563,673     24,051,278  
   153,309,206    152,863,988  
    
 
   178,872,879    176,915,266  
   (90,138,293 )   (84,438,840 )
    
 
   88,734,586     92,476,426  
 
    
 
   (1,849,555 )   (1,822,925 )
 
    
 
   255,687
 
    
    
 
 
   -
 
   684,295
 
   352,430
    
 
 
   1,036,725
    
 
 $111,759,982  $111,631,968
243,835
     
     
    95,634
    818,637
    1,649,413
     
    2,563,684
OTHER OPERATING PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, at cost   2,105,242
Less:  accumulated depreciation and amortization
 
Net other operating property and equipment
 
OTHER ASSETS:
Receivables from affiliate
Commodity derivative instruments
Other noncurrent assets
 
Total other assets
 
Total assets
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-59
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS - CONTINUED
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
 
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Current maturities of debt
Accounts payable, principally trade
Commodity derivative instruments
Asset retirement obligations
Other accrued liabilities
 
Total current liabilities
 
LONG-TERM DEBT:
Bank debt
 
OTHER NONCURRENT LIABILITIES:
Preferred stock derivative liability, Series A and B
Asset retirement obligations
Commodity derivative instruments
Deferred taxes
677,132
    1,755,650
    1,127,283
March 31,
  December 31, 
 2014
 
  2013
 (Unaudited)
     
 
    
 
     
    
 
     
    
 $-
  $178,027
 
   17,424,428     15,116,560  
 
   1,762,788
 
   1,783,756
 
   1,394,422
    
 
   22,365,394     18,854,652  
 
    
    
 
   30,565,000     31,215,000  
 
    
    
 
   49,818,384     51,290,414  
   9,042,561
 
   12,766
 
   12,288,426     13,160,205
8,942,029
    218,649
102,532
    69,998
Restricted stock units
 
   158,654
Other deferred credits
 
   61,673
 
    
 
Total other noncurrent liabilities
   71,382,464     73,783,827  
 
    
 
PREFERRED STOCK, Series A and B, subject to mandatory redemption   35,948,291     35,666,342  
 
 
    
 
 EQUITY:
    
Common stock
 
   542
 
Capital in excess of par value of common stock
   2,668,923
   2,383
Accumulated other comprehensive income
 
   (51,173,015 )   (50,596,088 )
Accumulated earnings (deficit)
 
    
 
   (48,501,167 )   (47,887,853 )
Total equity
    
 
 
Total liabilities and equity
 $111,759,982  $111,631,968
542
    2,668,923
    38,770
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-60
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
2013
126,648
235,569
Quarters Ended March 31, 
 
 
 2014
 
    
 
REVENUES:
 $10,355,439   $4,869,942  
Sales of natural gas and crude oil
 
   241,493
Other revenue
    
 
 
   10,596,932     4,996,590  
Total revenues
    
 
 
 
    
EXPENSES:
   321,317
 
Marketing cost of sales
   3,658,505     1,347,731  
Lease operating
   1,510
 
Re-engineering and workovers
   47,914
 
General and administrative - stock based compensation
   3,150,071     1,251,791  
General and administrative - other
   5,726,083     1,661,505  
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
   142,144
 
Asset retirement obligation accretion expense
 
   27,128
Bad debt expense
    
 
 
   13,074,672     4,612,301  
Total expenses
    
 
 
 
   (2,477,740 )   384,289
INCOME (LOSS) FROM OPERATIONS
 
    
 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE):
    
 
Change in fair value of preferred stock derivative liability - Series A and Series B   1,472,030     2,003,655  
)   (165,223 )
Interest expense
   (139,419
 
    2,046
Interest income
   1,049
)
    (2,138
Other, net
   102
 
     
 
    
   1,333,762     1,838,340  
Total other income (expense)
64,244
    504
50,957
    -
(1,143,978 )   2,222,629  
NET INCOME (LOSS) BEFORE INCOME TAXES
 
    
     
 
 
   (849,000
)   114,800
Income tax expense (benefit)
     
    
 
 
   (294,978
)   2,107,829  
NET INCOME (LOSS)
 
     
    
 
 
    271,674
   281,949
Accretion of Preferred Stock, Series A and Series B
     
    
 
 
 $(576,927
) $1,836,155  
NET LOSS AVAILABLE TO COMMON STOCKHOLDERS
 
     
    
 
 
     
    
EARNINGS (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE
 
) $34.00
 $(10.64
Basic
 $(10.64
) $26.67
 
Diluted
 
     
 
    
 
     
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON SHARES OUTSTANDING     
 
    54,000
Basic
Diluted
    79,036
54,236
   54,236
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-61
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
NET INCOME (LOSS)
 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
 
Reclassification of gain on settled commodity derivatives
Less income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain on settled   commodity derivatives, net of income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain from amortization of  commodity derivatives sold
Less income taxes
 
Reclassification of gain from amortization of  commodity derivatives sold, net of income taxes   (14,414
 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
 
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Quarters Ended March 31, 
 2014
 
  
 
 $(294,978 ) $2,107,829  
 
    
 
    
    
 
)
   (35,728
)
   (13,755
 
    
   (21,973
)
 
    
)
   (23,438
)
   (9,024
    
 
)
 
    
)
   (36,387
 
    
 $(331,365 ) $2,054,896
2013
)   (67,921
)   (26,150
     
)   (41,771
     
)   (18,150
)   (6,988
     
)   (11,162
     
)   (52,933
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-62
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
$540
    2
     
    542
March 31,
 
 2014
 
 (Unaudited)   2013
 
  
 
    
COMMON STOCK:
 $542
Balance at beginning of period - 54,000 shares, $.01 par
    
Employee restricted stock awards (236 shares)
    
 
   542
Balance at end of period - 54,236 shares, $.01 par
    
 
    
CAPITAL IN EXCESS OF PAR VALUE OF COMMON STOCK:
   2,668,923     2,182,293
Balance at beginning of period
   -
Employee restricted stock awards (236 shares)
    
 
   2,668,923     2,668,923
Balance at end of period
    
 
ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS):    
Balance at beginning of period
Comprehensive income (loss) from commodity derivative
instruments, net of income taxes
 
Balance at end of period
 
ACCUMULATED EARNINGS (DEFICIT):
Balance at beginning of period
Net income (loss)
Preferred stock accretion (Series A and B)
Preferred stock cash dividends (Series A and B)
Preferred stock dividends paid in kind (Series A and B)
 
Balance at end of period
 
TOTAL EQUITY
December 31, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   38,770
 
    
)
   (36,387
 
    
 
   2,383
 
    
    
 
   (50,596,088)   (10,885,832 )
)   (33,050,103 )
   (294,978
)   (1,101,972 )
   (281,949
    (145,900
   -
)
   -
    (5,412,281 )
    
 
     
   (51,173,015)   (50,596,088 )
    
 
 $(48,501,167) $(47,887,853 )
486,630
268,841
     
)   (230,071
     
    38,770
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-63
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Quarters Ended March 31, 
 
 
 2014
 
  
 
 
 
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
    
Reconciliation of net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities:
2013
504
123,925
)   (18,150
    675,613
    793
$(294,978 ) $2,107,829  
   (1,472,030 )   (2,003,655 )
   5,726,083     1,661,505  
    64,244
 
   142,144
    -
   47,913
 
 
   46,073
    40,202
 
   (849,000 )   114,800
 
   27,128
   1,257,160     -
 
 
   -
)
   (23,437
 
   978,386
   -
 
    
 
   5,585,442     2,767,610  
 
    
 
    
   (3,399,563 )   (33,797
)
)
    (5,117
   -
   177,018
    334,727
 
   2,307,868     2,721,079  
   267,139
    (108,961 )
 
     
    
 
)   -
   (8,325
    
     
 
   4,929,579     5,675,541
Net income (loss)
Decrease in fair value of preferred stock liability
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of  property and equipment
Accretion of asset retirement obligation
Stock-based compensation net of capitalized cost
Amortization of other assets and liabilities
Deferred tax expense (benefit)
Bad debt expense
Write off deferred offering costs
Write off credit financing costs
Amortization of benefit from commodity derivatives (sold) and purchased, net
Net commodity derivatives mark-to-market loss
Other
 
Cash flow from direct operations
 
Changes in current operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
Note receivable
Other current assets
Accounts payable
Other current liabilities
 
Noncurrent payable to commodity derivative advisor
 
NET CASH PROVIDED BY OPERATING ACTIVITIES
F-64
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS - CONTINUED
2013
55,000
    (293
Quarters Ended March 31, 
 
 2014
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
 $(2,308,992 ) $(5,215,033 )
Capital expenditures on property, plant and equipment
   307,600
 
Proceeds from sale of property
)
   95,634
Decrease (increase) in noncurrent receivable from affiliate
    
 
 
   (1,905,758 )   (5,160,326 )
NET CASH USED BY INVESTING ACTIVITIES
    
 
 
    
 
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
   (178,027 )   (183,601 )
Payments on borrowings
   (650,000 )   1,175,000  
Change in borrowing on line of credit
   (25,000
)   (266,276 )
Line of credit financing costs
 
    
     
 
 
   (853,027 )   725,123
NET CASH PROVIDED (USED) BY FINANCING ACTIVITIES
    
 
 
   2,170,794     1,240,338  
NET INCREASE IN CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
 
 
    
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT BEGINNING OF PERIOD   4,194,511     5,285,022  
    
 
 
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AT END OF PERIOD
 $6,365,305   $6,525,360
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Interest payments (net of interest capitalized)
Interest capitalized
Income tax payments
$66,968
 $239,063
 $-
$(148,831 )
 
  $239,063
  $-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-65
Yuma Energy, Inc.
CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE A – BASIS OF PRESENTATION
These consolidated financial statements are unaudited; however, in the opinion of management, these statements reflect all
adjustments necessary for a fair statement of the results for the period reported. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring
nature unless disclosed otherwise. These consolidated financial statements, including notes, have been condensed and do not
include all of the information and disclosures required by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America for complete financial statements. These condensed consolidated financial statements should be read in conjunction
with the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2013 and the notes thereto.
NOTE B – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
Certain financial instruments are reported at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Under fair value measurement
accounting guidance, fair value is defined as the amount that would be received from the sale of an asset or paid for the transfer
of a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants, i.e., an exit price. To estimate an exit price, a three-level
hierarchy is used. The fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs, which refer broadly to assumptions market participants would
use in pricing an asset or a liability, into three levels. Yuma uses a market valuation approach based on available inputs and the
following methods and assumptions to measure the fair values of its assets and liabilities, which may or may not be observable
in the market.
Fair Value of Other Financial Instruments – The carrying values of financial instruments comprising current assets and current
liabilities approximate fair values due to the short-term maturities of these instruments.
Derivatives – The fair values of the Company’s commodity derivatives are based on third-party pricing models which utilize
inputs that are either readily available in the public market, such as natural gas and oil forward curves and discount rates, or can
be corroborated from active markets or broker quotes. These values are then compared to the values given by Yuma’s
counterparties for reasonableness. The Company is able to value the assets and liabilities based on observable market data for
similar instruments, which results in the Company using market prices and implied volatility factors related to changes in the
forward curves. Derivatives are also subject to the risk that counterparties will be unable to meet their obligations. Because the
Company’s commodity derivative counterparty was Société Générale at March 31, 2014, Yuma has not considered non-
performance risk in the valuation of the Company’s derivatives.
Financial assets are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies or similar techniques, and at least one significant model assumption or input is unobservable. Level 3 financial
liabilities consist of embedded derivatives related to the conversion features in the Series A Preferred Stock issued July 1, 2011,
and the Series B Preferred Stock issued in July and August of 2012, for which there is no current market for these securities such
that the determination of fair value requires significant judgment or estimation. Yuma has valued the automatic conditional
conversion, re-pricing/down-round, change of control, default and follow-on offering provisions using a Monte Carlo simulation
model, with the assistance of a valuation consultant. These models incorporate transaction details such as the stock price of
comparable companies in the same industry, contractual terms, maturity, and risk free interest rates, as well as assumptions
about future financings, volatility, and holder behavior as of issuance, and each quarter thereafter for each of the Series A and the
Series B Preferred Stock.
F-66
NOTE B – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS – Continued
Fair value measurements at March 31, 2014
Significant
Significant
Quoted prices  other
 
 in active
 
 markets
 
 (Level 1)
 
  
 
  
Assets:
 $
Commodity derivatives - oil
  
 
 $
Total assets
  
 
  
Liabilities:
 $
Commodity derivatives - gas
Commodity derivatives - oil
  
Preferred stock derivative liability  
 
  
 $
Total liabilities
observable  unobservable   
 
  inputs
  inputs
   
 
  (Level 3)
  Total
  (Level 2)
 
   
   
   
 
     
     
     
 
  $684,295   $-
  $684,295
 
     
     
     
 
  $684,295
  $684,295   $-
 
     
     
     
 
     
     
     
  $1,009,231  
  $1,009,231  $-
    766,323     -
    766,323
 
    49,818,384     49,818,384 
    -
     
     
 
  $1,775,554  $49,818,384   $51,593,938
-
 
-
 
 
-
-
-
 
-
Significant
Significant
Fair value measurements at December 31, 2013
 
  
 
 Quoted prices  other
 
 in active
 
 markets
 
 (Level 1)
 
  
 
  
Assets:
 $
Commodity derivatives - oil
  
 
 $
Total assets
  
 
  
Liabilities:
 $
Commodity derivatives - gas
Commodity derivatives - oil
  
Preferred stock derivative liability  
 
  
 $
Total liabilities
observable  unobservable   
 
  inputs
  inputs
   
 
  (Level 3)
  Total
  (Level 2)
 
   
   
   
 
     
     
     
 
  $818,637   $-
  $818,637
 
     
     
     
 
  $818,637
  $818,637   $-
 
     
     
     
 
     
     
     
 
  $472,564
  $472,564   $-
 
    423,217     -
    423,217
    51,290,414     51,290,414 
    -
     
 
     
  $895,781   $51,290,414   $52,186,195
-
 
-
 
 
-
-
-
 
-
Commodity derivative instruments listed above include collars, swaps, and 3-way collars. For additional information on the
Company’s commodity derivatives, see Note C – Commodity Derivative Instruments.
F-67
NOTE B – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS – Continued
Debt – The Company’s debt is recorded at the carrying amount on its Consolidated Balance Sheets. For further discussion of the
Company’s debt, please see Note G – Debt. The carrying amount of floating-rate debt approximates fair value because the
interest rates are variable and reflective of market rates.
Asset Retirement Obligations (ARO’s) – The Company estimates the fair value of ARO’s based on discounted cash flow
projections using numerous estimates, assumptions and judgments regarding such factors as the existence of a legal obligation
for an ARO, amounts and timing of settlements, the credit-adjusted risk-free rate to be used and inflation rates.
At March 31, 2014, the level 3 inputs to the Monte Carlo option pricing model were an assumed valuation market value of equity
of $254.95 million based on a discount to net asset value, resulting in a value per share on a fully diluted and as-converted basis
of $2,946. The evaluation assumed a likely merger or initial public offering with a probability of 5% in the second quarter, 65% in
the third quarter and 20% in the fourth quarter of 2014, with some sale or other exit of the Company at the end of 2014 or early in
2015 if not completed in 2014. The volatility was assumed to be 40.84% and was derived from implied volatilities of a number of
public companies (tickers: AXAS, CRK, CRZO, GDP, PQ, SFY, SGY and WRES) adjusted for Yuma’s relatively lower amount of
financial leverage at March 31, 2014.
A summary of the value and the changes in Yuma’s assets (liabilities) classified as Level 3 measurements during the quarter
ended March 31, 2014 is presented below:
March 31, 2014
December 31, 2013
 
Total change (decrease) $ (1,472,030
Preferred Stock
 
 Derivative Liability 
  
 
 
 $ 49,818,384
 
   51,290,414
 
    
)
NOTE C – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
Objective and Strategies for Using Commodity Derivative Instruments – In order to mitigate the effect of commodity price
uncertainty and enhance the predictability of cash flows relating to the marketing of the Company’s crude oil and natural gas,
Yuma enters into crude oil and natural gas price commodity derivative instruments with respect to a portion of the Company’s
expected production. The commodity derivative instruments used include variable to fixed price commodity swaps, two-way and
three-way collars.
F-68
NOTE C – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
The fixed price swap and two-way collar contracts entitle Yuma (floating price payor) to receive settlement from the counterparty
(fixed price payor) for each calculation period in amounts, if any, by which the settlement price for the scheduled trading days
applicable for each calculation period is less than the fixed strike price or floor price. Yuma would pay the counterparty if the
settlement price for the scheduled trading days applicable for each calculation period is more than the fixed strike price or selling
price. The amount payable by Yuma, if the floating price is above the fixed or selling price, is the product of the notional quantity
per calculation period and the excess of the floating price over the fixed or ceiling price with respect to each calculation period.
The amount payable by the counterparty, if the floating price is below the fixed or floor price, is the product of the notional quantity
per calculation period and the excess of the fixed or floor price over the floating price with respect to each calculation period.
A three-way collar consists of a two-way collar contract combined with a put option contract sold by Yuma with a strike price
below the floor price of the two-way collar. The Company receives price protection at the purchased put option floor price of the
two-way collar if commodity prices are above the sold put option strike price. If commodity prices fall below the sold put option
strike price, Yuma receives the cash market price plus the difference between the two put option strike prices. This type of
instrument allows Yuma to capture more value in a rising commodity price environment, but limits the benefits in a downward
commodity price environment.
While these instruments mitigate the cash flow risk of future reductions in commodity prices, they may also curtail benefits from
future increases in commodity prices.
Yuma has elected to discontinue hedge accounting for all commodity derivative instruments beginning with the 2013 financial
year. The balance in other comprehensive income (“OCI”) at year-end 2012 will remain in accumulated other comprehensive
income (“AOCI”) until such time that the original hedged forecasted transaction occurs. The last of these contracts will expire in
December 2016. Starting with year 2013, mark-to-market adjustments to the contracts that were in AOCI at year-end 2012 will not
be made to AOCI, but instead are recognized in earnings, as are all other commodity derivative contracts going forward. As a
result of discontinuing the application of hedge accounting, Yuma’s earnings are potentially more volatile.
See Note B – Fair Value Measurements for a discussion of methods and assumptions used to estimate the fair values of the
Company’s commodity derivative instruments.
Counterparty Credit Risk – Commodity derivative instruments expose Yuma to counterparty credit risk. The Company’s
commodity derivative instruments are with Société Générale (“SocGen”) which is rated “A” by Standard and Poor’s, “A2” by
Moody’s, and “A” by Fitch. Commodity derivative contracts are executed under master agreements which allow Yuma, in the
event of default, to elect early termination of all contracts. If Yuma chooses to elect early termination, all asset and liability
positions would be netted and settled at the time of election.
Commodity derivative instruments open as of March 31, 2014 are provided below. Natural gas prices are New York Mercantile
Exchange (“NYMEX”) Henry Hub prices, and crude oil prices are NYMEX West Texas Intermediate, except for the oil swaps
noted below that are based on Argus Light Louisiana Sweet.
F-69
NOTE C – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
NATURAL GAS (MMBtu):
3-way collars
Volume
Ceiling sold price (call)
Prices are Weighted Averages
 
 2014
  2016
 Settlement   Settlement   Settlement  
 
  
 
    
    
 
   764,285     2,377,371    1,122,533 
 $4.42
2015
$4.47
$4.35
$4.00
  $3.25
$4.08
$4.10
 $4.12
Floor purchased price (put)
  $3.25
 $3.32
Floor sold price (short put)
     
    
 
    
     
Swaps
   1,431,508    458,622     -
Volume
    -
 $4.08
Price
     
    
 
    
     
Reverse Swaps
   142,233     293,234     -
Volume
  $4.32
    -
 $4.27
Price
     
     
    
 
     
     
    
CRUDE OIL (Bbls):
     
    
     
3-way collars
    89,512
    70,263
   36,700
Volume
  $104.36
  $106.39
 $103.61
Ceiling sold price (call)
  $86.49
  $92.38
 $90.92
Floor purchased price (put)
  $65.82
 $69.39
  $72.38
Floor sold price (short put)
     
     
    
 
     
    
     
Swaps
    -
   195,802     -
Volume
 $94.05
    -
    -
Price
     
     
 
    
     
     
Swaps at Argus Light Louisiana Sweet    
    -
    -
Volume
Price
    -
    -
     
     
 
     
     
Sold puts
    -
    -
Volume
Floor sold price (short put)
    -
    -
     
     
 
     
     
Put Spread
    -
    27,588
Volume
Floor purchased price (put)
  $90.00
*   -
*   -
  $75.00
Floor sold price (short put)
20,203
 $99.40
    
    
   40,500
 $70.00
    
    
   -
   -
   -
* Contracts include a premium to be paid by Yuma of $5.56 per barrel as the contracts mature ($153,389 total premium). The
premium is not included in these prices.
F-70
NOTE C – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
Derivatives for each commodity are netted on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as they are all contracts with the same
counterparty. The following table presents the fair value and balance sheet location of each classification of commodity
derivative contracts on a gross basis without regard to same-counterparty netting:
Asset commodity derivatives:
Current assets
Noncurrent assets
Fair value as of
  December 31, 
 March 31,
  2013
 
 2014
 
   
  
 
     
    
 
 $826,697
  $1,109,403
   2,331,574     2,861,225
 
 
    
   3,158,271     3,970,628
Liability commodity derivatives:
Current liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities
 
 
 
Total commodity derivative instruments $(1,091,259) $(77,144
(2,589,485)   (1,786,535 )
   (1,660,045)   (2,261,237 )
    
 
   (4,249,530)   (4,047,772 )
 
    
)
Sales of natural gas and crude oil on the Consolidated Statements of Operations are comprised of the following:
Sales of natural gas and crude oil
Gains (losses) realized on commodity derivatives
Gains (losses) unrealized on commodity derivatives
Amortized gains from benefit of sold qualified gas options   23,438
 
Total sales of natural gas and crude oil
Quarters ended March 31, 
 
 2014
  
 
 $12,307,018   $5,443,298  
)   84,107
   (996,631
 
)   (675,613 )
   (978,386
 
    18,150
    
     
 
 $10,355,439   $4,869,942
2013
F-71
NOTE C – COMMODITY DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS – Continued
A reconciliation of the components of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the Consolidated Statements of
Changes in Equity is presented below:
Balance, beginning of period
Other reclassifications due to expired contracts previously subject to hedge
accounting rules
Amortized gains from benefit of sold qualified options realized in income
 
Balance, end of period
NOTE D – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
March 31, 2014
Before
 
tax
 
  
 $63,041   $38,770   $437,140  $268,841
March 31, 2013
Before
tax
After tax
After tax
(35,728 )   (21,973)   (67,921 )   (41,771 )
(23,438 )   (14,414)   (18,150 )   (11,162 )
     
    
 
 $3,875
  $2,383   $351,069  $215,908
On March 19, 2014, under the terms of the Company’s 2011 Working Interest Incentive Plan with the Company’s CEO, Samuel L.
Banks, Yuma’s Board of Directors approved the sale to Mr. Banks of an additional 1.00% working interest in Phase 2 of the
Company’s Austin Chalk Project. Mr. Banks paid $16,000 as his share of the upfront participation amount on the same terms as
third party participants.
NOTE E – STOCK AWARDS AND THEIR TREATMENT
Under the terms of the Company’s 2011 Stock Option Plan, on March 6, 2014, the Company granted 237 RSA’s to two
employees that vest at various dates with one-third vesting one year from the employee’s start date and each additional third
vesting in each of the next two subsequent years, subject to the successful completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter
lock-up period. Should an employee leave the Company; any unvested shares are forfeited.
On March 6, 2014, the Company granted 22 RSA’s to two non-employee members of the Board of Directors with a vesting
schedule of one-third December 31, 2014, one-third December 31, 2015 and one-third December 31, 2016, subject to the
completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter lock-up period. Should a Director leave the Board, any unvested shares are
forfeited.
The term “Liquidity Event” means either (i) the closing of an initial public offering of Company securities raising gross proceeds of
at least $40 million, or (ii) the closing of a merger or stock exchange between the Company or its stockholders pursuant to which
the Company stockholders own in excess of 50% of the common equity of the surviving company and such surviving company is
subject to the reporting obligations under Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the “Exchange Act”).
F-72
NOTE E – STOCK AWARDS AND THEIR TREATMENT – Continued
A summary of the status of the RSA’s and changes for the quarter ending March 31, 2014 is presented below.
Unvested shares as of January 1, 2014  2,739
Granted on March 6, 2014
Vested
Forfeited
 
Unvested shares as of March 31, 2014   2,998
259
  -
  -
Number of  Weighted
 unvested   average
 RSA
 shares
grant-date
  fair value
   
  $2,542 per share
  $2,946 per share
   
   
   
  $2,577 per share
On April 1, 2013, the Company granted 163 Restricted Stock Units or “RSU’s”. In order to vest, an employee must have
continuous service with the Company from time of the grant through April 1, 2016, the Vesting Date. The RSU’s may be settled in
cash and do not require the eventual issuance of common stock (although it is an election available to the Company);
consequently, the awards are liability based and the booked valuation will change as the market value for common stock (as
determined by an outside consulting firm) changes. Compensation expense is recognized over the three-year vesting period.
A summary of the status of the unvested RSU’s and changes during the quarter ended March 31, 2014 is presented below.
Unvested shares as of January 1, 2014   158
Forfeited
(9
Number of  Weighted
 unvested   average
 RSU
 shares
grant-date
  fair value
   
  $2,062 per share
) $2,062 per share
Unvested shares as of March 31, 2014    149
$2,062 per share
F-73
NOTE F – EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE
Earnings per common share are computed by dividing earnings available to common stockholders by the weighted average
number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Potential common stock equivalents are determined using the
“if converted” method.
Potentially dilutive securities for the computation of diluted weighted average shares outstanding are as follows:
Three Months Ended 
 
 
 March 31,
 
 
 2014
 
  
 
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock  18,876    15,589  
 
Series B Convertible Preferred Stock  9,989
 
  2,578
Restricted Stock Awards
Restricted Stock Units
  150
 
   
 
 
 
  31,593    25,036
9,447
   -
   -
2013
The Company excludes convertible preferred stock and stock-based awards whose effect would be anti-dilutive from the
calculation. For the quarter ended March 31, 2014, adjusted earnings was a loss, therefore common stock equivalents were
excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per common share, as their effect was anti-dilutive. For the quarter ended March
31, 2013, common stock equivalents were dilutive and are included for the computation of fully diluted earnings per share.
NOTE G – DEBT
Variable rate revolving credit facility payable to Société Générale, OneWest Bank, FSB, and View
Point Bank, N.A., maturing   May 20, 2017, with possible acceleration (see below), secured by  oil
and natural gas reserves held by Yuma Exploration and  Production Company, Inc. and guaranteed
by YEI.
 
Installment loan due February 28, 2014, originating from the financing of insurance premiums at
4.29% interest rate.
 
 
Less:  Current portion
 
Total long-term debt
F-74
March 31,
 2014
December 31, 
 
  2013
$30,565,000  $31,215,000
-
178,027
30,565,000    31,393,027  
   -
)
    
 
 $30,565,000  $31,215,000
(178,027
NOTE G – DEBT – Continued
On February 13, 2013, the credit facility was amended to bring SocGen in as a new participant and as a replacement for
Union Bank N. A. (“Union”) as the Administrative Agent, and to remove Amegy from the syndication (although still
remaining Yuma’s bank for operations). The participation allocation became 68.75% for SocGen and 31.25% for Union.
The new interest rate margins are as follows:
LIBOR 
 
 
 margin 
Borrowing base utilization Prime margin 
 
  
 
  
 
%  3.25 %
Utilization > 90%
   2.25
75% < utilization < 90%    2.00
%  3.00 %
%  2.75 %
50% < utilization < 75%    1.75
%  2.50 %
25% < utilization < 50%    1.50
Utilization < 25%
   1.25
%  2.25 %
On May 20, 2013, a third amendment to the credit agreement brought in OneWest Bank, FSB (“OneWest”) to replace
Union with new participation equal for SocGen and OneWest at 50/50. With the new amendment, the credit agreement
now matures May 20, 2017; provided, however, that if the Series A Preferred Stock is not terminated or the redemption
date of that series is not extended past May 20, 2018, and changed on or prior to January 1, 2016, the maturity date of
the credit agreement accelerates to no later than April 30, 2016. The fee paid to extend the maturity date was $216,000,
and is being amortized over the life of the loan.
On September 27, 2013, the Borrowing Base Redetermination Agreement and Assignment brought in View Point Bank,
N.A. (“View Point”) as a third lender in the credit agreement. Participating percentages at September 27, 2013 became
37.5% for SocGen, 37.5% for OneWest and 25% for View Point.
Costs paid to SocGen to bring them into the syndicate include a $150,000 arrangement fee, an $88,000 upfront fee, and
$87,598 in legal fees. Costs paid to replace Union with OneWest were a $50,000 arrangement fee and $37,061 in legal
fees. On September 27, 2013, Yuma paid SocGen a $24,000 redetermination fee whereby the borrowing base was
increased $4 million to $40 million. Legal fees for the redetermination were $4,080. All these costs are being amortized
over the life of the credit facility. SocGen is also paid an annual administrative fee each February of $25,000 amortized
over each year. The unamortized Amegy and Union costs of $123,925 and $189,727 were written off immediately upon
their exit from the syndicate. SocGen also required all commodity derivatives be moved from BP Corporation North
America, Inc. to SocGen and charged a fee of $175,000 for the novation. This fee was fully expensed in the second
quarter of 2013.
Cash paid for interest for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 to SocGen as administrator was $293,580 and to SocGen
and Union for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 was $11,377 and $74,839, respectively. All the interest paid to Union was
prime-based at 4.75%. On June 14, 2013, $5,000,000 of outstanding debt was converted to LIBOR and on July 15, 2013,
another $15,000,000 was converted to LIBOR. Except for a brief period (November 15th to December 5th) when only
$5,000,000 was in LIBOR, Yuma has kept $20,000,000 in LIBOR. Yuma’s all-in rates for LIBOR have ranged from 2.92% to
3.21% per annum. SocGen interest rates for prime-based debt have been 5.25% except for one day at 5% for the first
quarter of 2014, and were 5% for the first quarter of 2013. Cash paid to SocGen for commitment fees for the first quarter
of 2014 was $9,716 and for the first quarter of 2013 was $2,044.
F-75
NOTE G – DEBT– Continued
The terms of the credit agreement require Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation and
wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Exploration”), to meet a specific current ratio, interest coverage ratio, and a
funded debt to EBITDA ratio. In addition, the credit facility requires the guarantee of Yuma. Exploration was in
compliance with the loan covenants as of March 31, 2014.
NOTE H – INCOME TAXES
The following summarizes the income tax expense (benefit) and effective tax rates:
Three Months Ended
 
 
 March 31,
 
 
 2014
 
  
 
 
 $(1,143,978)  $2,222,629 
Consolidated Net Income (Loss) before Income Taxes
   (849,000 )    114,800  
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
%
   74.21
Effective Tax Rate
 
    
 
Adjusted Consolidated Net Income (Loss) before Income Taxes 1   (2,616,008)    218,974  
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
   (849,000 )    114,800  
%
   32.45
Effective Tax Rate, as adjusted
%   5.17
%   52.43
2013
1 Adjusted to exclude the change in fair value of preferred stock derivative liability
The differences between the U. S. federal statutory rate of 35% and our effective tax rates for the three months ended
March 31, 2014 and 2013 are due primarily to the tax effects of the excess of book basis over the tax basis in the full cost
pool and the net operating loss carryforwards for each period.
NOTE I – CONTINGENCIES
1.
Certain Legal Proceedings
From time to time, the Company is party to various legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. While
the outcome of lawsuits cannot be predicted with certainty, the Company is not currently a party to any proceeding that
it believes, if determined in a manner adverse to the Company, could have a potential material adverse effect on the
Company’s financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
2. Environmental Remediation Contingencies
As of March 31, 2014, there were no known environmental or other regulatory matters related to the Company’s
operations that were reasonably expected to result in a material liability to the Company. The Company’s operations are
subject to numerous laws and regulations governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise
relating to environmental protection.
F-76
NOTE I – CONTINGENCIES – Continued
Yuma has been named as one of 97 defendants in a matter entitled Board of Commissioners of the Southeast Louisiana
Flood Protection Authority – East, Individually and As the Board Governing the Orleans Levee District, the Lake Borgne
Basin Levee District, and the East Jefferson Levee District v. Tennessee Gas Pipeline Company, LLC, et al., Civil District
Court for the Parish of Orleans, State of Louisiana, No. 13-6911, Division “J” - 5, now removed as Civil Action No. 13-
5410, before the United Stated District Court, Eastern District of Louisiana. Plaintiff filed the suit on July 24, 2013 seeking
damages and injunctive relief arising out of defendants’ drilling, exploration, and production activities from the early
1900s to the present day in coastal areas east of the Mississippi River in Southeast Louisiana.
The suit alleges that defendants’ activities have caused “removal, erosion, and submergence” of coastal lands resulting
in significant reduction or loss of the protection such lands afforded against hurricanes and tropical storms. Plaintiff
alleges that it now faces increased costs to maintain and operate the man-made hurricane protection system and may
reach the point where that system no longer adequately protects populated areas.
Plaintiff lists hundreds of wells, pipelines, and dredging events as possible sources of the alleged land loss. Yuma is
named in association with 11 wells, four rights-of-way, and one dredging permit. The suit does not specify any
deficiency or harm caused by any individual activity or facility.
Although the suit references various federal statutes as sources of standards of care, plaintiff claims that all causes of
action arise under state law: negligence, strict liability, natural servitude of drain, public nuisance, private nuisance, and
as third-party beneficiary under breach of contract.
The lawsuit is in its early stages. No broad activity is expected until after the federal court decides whether to remand the
matter to state court. The court retaining jurisdiction will then set a scheduling order under which preliminary motions
will be heard, likely over the next several months. Potential motions to dismiss are numerous, including, challenges to
plaintiff’s right to bring suit, no cause of action, and improper parties. At this time, the Company cannot predict the
outcome of this case and, in management’s opinion, assess any potential liability; therefore no liability has been
recorded on the Company’s books.
NOTE J – MERGER AGREEMENT
On February 6, 2014, Yuma and Pyramid Oil Company (“Pyramid”), which is traded on the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE MKT, symbol “PDO”), announced they had entered into a definitive merger agreement for an all-stock
transaction. Upon completion of the transaction, which is subject to the approval of stockholders of both companies,
Pyramid will change its name to “Yuma Energy, Inc.,” and relocate its headquarters to Houston, Texas, while
maintaining offices in Bakersfield, California, to oversee its California operations.
Under the terms of the merger agreement, Pyramid will reincorporate in Delaware and the Delaware successor
corporation will issue an aggregate of approximately 66 million shares of its common stock to Yuma stockholders,
resulting in former Yuma stockholders owning approximately 93% of the combined company. Upon closing, there will
be an aggregate of approximately 71 million shares of common stock outstanding. The transaction is expected to
qualify as a tax-deferred reorganization under Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”).
F-77
NOTE J – MERGER AGREEMENT – Continued
The merger agreement is subject to the approval of the common stockholders of Pyramid and the common and
preferred stockholders of Yuma, as well as other customary approvals, including authorization to list the newly issued
shares on the NYSE MKT. The companies anticipate completing the transaction in mid-2014.
As a result of the merger agreement with Pyramid Oil Company, the expenses of approximately $1.6 million incurred by
the Company in exploring several alternative options to go public were written off during the first quarter of 2014.
NOTE K – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company has evaluated subsequent events through June 2, 2014, the date these financial statements were
available to be issued. The Company is not aware of any subsequent events which would require recognition or
disclosure in the financial statements, except as noted below or already recognized or disclosed.
Filing of Registration Statement on Form S-4
On April 25, 2014, Pyramid Delaware Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Pyramid Delaware”) and wholly-
owned subsidiary of Pyramid, filed a Registration Statement on Form S-4 (“Form S-4”) with the SEC to effectuate (i) the
proposed reincorporation of Pyramid from California to Delaware through the merger of Pyramid with and into Pyramid
Delaware (the “reincorporation”), and (ii) the merger of Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and
wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid Delaware (“Merger Subsidiary”), with and into Yuma Energy, Inc. (“Yuma”), with
Yuma becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid Delaware (the “merger”). As a result of the reincorporation and
the merger, Pyramid Delaware will be the publicly held corporation through which Pyramid Delaware’s (renamed Yuma
Energy, Inc.) common stock will be traded. In order to complete the merger, the stockholders of both Yuma and Pyramid
must vote to approve and adopt the merger agreement (which includes (i) approval of the principal terms and conditions
of the reincorporation; (ii) approval of the amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the amended and
restated bylaws of Pyramid Delaware; (iii) approval of the issuance of shares of Pyramid Delaware common stock to
stockholders of Yuma; and (iv) approval of the change of Pyramid Delaware’s name to “Yuma Energy, Inc.
Annual Incentive Plan Awards for 2013
On April 1, 2014, the Company granted 44 RSA’s to employees in lieu of cash awards for 2013 under the 2013 Annual
Incentive Plan that vest immediately at the completion of a Liquidity Event and any underwriter lock-up period, subject
to continued service as an employee through such time. Should an employee leave the Company, any unvested shares
are forfeited.
Fourth Amendment to Credit Agreement
Effective April 22, 2014, Yuma amended its credit agreement with its Administrative Agent Bank, SocGen, and two
additional banks making up the lenders. This amendment provides for, among other things, a borrowing base of $40
million, a non-conforming borrowing base of $4.5 million, a new fee schedule, and the removal of certain informational
reporting covenants.
F-78
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders
Pyramid Oil Company
Bakersfield, California
We have audited the balance sheets of Pyramid Oil Company (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and
the related statements of operations, shareholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2013. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to
perform an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control over
financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audits provided a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Pyramid Oil Company as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of
the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013 in conformity with U. S. generally accepted accounting
principles.
/s/ SINGERLEWAK LLP
Los Angeles, California
March 31, 2014
F-79
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
December 31,
 2013
2012
0
375,090
    73,069
    82,180
    257,370
    264,400
CURRENT ASSETS:
 $4,404,246   $3,834,097  
Cash and cash equivalents
   967,329
 
Restricted cash
   2,140,822     2,135,709  
Short-term investments
 
Trade accounts receivable  (net of reserve for doubtful accounts of $4,000 in 2013 and 2012)   484,468
 
   12,400
Income taxes receivable
 
   102,334
Crude oil inventory
 
Prepaid expenses and other assets
   249,030
 
   711,800
Deferred income taxes
    
 
 
   9,072,429     7,021,915  
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
 
    
 
 
    
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, at cost:
    
 
 
   19,883,190     20,007,453  
Oil and gas properties and equipment (successful efforts method)
Capitalized asset retirement costs
   412,612
 
   2,058,744     1,966,750  
Drilling and operating equipment
   1,098,918     1,098,918  
Land, buildings and improvements
   1,136,566     1,202,544  
Automotive, office and other property and equipment
 
   24,590,030     24,701,643  
   (21,335,914)   (20,953,324)
Less – accumulated depletion,  depreciation, amortization and valuation allowances
   3,254,116     3,748,319  
TOTAL PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
 
    
 
OTHER ASSETS
    
 
   1,131,707     1,101,526  
Long-term investments
 
   459,900
Deferred income taxes
 
   250,000
Deposits
Other assets
   11,380
 
   1,852,987     1,990,706  
TOTAL OTHER ASSETS
    
 
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 $14,179,532   $12,760,940
621,800
    250,000
    17,380
425,978
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-80
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
BALANCE SHEETS
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Accounts payable
Accrued professional fees
Accrued taxes, other than income taxes
Accrued payroll and related costs
Accrued royalties payable
Accrued insurance
Liability for deferred compensation
December 31,
 2013
2012
$290,930
   140,711
   54,444
   40,932
   226,502
   113,480
   1,026,655     0
$226,759
    120,000
    70,407
    58,954
    204,509
    94,116
1,893,654     774,745
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES
 
 
LIABILITY FOR ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS   1,305,862     1,327,861  
 
 
    
   3,199,516     2,102,606  
TOTAL LIABILITIES
 
    
 
 
    
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES (Note 7)
 
    
 
 
    
SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY:
 
    
Preferred stock, no par value
 
    
Authorized – 10,000,000 shares
Issued and outstanding – none
   0
 
 
    
Common stock, no par value (Note 11, 12 and 13)
 
    
Authorized – 50,000,000 shares
 
    
Issued and outstanding – 4,688,085 shares
    
shares at December 31, 2013
 
and December 31, 2012
   1,847,384     1,682,971  
   9,132,632     8,975,363  
Retained earnings
    
 
 
   10,980,016    10,658,334 
TOTAL SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
    
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY $14,179,532  $12,760,940
0
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-81
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
REVENUES:
Oil and gas sales
Gain on sales of property and equipment
 
COSTS AND EXPENSES:
Operating expenses
General and administrative
Deferred compensation
Stock based compensation
Taxes, other than income and payroll taxes
Provision for depletion, depreciation, and amortization
Valuation allowances
Accretion expense
Other costs and expenses
 
OPERATING INCOME (LOSS)
 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE):
Interest income
Other income
Interest expense
1,512
2011
2012
0
    43,743
Year Ended December 31,
 
 2013
    
 
 $4,391,824  $4,995,327  $5,688,437 
   809,476     0
 
   5,201,300    4,995,327    5,689,949 
    
 
   1,978,468    1,942,754    1,789,569 
   1,080,162    842,037     879,779  
   1,063,445    0
 
   164,413     0
 
   130,297     160,144     137,163  
   507,157     649,559     735,231  
   151,243     237,711     751,263  
   37,477
 
   165,533     149,717     147,330  
   5,278,195    4,020,263    4,529,392 
   (76,895 )   975,064     1,160,557 
 
    
 
    
 
   40,519
   0
 
)
   0
   40,519
42,943
    450
    (1,091
    42,302
49,863
    500
)   (3,020
    47,343
38,341
45,314
INCOME (LOSS) BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE (BENEFIT)    (36,376 )   1,017,366    1,207,900 
     
Income tax expense (benefit)
 
    
   91,855
Current
    203,203  
Deferred
   (285,500 )   157,900     (90,500 )
   (193,645 )   239,821     112,703  
 
    
 
 
 $157,269   $777,545   $1,095,197 
NET INCOME
 
    
 
 
 $0.03
BASIC AND DILUTED INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
 
    
 
Basic and diluted average number of common shares outstanding   4,688,085    4,685,859    4,687,580
$0.17
$0.23
81,921
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-82
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Total
Equity
Earnings
43,743
43,743
1,095,197    1,095,197
Balances, December 31, 2010
 
Stock based compensation
 
Shares issued on exercise of options  6,125
 
Net income
 
Balances, December 31, 2011
 
Shares issued on exercise of options  4,232
 
Net income
 
Balances, December 31, 2012
 
Stock based compensation
 
Net income
 
Balances, December 31, 2013
4,683,853     1,682,971    8,197,818    9,880,789
Common
 Shares
 
 Issued and   Common   Retained   Shareholders’ 
 Outstanding  Stock
 
 
  
 
  4,677,728   $1,639,228  $7,102,621  $8,741,849
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
  4,688,085     1,682,971    8,975,363    10,658,334  
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
  4,688,085   $1,847,384  $9,132,632  $10,980,016
164,413      
     
     
     
    157,269     157,269
777,545     777,545
164,413
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-83
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
2012
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 2013
 
    
 
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
 $157,269   $777,545   $1,095,197 
Net income
 
 
    
 
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:    
    
 
 
Provision for depletion, depreciation, and amortization
   507,157     649,559     735,231  
   151,243     237,711     751,263  
Valuation allowances
 
   37,477
Accretion expense
)
   (809,476 )   0
Gain on sale of property and equipment
Stock based compensation
   164,413     0
 
   (285,500 )   157,900     (90,500 )
Deferred income taxes
)
    10,631
   0
Asset retirement obligations
 
   30,790
Loss on disposal of fixed assets
    0
   1,026,655    0
Deferred compensation
 
 
     
    
 
    
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
     
 
   (48,709 )   128,505     (68,207 )
(Increase) decrease in trade accounts and interest receivable
(Increase) decrease in crude oil inventory
   (20,154 )   35,976
    (31,795 )
)   (24,970 )
    (1,523
   8,340
Decrease (increase) in prepaid expenses
    (10,000 )
    0
   6,000
Decrease (increase) in other assets
 
    107,300     55,099
   92,254
Increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
    
 
     
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
   1,017,759    2,141,945    2,497,245
(1,618
    0
    0
45,314
    (1,512
    43,743
38,341
2011
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-84
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Year Ended December 31,
2013
2012
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:     
    
 
 
 $(194,987 ) $(979,038 ) $(1,163,961)
Capital expenditures
    0
Payments to acquire short-term investments
   0
    (100,000 )
)
)   (11,655
   (5,113
(Increase) in short-term investments
)   (7,329
)
)   (30,181
   (30,181 )   (29,542
(Increase) in long-term investments
 
    0
   (967,329 )   0
Restricted cash
Proceeds from sale of property and equipment
   750,000     0
    21,500
 
    
 
 
     
     
Net cash used in investing activities
   (447,610 )   (1,015,909)   (1,284,297)
2011
0
    (54,615
     
    (54,615
55,979
)   (41,783
     
)   14,196
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:     
 
   0
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
)
   0
Principal payments on long-term debt
 
 
    
 
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities   0
    
 
 
   570,149     1,071,421     1,227,144  
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
    
 
   3,834,097    2,762,676     1,535,532  
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
    
 
 
 $4,404,246  $2,762,676   $2,762,676  
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
 
    
 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION:    
 
    
 
 
 $0
Cash paid during the year for interest
 
    
 
 
 $48,800
Cash paid during the year for income taxes
$1,091
     
  $133,821
$3,020
     
  $216,874
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-85
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1. Significant Accounting Policies
Nature of Operations
Pyramid Oil Company (the “Company”), a California Corporation, has been in the oil and gas business continuously for
103 years since it was incorporated on October 9, 1909. The Company is in the business of exploration, development
and production of crude oil and natural gas. The Company operated and has interests in 28 oil and gas leases in Kern
and Santa Barbara Counties in the State of California. The Company also owns oil and gas interests in Wyoming, Texas
and New York that it does not operate. The Company grants short-term credit to its customers and generally receives
payment within 30 days.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities,
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of
revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents principally consist of demand deposits and certificates of deposits having original
maturities of three months or less. At December 31, 2013, the Company had approximately $3,813,898 of cash and cash
equivalents that were not fully insured by the FDIC.
Investments
Investments consist of certificates of deposit having original maturities of three months or more and are valued at cost.
Inventory
Inventories of crude oil and condensate are valued at the lower of cost, predominately on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis,
or market, and include certain costs directly related to the production process.
Deposits
In April 2004, the Company replaced its state of California oil and gas blanket performance surety bond, with a cash
bond in the form of an irrevocable certificate of deposit in the amount of $250,000.
Costs Incurred in Oil and Gas Producing Activities
The Company has adopted the “successful efforts” method of accounting for its oil and gas exploration and
development activities, as set forth in FASB ASC Topic No. 932.
The Company initially capitalizes expenditures for oil and gas property acquisitions until they are either determined to
be successful (capable of commercial production) or unsuccessful. The carrying value of all undeveloped oil and gas
properties is evaluated periodically and reduced if such carrying value appears to have been impaired. Leasehold costs
relating to successful oil and gas properties remain capitalized while leasehold costs which have been proven
unsuccessful are charged to operations in the period the leasehold costs are proven unsuccessful. Costs of carrying
and retaining unproved properties are expensed as incurred.
F-86
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
The costs of drilling and equipping development wells are capitalized, whether the wells are successful or unsuccessful.
The costs of drilling and equipping exploratory wells are capitalized until they are determined to be either successful or
unsuccessful. If the wells are successful, the costs of the wells remain capitalized. If, however, the wells are
unsuccessful, the capitalized costs of drilling the wells, net of any salvage value, are charged to operations in the period
the wells are determined to be unsuccessful.
The Company adopted FASB ASC Topic No. 360-10-15, “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for
Long-Lived Assets to be Disposed of” (the Statement). The Statement specifies when an impairment loss should be
recognized and how impairment losses should be measured for long-lived assets to be held and used and for long-lived
assets to be disposed of. In accordance with the Statement, the costs of proved oil and gas properties and equipment
are periodically assessed on a lease by lease basis to determine if such costs exceed undiscounted future cash flows,
and if conditions warrant an impairment reserve will be provided based on the estimated future discounted cash flows.
The Company recorded an impairment reserve of $151,243, $237,711 and $751,263 at December 31, 2013, 2012 and
2011, respectively (see Note 6). The accumulated impairment reserve was $4,988,758 and $4,980,931 at December 31,
2013 and 2012, respectively.
Joint Venture Investments
The Company participates in two joint ventures as a non-operator. The properties are located in New York and Texas,
both are primarily gas properties. The Company has a minority interest in both joint ventures. The Company’s interest in
the New York gas wells range from 19 to 38 percent. The Company’s interest in the Texas joint venture wells range from
3.75 to 6.25 percent. The Company records its share of revenues, expenses and capital costs as provided to the
Company by the joint-venture operators. The accounting policies for the joint venture properties are consistent with the
accounting policies that the Company uses for its wholly-owned properties.
Depletion, Depreciation, and Amortization
Depletion of leasehold costs of producing oil and gas properties is provided on the unit-of-production method, by
individual property unit, based on estimated recoverable proved reserves. Depreciation and amortization of the costs of
producing wells and related equipment are provided on the unit-of-production method, by individual property unit,
based on estimated recoverable proved developed reserves. Amortization of the costs of undeveloped oil and gas
properties is based on the Company’s experience, giving consideration to the holding periods of leaseholds. The
average depletion per equivalent barrel of crude oil produced for 2013, 2012 and 2011 were $11.88, $16.66 and $24.27,
respectively.
Drilling and operating equipment, buildings, automotive, office and other property and equipment and leasehold
improvements are stated at cost. Depreciation and amortization are computed using the straight-line method over the
shorter of the estimated useful lives or the applicable lease terms (range of 3 to 19 years). Any permanent impairment of
the carrying value of property and equipment is provided for at the time such impairments become known.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for its share based compensation in accordance with ASC718.  Stock-based compensation
cost represents stock options issued to non-employee members of the Board of Directors, and is measured at the grant
date based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite vesting period.
F-87
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
The fair value of each stock option is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Assumptions relative to volatility and anticipated forfeitures are determined at the time of grant. The following are the
assumptions used for stock option grants during 2013. There were no stock option grants during 2012.
Expected life in years    2.5 years
Stock price  volatility    51.4
Discount rate
   0.34
Expected dividends     None
Forfeiture rate
December 31, 2013 
 
  
 
%
%
 
%
0
The assumptions used in the Black Scholes model referred to above are based upon the following data: (1) the
expected life of the option is estimated by considering the contractual term of the option and the vesting period of the
option, the employees’ expected exercise behavior and the post-vesting employee turnover rate; (2) the expected stock
price volatility of the underlying shares over the expected term of the option is based upon historical share price data of
the Company’s shares; (3) the risk free interest rate is based on published U.S. Treasury Department interest rates for
the expected terms of the underlying options; (4) expected dividends are based on historical dividend data and
expected future dividend activity; and (5) the expected forfeiture rate is based on historical forfeiture activity and
assumptions regarding future forfeitures based on the composition of current grantees.
Maintenance and Repairs
Maintenance, repairs and replacement expenditures are charged to operations as incurred, while major renewals and
betterments are capitalized and depreciated over their useful lives.
Retirement or Disposal of Properties and Equipment
Costs and accumulated depletion, depreciation, amortization and valuation allowances of property and equipment
retired, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of are removed from the accounts upon disposal, and any resulting gain or
loss is included in operations in the year of disposition. However, upon disposal of a portion of an oil and gas property,
any proceeds received are treated as a recovery of cost and no gain or loss is recognized in the year of disposition.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability method,
deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the
financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets
and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those
temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a
change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company adopted the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 740-10-25, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
Taxes,” on January 1, 2007 (ASC 740-10-25). As a result of the implementation of ASC 740-10-25, the Company made a
comprehensive review of its portfolio of tax positions in accordance with recognition standards established by ASC
740-10-25. As a result of the implementation of ASC 740-10-25, the Company recognized no material adjustments to
liabilities or stockholders equity.
F-88
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. Federal jurisdiction, and California, Texas and New York states. With
few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. Federal tax examination for the years prior to 2010. State
jurisdictions that remain subject to examination range from 2009 to 2012. The Company does not believe there will be
any material changes in its unrecognized tax positions over the next 12 months.
The Company’s policy is to recognize interest and penalties accrued on any unrecognized tax benefits as a component
of income tax expense. As of the date of adoption of ASC 740-10-25, the Company did not have any accrued interest or
penalties associated with any unrecognized tax benefits, nor was any interest expense recognized during the year
ended December 31, 2013.
Concentration of Credit Risk
The Company sells its crude oil to Phillips 66 and Kern Oil & Refining, accounting for approximately 51% and 47%,
respectively, of the Company’s crude oil and gas sales in 2013. Crude oil sales were approximately 51% and 47%
attributable to Phillips 66 and Kern Oil and Refining, respectively at December 31, 2012. While revenue from these
customers is significant, and the loss of any one could have an adverse effect on the Company, it is management’s
opinion that the oil and gas it produces could be sold to other crude oil purchasers, refineries or pipeline companies.
Trade receivables were approximately 44% and 55% attributable to Phillips 66 and Kern Oil and Refining, respectively at
December 31, 2013. Trade receivables were approximately 62% and 37.5% attributable to Phillips 66 and Kern Oil and
Refining, respectively at December 31, 2012.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2013, the FASB issued ASU 2013-01, “Balance Sheet (Topic 210): Clarifying the Scope of Disclosures about
Offsetting Assets and Liabilities.” The amendments in this ASU clarify the scope for derivatives accounted for in
accordance with Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, including bifurcated embedded derivatives, repurchase
agreements and reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowing and securities lending transactions that are
either offset or subject to netting arrangements. An entity is required to apply the amendments for fiscal years
beginning on or after January 1, 2013. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2013-01 to have a material
impact on its financial statements.
In April 2013, the FASB issued ASU 2013-07, “Presentation of Financial Statements (Topic 205): Liquidation Basis of
Accounting.” The amendments in this update are being issued to clarify when an entity should apply the liquidation
basis of accounting. In addition, the guidance provides principles for the recognition and measurement of assets and
liabilities and requirements for financial statements prepared using the liquidation basis of accounting. The
amendments are effective for entities that determine liquidation is imminent during annual reporting periods beginning
after December 15, 2013, and interim reporting periods therein. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU
2013-07 to have a material impact on its financial statements.
In July 2013, the FASB issued ASU No. 2013-011, “Presentation of an Unrecognized Tax Benefit When a Net Operating
Loss Carryforward, a Similar Tax Loss, or A Tax Credit Carryforward Exists.” These amendments provide guidance on
the financial statement presentation of unrecognized tax benefits to better reflect the manner in which an entity would
settle at the reporting date any additional income taxes that would result from the disallowance of a tax position. For
public entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after
December 15, 2013. The adoption of ASU 2013-11 will not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated
financial statements.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior financial statements to conform to the 2013 presentation.
F-89
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes sales when: (1) persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; (2) product delivery has
occurred; (3) pricing is fixed or determinable; and (4) collection is reasonably assured. To satisfy these criteria, the
Company: (1) has crude oil sales contracts with its crude oil purchasers; (2) records revenue based upon receipt of
evidence of shipment of crude oil and when risk of loss and title transfer has occurred; (3) the Company’s crude oil
contracts specify the pricing terms which are fixed and determinable; (4) validates creditworthiness through past
payment history and other financial date. Sales rebates, discounts and customer returns are not applicable to the oil
and gas industry.
Trade Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our accounts receivable are unsecured and are at risk to the extent such amounts become uncollectible. The Company
has had the same two major customers for approximately 20 years with no history of non-payment or default. Pursuant
to the terms of the crude oil sales contracts, the Company receives payment around the 20th of the month following
crude oil shipments. The Company has established a nominal allowance for doubtful accounts due to the Company’s
evaluation of its customers past payment history, creditworthiness and other financial data.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation is recorded
on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from 3 to 19 years. Maintenance and
repairs are charged to operations as incurred, while significant improvements are capitalized. Upon retirement or
disposition of property, the asset and related accumulated depreciation or amortization is removed from the accounts
and any resulting gain or loss is charged to operations. The carrying value of property and equipment is assessed
periodically and/or when factors indicating impairment are present. We recognize impairment losses when the expected
cash flows are less than the asset’s carrying value, in which case the asset is written down to its estimated fair value.
The Company recorded an impairment reserve of $151,243, $237,711 and $751,263 at December 31, 2013, 2012 and
2011, respectively (see Note 6).
2. Fair Value Measurements
Effective January 1, 2008, the Company adopted the authoritative guidance on fair value measurements. Fair value is
defined as an exit price, representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in
an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market based measurement that should be
determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or a liability. As a basis for
considering such assumptions, the guidance establishes a three tier value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used
in the valuation methodologies in measuring fair value:
Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2 - Include other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activity. Included in this category is the
Company’s valuation of its asset retirement obligation liability. The obligation increased $37,477 during the year ended
December 31, 2013, as a result of normal accretion. This was offset by a decrease in the obligation of $59,476 due to the
sale of the Chico-Martinez lease.
The fair value hierarchy also requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of
unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
F-90
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
In accordance with this guidance, we measure our cash equivalents and short-term investments at fair value. Our cash
equivalents and short term investments are classified within Level 1. Cash equivalents and short term investments are
valued primarily using quoted market prices utilizing market observable inputs. At December 31, 2013, cash equivalents
and short term investments consisted of certificates of deposit measured at fair value on a recurring basis. Fair values
of our certificates of deposit were $3,678,639, of which $406,110 was included in cash equivalents, $2,140,822 was
included in short-term investments and $1,131,707 was included in long-term investments at December 31, 2013. Fair
values of our certificates of deposit were $3,642,944, of which $405,709 was included in cash equivalents, $2,135,709
was included in short-term investments and $1,101,526 was included in long-term investments at December 31, 2012.
Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis
Certain assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis in accordance with GAAP (for example,
when there is evidence of impairment). The amounts below represent only balances measured at fair value during the
period presented and still held as of the reporting date.  These balances appear as a component of the “Oil and Gas
Properties and Equipment” and “Accumulated Depletion, Depreciation, Amortization and Valuation Allowances”
captions on the balance sheet.
Oil and gas properties and equipment $674,600  $ —   $ —   $523,400  $ (151,200
Level 1  Level 2  Level 3   Total Valuation 
)
At and for the period ended December 31, 2013:
 Total
In the year ended December 31, 2013 certain oil and gas properties and equipment held and used with a carrying
amount of $674,600 were written down to their fair value of $523,400, resulting in a valuation charge of $151,200, which
was included in earnings for this period.  The fair value of these long-lived assets held and used was calculated based
upon discounted cash flow projections.  These projections incorporate management’s assumptions about future cash
flows based upon past experience and future expectations.  The expected cash flows are then discounted using a
discount rate that the Company believes is commensurate with the risks involved.
Oil and gas properties and equipment $1,019,100  $ —   $ —   $781,400  $ (237,700
Level 1  Level 2  Level 3   Total Valuation 
)
At and for the period ended December 31, 2012:
 Total
In the year ended December 31, 2012 certain oil and gas properties and equipment held and used with a carrying
amount of $1,019,100 were written down to their fair value of $781,400, resulting in a valuation charge of $237,700, which
was included in earnings for this period.  The fair value of these long-lived assets held and used was calculated based
upon discounted cash flow projections.  These projections incorporate management’s assumptions about future cash
flows based upon past experience and future expectations.  The expected cash flows are then discounted using a
discount rate that the Company believes is commensurate with the risks involved.
3. Long-Term Debt and Line of Credit
At December 31, 2013, the Company had an unsecured line of credit with a bank, under which the Company may borrow
up to $500,000 through May 31, 2014. Interest on any borrowing is accrued at the bank’s index rate plus 0.50 percentage
points. The bank’s index rate was 4.75% at December 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2013, the Company did not have any
outstanding balance on its unsecured line of credit.
F-91
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
4. Income Taxes
Income tax expense (benefit) consists of the following:
2012
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
  2011
 2013
 
 
    
     
 
Federal income taxes:
 $78,226   $69,700   $174,403 
Current
   (228,800)   122,850    (70,350 )
Deferred
   (150,574)   192,550    104,053 
 
    
 
State income taxes:
   13,629     12,221     28,800  
Current
   (56,700 )   35,050     (20,150 )
Deferred
 
   (43,071 )   47,271     8,650
 
    
 
 
Income tax expense (benefit) $(193,645) $239,821  $112,703
Differences exist between certain accounting policies and related provisions included in federal income tax rules. The
amounts by which these differences and other factors cause the total income tax provision to differ from an amount
computed by applying the federal statutory income tax rate to financial income is set forth in the following reconciliation:
Year Ended December 31,
 2013
  2011
Federal income tax expense (benefit) at statutory rate $(13,942 ) $351,395   $410,686  
   (147,845)   (143,291)   (320,627)
Statutory depletion
   (2,443
Prior period tax changes
 
   13,629     12,221     28,800  
State income taxes
Other
   (43,044 )   27,496     (6,156
)
    
 
 
Income tax expense (benefit)
 $(193,645) $239,821   $112,703
)   (8,000
2012
)   0
The components of net deferred tax asset (liability) are as follows:
Current deferred taxes:
Gross assets
Gross liabilities
 
Noncurrent deferred taxes:    
Gross assets
Gross liabilities
Valuation allowance
2011
     
  $262,500
    0
    262,500
2012
     
  $264,400
    0
    264,400
Year Ended December 31,
 2013
    
 $711,800
   0
   711,800
2,178,600     2,340,500     2,500,300  
   0
 
   (1,718,700)   (1,718,700)   (1,718,700)
 
   459,900
    781,600
     
    
 
 $1,171,700   $886,200
  $1,044,100
621,800
0
0
F-92
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
The tax effect of significant temporary differences representing deferred tax assets and (liabilities) are as follows:
2012
  $1,600
    519,800
Year Ended December 31,
 2013
 $1,600
Accounts receivable
 
Asset retirement obligations    520,200
 
Statutory depletion carryover   1,718,700     1,718,700     1,718,700  
 
Accrued liabilities
   710,200
    
 
 
Total deferred tax assets
   2,950,700     2,502,900     2,481,300  
 
    
 
   (60,300
Property and equipment
 
   (1,718,700)   (1,718,700)   (1,718,700)
Valuation allowance
 
 $1,171,700   $886,200
  $1,044,100
262,800
260,900
2011
  $1,600
    500,100
)   102,000
281,500
At December 31, 2013, a valuation allowance has been provided against the statutory depletion carryover due to the
uncertainty of its future utilization.
The Company believes that its estimate of deferred tax assets and determination to record a valuation allowance against
the statutory depletion carryover are critical accounting estimates because they are subject to, among other things, an
estimate of future taxable income, which is susceptible to change and dependent upon events that may or may not
occur, and because the impact of recording a valuation allowance may be material to the assets reported on the balance
sheet and results of operations.
At December 31, 2013, the Company has, for Federal income tax purposes, a statutory depletion carryover of
approximately $4,095,000, which currently has no expiration date.
5. Related-Party Transactions
Effective January 1, 1990, John H. Alexander, a former officer and director of the Company participated with a group of
investors that acquired the mineral and fee interest on one of the Company’s oil and gas leases (the “Santa Fe Energy
lease”) in the Carneros Creek field after the Company declined to participate. The thirty-three percent interest owned by
Mr. Alexander represents a minority interest in the investor group. Royalties on oil and gas production from this
property paid to the investor group approximated $131,000, $222,500 and $226,200 in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
As a director, Mr. Alexander had abstained from voting on any of the above matters that have been brought before the
Board of Directors, involving the Santa Fe lease. See Note 12 for discussion of severance awards entered into with Mr.
Alexander.
6. Fourth Quarter Results (Unaudited)
During the fourth quarter of 2013, the Company made adjustments to the carrying value of some of its oil and gas
properties. The Company recorded a valuation allowance in the amount of $151,243 at December 31, 2013 to reflect the
change in the projected future discounted net cash flows for this property, as the result of the analysis of the
Company’s oil and gas reserves by independent consultants. The Company also reduced depletion of its oil and gas
properties by $34,834 as a result of the analysis of the Company’s oil and gas reserves by independent consultants at
December 31, 2013.
F-93
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
During the fourth quarter of 2012, the Company made adjustments to the carrying value of some of its oil and gas
properties. The Company recorded a valuation allowance in the amount of $237,711 at December 31, 2012 to reflect the
change in the projected future discounted net cash flows for this property, as the result of the analysis of the
Company’s oil and gas reserves by independent consultants. The Company also reduced depletion of its oil and gas
properties by $39,414 as a result of the analysis of the Company’s oil and gas reserves by independent consultants at
December 31, 2012.
During the fourth quarter of 2011, the Company made adjustments to the carrying value of one of its oil and gas
properties. The Company recorded a valuation allowance in the amount of $23,879 at December 31, 2010 to reflect the
change in the projected future discounted net cash flows for this property, as the result of the analysis of the
Company’s oil and gas reserves by independent consultants.
7. Commitments and Contingencies
The Company is liable for future dismantlement and abandonment costs associated with its oil and gas properties.
These costs include down-hole plugging and abandonment of wells, future site restoration, post closure and other
environmental exit costs. The costs of future dismantlement and abandonment have been accrued and recorded in the
financial statements. See Note 10, Assets Retirement Obligations.
The Company is subject to potential litigation within the normal course of business. In management’s opinion, the
resolution of such litigation would not have a material adverse effect upon the Company’s financial position or the
results of its operations. The Company did not have any pending litigation at December 31, 2013.
The Company has been notified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) of a final settlement
offer to settle its potential liability as a generator of waste containing hazardous substances that were disposed of at a
waste disposal site in Santa Barbara County. The Company has responded to the EPA by indicating that the waste
contained petroleum products that fall within the exception to the definition of hazardous substances for petroleum-
related substances of the pertinent EPA regulations. Management has concluded that under both Federal and State
regulations no reasonable basis exists for any valid claim against the Company. As such, the likelihood of any liability is
deemed remote.
During the fourth quarter of 2012, pursuant to requirements of the California Department of Oil and Gas (“CA DOG”) the
Company conducted a testing program on all of its crude oil storage tanks. The testing required the Company to empty
each tank and measure for the thickness of the metal. The testing is almost complete and the results were favorable. The
testing process disrupted crude oil production during the fourth quarter leading to lower revenues during the fourth
quarter of 2012 and the first quarter of 2013.
8. Defined Contribution Plan
The Company has a defined contribution plan (Simple IRA) available to all employees meeting certain service
requirements. Employees may contribute up to a maximum of $6,000 of their compensation to the plan. The Company
will make a contribution to the plan in an amount equal to the employee’s contributions up to 3% of their salaries.
Contributions of $12,641, $12,646 and $11,549 were made during the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011,
respectively.
F-94
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
9. Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company recognizes a liability at discounted fair value for the future retirement of tangible long-lived assets and
associated assets retirement cost associated with the petroleum and natural gas properties. The fair value of the liability
is capitalized as part of the cost of the related asset and amortized to expense over its useful life. The liability accretes
until the date of expected settlement of the retirement obligations. The related accretion expense is recognized in the
statement of operations. The provision will be revised for the effect of any changes to timing related to cash flow or
undiscounted abandonment costs. Actual expenditures incurred for the purpose of site reclamation are charged to the
asset retirement obligations to the extent that the liability exists on the balance sheet. Differences between the actual
costs incurred and the fair value of the liability recorded are recognized in income in the period the actual costs are
incurred.
There are no legally restricted assets for the settlement of asset retirement obligations. The Company has recognized
deferred tax benefits of approximately $520,200 for the asset retirement obligations as of December 31, 2013.
A reconciliation of the Company’s asset retirement obligations from the periods presented, are as follows:
Beginning balance
Incurred during the period   0
Additions for new wells
   0
Deletions for wells sold    (59,476 )   0
Accretion expense
Ending balance
December 31,
 
 2013
 
  
 $1,327,861  $1,278,889  $1,235,193 
    (14,105 )   (13,397 )
 
    25,092
 
   37,477
 
 $1,305,862  $1,327,861  $1,278,889
11,779
    0
    45,314
2012
2011
37,985
10. Share Based Compensation
Stock-Option Plan
The Company has issued stock options as compensation for members of the Board of Directors under the Pyramid Oil
Company 2006 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2006 Plan”). These options vested immediately and are exercisable for a five-
year period from the date of the grant.
The following is a summary of the Company’s stock option activity.
Weighted-
Exercise   Contractual  Intrinsic
Weighted-  Average
Outstanding at December 31, 2011  10,000   $ 5.40
Granted
Exercised
Forfeited
Outstanding at December 31, 2012  10,000   $ 5.40
  100,000    5.16
Granted
Exercised
  0
Forfeited
  (5,000 )   5.40
Outstanding at December 31, 2013  105,000  $ 5.17
 
Exercisable at December 31, 2013   105,000  $ 5.17
Number   Average   Remaining   Aggregate 
 
 Of
 Options   Price
Life (Years)  Value
 
     
0
    0
0
     
     
0
0
     
0
    3.42
0
     
     
0
0
     
0
    4.66
 
     
    4.66
0
$
   
   
   
  $
   
   
   
  $
   
  $
0
    0
    0
0
  0
  0
0
F-95
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
As of December 31, 2013, there were no unvested stock options or unrecognized stock option expense. The weighted
average grant date fair value of options issued and vested during 2013 was $1.64 per option.
The following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding and exercisable at December 31, 2013.
Exercise
Price
$ 5.40
$ 5.16
Number
  
of Shares
Options Outstanding
Weighted
Average
  
Remaining
Life (Years)
   
   
   5,000
    2.42
   100,000     4.77
   105,000
Weighted
Average
  
Exercise
Price
   
  $ 5.40
  $ 5.16
Number
  
of Shares
Options Exercisable 
Weighted
Average
  
Exercise
Price
   
   
   5,000
  $ 5.40
   100,000   $ 5.16
   105,000
Warrants
During the year ended December 31, 2012, warrant holders exercised 15,000 outstanding warrants under a cash-less
exercise provision in the warrant agreements. This resulted in 4,232 shares of common stock being issued to the
warrant holders. There were no remaining warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2013 or 2012.
11. Incentive and Retention Plan
On January 9, 2007, the Company’s Board of Directors adopted an Incentive and Retention Plan (the “Incentive Plan”)
pursuant to which the Company’s officers and other employees selected by the Company’s Compensation Committee
are entitled to receive payments if they are employed by the Company as of the date of a Corporate Transaction (as
such term is defined in the Incentive Plan). A Corporate Transaction includes certain mergers involving the Company,
sales of Company assets, and other changes in the control of the Company, as specified in the Incentive and Retention
Plan. In general, the amount that is payable to each plan participant will equal the number of plan units that have been
granted to him or her, multiplied by the increase in the value of the Company between January 9, 2007 and the date of a
Corporate Transaction. There has been no Corporate Transaction since the adoption of the Incentive and Retention
Plan. No employees have been selected by the Compensation Committee to receive payments under the Incentive Plan.
12. Registration Statement on Form S-3
The Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”)
on November 5, 2013, that became effective on November 21, 2013. The registration statement is designed to provide
the Company the flexibility to offer and sell from time to time up to $30 million of the Company’s common stock. The
Company may offer and sell such securities through one or more methods of distribution, subject to market conditions
and the Company’s capital needs. The terms of any offering under the shelf registration statement will be established at
the time of such offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC prior to the completion of
the offering. The Company has not filed any supplemental prospectus with the SEC or sold any common stock under
this registration statement.
F-96
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
13. Change in Directors of the Company
On September 30, 2013, John H. Alexander resigned as the President and Chief Executive Officer, and as a director, of
the Company, and John E. Turco resigned as a director of the Company. Michael D. Herman, currently the Chairman of
the Board of Directors of the Company, was appointed as the Interim President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Company.
Mr. Herman served as Pyramid’s Chairman of the Board of Directors since 2005. Following his purchases of Pyramid
common stock from Messrs. Alexander and Turco, Mr. Herman owns approximately 39.5% of the outstanding common
stock of Pyramid (not including the 100,000 shares that Mr. Herman will acquire in April 2014).
As part of this Board of Directors and management transition, Mr. Herman purchased 243,579 shares of Pyramid
common stock from Mr. Turco at a purchase price of $6.00 per share. In addition, Mr. Herman purchased 95,592 shares
of Pyramid common stock from Mr. Alexander at a purchase price $6.00 per share, and will purchase an additional
100,000 of Mr. Alexander’s shares by April 5, 2014, at the same price.
On October 8, 2013, the Board of Directors appointed Rick D. Kasch to the Company’s Board of Directors to fill the
vacancy created by the resignation of Mr. Turco. Mr. Kasch serves as President of ENSERVCO Corporation, which is a
publicly traded energy services company based in Denver, Colorado. Pyramid’s Chairman of the Board of Directors and
Interim President and Chief Executive Officer, Michael D. Herman, serves as the Chairman of the Board of Directors and
Chief Executive Officer of ENSERVCO Corporation.
14. Settlement Agreement
In February 2002, the Company entered into an employment agreement with John H. Alexander pursuant to which Mr.
Alexander agreed to serve as the Company’s Vice President. On June 3, 2004, Mr. Alexander was appointed as the
Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer. The employment agreement was for an initial term of six years, which
term automatically renews annually if written notice is not tendered. The agreement was automatically renewed on June
3, 2013. On September 30, 2013, Mr. Alexander resigned as the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
In connection with Mr. Alexander’s resignation, Mr. Alexander and the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement
and General Release of Claims, dated as of September 30, 2013 (the “Settlement Agreement”). Pursuant to the
Settlement Agreement, among other things:
·Mr. Alexander’s existing employment agreement terminated effective as of September 30, 2013;
The Company agreed to pay an aggregate amount of $967,329 to Mr. Alexander in satisfaction of amounts that are owed to Mr.
Alexander under his employment agreement, with such amount to be paid in three equal installments of $322,443 each, on April
·
5, 2014, January 5, 2015, and January 5, 2016. These amounts are included in restricted cash and deferred compensation
liability;
The Company agreed to secure these payments owed to Mr. Alexander in a “rabbi trust” pursuant to a Trust Agreement, dated as
·
of October 1, 2013 between the Company and Gilbert Ansolabehere, as trustee (the “Trust Agreement”);
· Mr. Alexander agreed to resign as a director and officer of the Company;
The Company and Mr. Alexander entered into a Consulting Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2013 (the “Consulting
·
Agreement”), pursuant to which Mr. Alexander will serve as a consultant to the Company on a part-time basis through
September 30, 2014 for a fee of $10,000 per month;
F-97
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Continued)
·The Company and Mr. Alexander waived known and unknown claims against each other;
Mr. Herman agreed to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock held by Messrs. Alexander and Turco, see Note 13;
·
and
The Company and Mr. Alexander entered into an Indemnity Agreement, dated as of September 30, 2013 (the “Indemnity
Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to indemnify Mr. Alexander against certain claims, losses, costs and
·
expenses that may result in the future from lawsuits and other proceedings in connection with his service as a director and an
officer of the Company.
On March 18, 2014, the trust agreement, “Rabbi Trust dated October 1, 2013,” noted above was terminated by agreement
of the Company, Mr. Alexander and the trustee and the funds were disbursed.
15. Subsequent Events
The Company evaluated subsequent events after the balance sheet date of December 31, 2013 through March 31, 2014.
On February 6, 2014, the Company and privately held Yuma Energy, Inc. (“Yuma”) announced they had entered into a
definitive merger agreement for an all-stock transaction. Upon completion of the transaction, which is subject to the
approval of shareholders of both companies, the Company will change its name to “Yuma Energy, Inc.,” and relocate its
headquarters to Houston, Texas, while maintaining offices in Bakersfield, California, to oversee its California operations.
Under the terms of the merger agreement, the Company will reincorporate in Delaware and the Delaware successor
corporation will issue an aggregate of approximately 66 million shares of its common stock to Yuma shareholders,
resulting in former Yuma shareholders owning approximately 93% of the post-merger company. Upon closing, there will
be an aggregate of approximately 71 million shares of common stock outstanding. The transaction is expected to
qualify as a tax-deferred reorganization under Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”).
The merger agreement is subject to the approval of the shareholders of both companies, as well as other customary
approvals, including authorization to list the newly issued shares on the NYSE MKT. The companies anticipate
completing the transaction in mid-2014.
F-98
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED) (Continued)
OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
FASB ASC Topic 932, Extraction Activities – Oil and Gas, requires disclosure of certain financial data for oil and gas
operations and reserve estimates of oil and gas. This information, presented here, is intended to enable the reader to
better evaluate the operations of the Company. All of the Company’s oil and gas reserves are located in the United
States.
The aggregate amounts of capitalized costs relating to oil and gas producing activities and the related accumulated
depletion, depreciation, and amortization and valuation allowances as of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were as
follows:
2013
 
 
 $19,704,600   $19,828,900   $18,946,000  
Proved properties
 
   178,600
Unproved properties being amortized
   0
 
Unproved properties not being amortized
Capitalized asset retirement costs
 
   412,612
Accumulated depletion, depreciation, amortization and valuation allowances   (18,214,400)   (17,912,400)   (17,132,100)
 
 $2,081,412   $2,521,078   $2,393,700
178,600
    0
    425,978
178,600
    0
    401,200
2012
2011
The estimated quantities and the change in proved reserves, both developed and undeveloped, for the Company are as
follows:
Gas
Gas
2011
  Oil
2012
  Oil
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:   
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Extensions, discoveries and other additions
Production
End of year
 
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
 
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
482
  10
  0
  (43
  449
   
   
  482
  449
   
   
  0
  0
2013
 Oil
 
 (Mbbls)  (MMCF)  (Mbbls)  (MMCF)  (Mbbls)  (MMCF) 
 
 
 
 
)
546
   (19
   0
)  (45
   482
    
    
   474
   482
    
    
   71
   0
538
)  63
   0
)  (55
   546
    
    
   433
   474
    
    
   105
   71
42
)   (36
    0
)   (6
    0
     
     
    42
    0
     
     
    0
    0
0
    20
    0
)   (6
    14
     
     
    0
    14
     
     
    0
    0
Gas
44
    7
    0
)   (9
    42
     
     
    35
    42
     
     
    8
    0
The foregoing estimates have been prepared by the Company from data prepared by an independent petroleum
engineer in respect to certain producing properties. Revisions in previous estimates as set forth above can result from
analysis of new information, as well as from additional production experience or from a change in economic factors. The
primary factor that has impacted the revisions of previous estimates of crude oil and natural gas reserves noted above
is from a change in crude oil and natural gas prices used to determine the valuation of year-end reserves. Higher crude
oil and natural gas prices cause certain oil and gas leases to become more profitable, thus generating additional
reserves. Net average crude oil sales prices (average crude oil sales prices net of operating costs, production taxes and
development costs) used to value the year-end reserves decreased by approximately $0.63 per barrel at December 31,
2013, decreased by approximately $6.50 per barrel at December 31, 2012 and increased by approximately $18.00 per
barrel at December 31, 2011.
F-99
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED) (Continued)
OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
The reserve estimates are believed to be reasonable and consistent with presently known physical data concerning size
and character of the reservoirs and are subject to change as additional knowledge concerning the reservoirs becomes
available.
The present value of estimated future net revenues of proved developed and undeveloped reserves, discounted at 10%,
were as follows:
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves    
(Present value before income taxes)
December 31,
 2013
$13,135,000  $13,712,000  $18,439,000
2012
2011
FASB ASC Topic 932, Extraction Activities - Oil and Gas, requires certain disclosures of the costs and results of
exploration and production activities and established a standardized measure of oil and gas reserves and the year-to-
year changes therein.
In addition to the foregoing disclosures, FASB ASC Topic 932, Extraction Activities – Oil and Gas established a
“Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows and Changes Therein Relating to Proved Oil and Gas
Reserves”.
Costs incurred, both capitalized and expensed, of oil and gas property acquisition, exploration and development for the
years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were as follows:
2013
 
Property acquisition costs
 $0
Exploration costs – expensed   0
Development costs
Asset retirement costs
2012
  2011
  $50,000   $700
    0
103,000    857,900    1,022,300 
   0
24,700     11,800
0
The results of operations for oil and gas producing activities for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
were as follows:
2013
 
 
 $4,392,000  $4,995,000  $5,688,000 
Sales
   2,109,000    2,103,000    1,920,000 
Production costs
 
   0
Exploration costs
Accretion expense
   115,000     38,000
 
Depletion, depreciation, amortization and valuation allowance   658,000     887,000     1,486,000 
   1,510,000    1,967,000    2,237,000 
 
Income tax (benefit) provision
   (246,000 )   240,000     113,000  
 $1,756,000  $1,727,000  $2,124,000 
Results of operations from production activities
0
    45,000
2012
2011
0
F-100
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED) (Continued)
OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
The standardized measure of discounted estimated future net cash flows relating to proved oil and gas reserves for the
years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were as follows:
2013
 
Future cash inflows
 $46,428,000  $51,004,000  $58,216,000 
Future development and production costs
   23,136,000    25,941,000    24,445,000 
Future abandonment costs
   1,442,000     1,328,000     1,279,000  
Future income tax expense
   5,100,000     5,238,000     7,987,000  
Future net cash flow
   16,750,000    18,497,000    24,505,000 
10% annual discount
   6,701,000     7,771,000     9,392,000  
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flow $10,049,000  $10,726,000  $15,113,000
2011
2012
The principal changes in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows during the years ended
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were as follows:
2012
  $0
Extensions
Revisions of previous estimates
Price changes
Quantity estimates
Change in production rates, timing and other
Development costs incurred
Changes in estimated future development costs   0
Estimated future abandonment costs
Sales of oil and gas, net of production costs
Accretion of discount
 
Net change in income taxes
Net (decrease) increase
2013
 
 $0
    
 
   (357,000 )   (2,155,000)   7,026,000  
    (894,000 )   1,901,000  
   411,000
    (1,642,000)   (1,157,000)
   143,000
    1,023,000  
    858,000
   103,000
    (1,281,000)   315,000
 
   (90,000
 
)   (6,000
   (2,283,000)   (2,892,000)   (3,768,000)
   1,450,000     1,922,000     1,386,000  
   (623,000 )   (6,090,000)   6,734,000  
   54,000
    (1,703,000)   1,778,000  
 $(677,000 ) $(4,387,000) $4,956,000
2011
  $0
)   8,000
Estimated future cash inflows are computed by applying year-end prices of oil and gas to year-end quantities of proved
reserves. Estimated future development and production costs are determined by estimating the expenditures to be
incurred in developing and producing the proved oil and gas reserves at the end of the year, based on year-end costs
and assuming continuation of existing economic conditions. Estimated future income tax expense is calculated by
applying the year-end effective tax rate to estimated future pretax net cash flows related to proved oil and gas reserves,
less the tax basis of the properties involved.
These estimates are furnished and calculated in accordance with requirements of the Financial Accounting Standards
Board and the SEC. Because of the unpredictable variances in expenses and capital forecasts, crude oil and natural
gas price changes being largely influenced and controlled by United States and foreign governmental actions, and the
fact that the basis for such estimates vary significantly, management believes the usefulness of these projections is
limited. Estimates of future net cash flows do not represent management’s assessment of future profitability or future
actual cash flows of the Company. It should be recognized that applying current costs and prices and a ten percent
standard discount rate allows for comparability but does not convey absolute value. The discounted amounts arrived at
are only one measure of financial quantification of proved reserves.
The standardized measure of discounted future cash flows before income taxes decreased by $623,000 at December 31,
2013. The increase in income taxes decreased discounted future cash flows by $54,000 for a total decrease in future
cash flows of $677,000 after income taxes as of December 31, 2013. Future cash flows decreased due primarily to sales
of oil and gas, net of production costs. This was offset by accretion of discount and revisions of quantity estimates.
F-101
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED) (Continued)
OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
The standardized measure of discounted future cash flows before income taxes decreased by $6,090,000 at December
31, 2012. The decrease in income taxes offset discounted future cash flows by $1,703,000 for a net decrease in future
cash flows of $4,387,000 after income taxes as of December 31, 2012. The factors contributing to the decrease in cash
flows are lower net average crude oil prices (average crude oil sales prices net of operating costs, production taxes and
development costs). During 2012, net average crude oil prices decreased by approximately $6.50 per barrel. At
December 31, 2012 the Company did not have any proved undeveloped reserves which also contributed to the
decrease in future cash flows for 2012. The proved undeveloped reserves at December 31, 2011 included two wells that
were projected to be drilled during 2012. One of these wells was the Santa Fe #20 development well that was drilled in
2012. This well is not currently producing and a valuation allowance of $204,000 was recorded at December 31, 2012 for
the Santa Fe energy lease. The other well project to be drilled in 2012, the CLI 4-H, was not drilled during 2012 and is not
expected to be drilled in the future.
The standardized measure of discounted future cash flows before income taxes increased by $6,734,000 at December
31, 2011. The increase in income taxes offset discounted future cash flows by $1,778,000 for a net increase in future
cash flows of $4,956,000 after income taxes as of December 31, 2011. The major factor contributing to the increase in
cash flows is higher net average crude oil prices (average crude oil sales prices net of operating costs, production taxes
and development costs). During 2011, net average crude oil prices increased by approximately $18.00 per barrel. This
price increase contributed to an increase in discounted cash flows due to price changes of $7,026,000.
F-102
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)
QUARTERLY RESULTS
REVENUES:
Quarter Ended:
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31 (a)
2012
2013
 
    
    
 
 $1,007,803  $1,369,058 
   1,154,409    1,340,314 
   1,138,438    1,198,420 
   1,900,650    1,087,535 
 $5,201,300  $4,995,327
NET INCOME (LOSS):
    
 
Quarter Ended:
 $112,687   $372,096  
March 31
   130,071     288,571  
June 30
   (533,781 )   207,896  
September 30 (b)
   448,292     (91,018 )
December 31 (a) (c) (d)
 $157,269   $777,545  
 
    
 
 
 
INCOME (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE:    
 
    
Quarter Ended:
 
 $0.02
March 31
June 30
   0.03
 
 
   (0.11
September 30 (b)
)
   0.09
December 31 (a) (c) (d)
 
 $0.03
$0.08
    0.06
)   0.04
    (0.01
  $0.17
(a) Reflects gain on sale of fixed assets of $809,476 for the sale of one of the Company’s oil and gas properties recorded
in the fourth quarter of 2013.
(b) Reflects deferred compensation of $1,040,764, see Note 14. “Settlement Agreement.”
(c) Reflects a valuation allowance of $151,243 recorded in the fourth quarter of 2013 for the write-down of certain oil and
gas properties.
(d) Reflects a valuation allowance of $237,711 recorded in the fourth quarter of 2012 for the write-down of certain oil and
gas properties.
F-103
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS:
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Short-term investments
Trade accounts receivable  (net of reserve for doubtful accounts of $4,000 in 2014 and 2013)   448,168
   537,400
Income taxes receivable
   74,607
Crude oil inventory
Prepaid expenses and other assets
   201,925
   281,700
Deferred income taxes
March 31,
 2014
 (Unaudited)   (Audited)
  
  
 $4,555,645   $4,404,246
   0
   2,141,887     2,140,822
December 31, 
 
  2013
484,468
    12,400
    102,334
    249,030
    711,800
967,329
412,612
8,241,332     9,072,429
 
    
 
    
    
 
   19,883,190     19,883,190  
 
   412,612
 
   2,058,744     2,058,744
   1,098,918     1,098,918
 
   1,136,566     1,136,566
 
   24,590,030     24,590,030  
   (21,439,883)   (21,335,914 )
 
   3,150,147     3,254,116
    
 
 
    
 
   1,139,149     1,131,707
 
   413,500
   250,000
 
 
   11,380
 
   1,814,029     1,852,987
    
 
 $13,205,508   $14,179,532
459,900
    250,000
    11,380
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
 
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, at cost:
 
Oil and gas properties and equipment (successful efforts method)
Capitalized asset retirement costs
Drilling and operating equipment
Land, buildings and improvements
Automotive, office and other property and equipment
 
Less - accumulated depletion,  depreciation, amortization and valuation allowances
TOTAL PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
 
INVESTMENTS AND OTHER ASSETS
Long-term investments
Deferred income taxes
Deposits
Other assets
TOTAL INVESTMENTS AND OTHER ASSETS
 
TOTAL ASSETS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-104
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
BALANCE SHEETS
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
March 31,
 2014
 (Unaudited)   (Audited)
    
 $351,836
   26,893
   54,444
   56,010
   227,457
   69,838
   282,314
    
   1,068,792     1,893,654
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Accounts payable
Accrued professional fees
Accrued taxes, other than income taxes
Accrued payroll and related costs
Accrued royalties payable
Accrued insurance
Liability for deferred compensation
 
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES
 
LIABILITY FOR ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS   1,315,279     1,305,862
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
 
CONTINGENCIES (Note 4)
 
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY:
Preferred stock, no par value
2,384,071     3,199,516
$290,930
    140,711
    54,444
    40,932
    226,502
    113,480
    1,026,655
December 31, 
 
  2013
Authorized - 10,000,000 shares
 
   0
Issued and outstanding - none
 
    
Common stock, no par value
 
    
Authorized - 50,000,000 shares
 
   1,847,384     1,847,384
Issued and outstanding - 4,688,085 shares
   8,974,053     9,132,632
 
Retained earnings
   10,821,437    10,980,016  
TOTAL SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
    
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY $13,205,508  $14,179,532
0
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-105
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(UNAUDITED)
REVENUES:
Oil and gas sales
 
COSTS AND EXPENSES:
Operating expenses
General and administrative
Taxes, other than income and payroll taxes
Provision for depletion, depreciation, and amortization
Accretion expense
Other costs and expenses
 
OPERATING (LOSS) INCOME
 
OTHER INCOME:
Interest
Other
 
(LOSS) INCOME BEFORE
INCOME TAX (BENEFIT) EXPENSE
Income tax (benefit) expense
Current
Deferred
 
 
NET (LOSS) INCOME
 
BASIC (LOSS) INCOME  PER COMMON SHARE
 
DILUTED (LOSS) INCOME  PER COMMON SHARE
 
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding   4,688,085
 
Diluted average number of common shares outstanding    4,688,085
Three Months Ended March 31, 
 
 2014
 
    
 
 $ 1,043,599
    
 
 
    
 
   496,290
 
   577,963
   33,609
 
 
   103,970
 
   9,417
 
   46,090
   1,267,339
 
 
   (223,740
 
    
 
    
   9,661
 
 
   7,000
 
   16,661
 
    
   (207,079
 
 
    
 
   (525,000
 
   476,500
   (48,500
 
 
    
 
 $ (158,579
 
    
 $ (0.03
 
 
    
 
 $ (0.03
2013
     
  $ 1,007,803
     
     
    434,438
    222,141
    30,397
    112,979
    10,379
    33,224
    843,558
)   164,245
     
     
    10,311
    0
    10,311
     
)   174,556
     
)   5,769
    56,100
)   61,869
     
) $ 112,687
     
) $ 0.02
     
) $ 0.02
     
    4,688,085
     
    4,688,085
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-106
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(UNAUDITED)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
 
Net (loss) income
Adjustments to reconcile net (loss) income to net cash (used in) provided by operating activities:    
Provision for depletion, depreciation, and amortization
Accretion expense
Deferred income taxes
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Trade accounts and income taxes receivable
Crude oil inventories
Prepaid expenses
Deferred compensation liability
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities
 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
 
Capital expenditures
Restricted cash
Increase in short-term investments
Increase in long-term investments
Net cash provided by (used in)
Investing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash & cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
103,970
   9,417
   476,500
    
   (488,700
   27,727
   47,105
   (744,341
   (80,522
   (807,423
    
    
    
   0
   967,329
   (1,065
   (7,442
    
   958,822
   151,399
    
   4,404,246
    
 $ 4,555,645
Three Months Ended March 31, 
 2014
 
 
    
 
    
 
 $ (158,579
 
 
 
 
 
)
)
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
)
 
)
)
 
)
)
2013
     
     
) $ 112,687
     
    112,979
    10,379
    56,100
     
)   (87,474
    (34,486
    56,235
)   0
)   (94,856
)   131,564
     
     
     
    (128,928
    0
)   (1,331
)   (7,442
     
    (137,701
    (6,137
     
    3,834,097
     
  $ 3,827,960
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-107
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
MARCH 31, 2014
(UNAUDITED)
1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The financial statements include the accounts of Pyramid Oil Company (the “Company”). Such financial statements
included herein have been prepared by the Company, without an audit, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Certain information and footnote disclosures normally included in
financial statements prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America (“GAAP”) have been condensed or omitted pursuant to such rules and regulations, although the Company
believes that the disclosures are adequate to make the information presented not misleading.
A summary of the Company's significant accounting policies is contained in its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2013. The financial data presented herein should be read in conjunction with the Company's
December 31, 2013 financial statements and notes thereto, contained in the Company's Form 10-K.
In the opinion of management, the unaudited financial statements, contained herein, include all adjustments necessary
to present fairly the Company's financial position as of March 31, 2014 and the results of its operations and its cash
flows for the three month periods ended March 31, 2014 and 2013. The results of operations for any interim period are
not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for a full year.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for its share based compensation in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards
Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718.  Stock-based compensation cost represents
stock options issued to non-employee members of the Board of Directors, and is measured at the grant date based on
the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite vesting period.
The fair value of each stock option is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Assumptions relative to volatility and anticipated forfeitures are determined at the time of grant. There were no stock
option grants during the three month periods ended March 31, 2014 or 2013.
Income Taxes
When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that some positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the
taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the
position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the financial statements in the
period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will
be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken
are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold
are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement
with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the
amount measured as described above is reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits in the accompanying
balance sheets along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon
examination.
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and California, Texas and New York states. With
few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal tax examination for the years prior to 2010. State
jurisdictions that remain subject to examination range from 2009 to 2013. The Company does not believe there will be
any material changes in its unrecognized tax positions over the next 12 months.
The Company policy is to recognize interest and penalties accrued on any unrecognized tax benefits as a component of
income tax expense. As of the date of adoption of FASB ASC 740-10-25, the Company did not have any accrued interest
or penalties associated with any unrecognized tax benefits, nor was any interest expense recognized during the three
month period ended March 31, 2014.
F-108
Interest associated with unrecognized tax benefits are classified as interest expense and penalties are classified in
selling, general and administrative expenses in the statements of operations.
Income Taxes Receivable
The Company has recognized income taxes receivable of $537,400 at March 31, 2014. The Company recorded an
increase in income taxes receivable for the first quarter of 2014 in the amount of $525,000. This increase is due primarily
to the deduction of deferred compensation for tax purposes in the amount of $1,003,973. The deferred compensation
had been recorded for financial statement purposes during the third quarter of 2013.
Income (Loss) per Share
Basic income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing the net income (loss) applicable to common stock by
the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Valuation Allowances
The Company has recorded valuation allowances for certain of its oil and gas properties when the undiscounted future
net cash flows are less than the net capitalized costs for the property. No valuation allowances were recorded in the first
quarter of 2014 or 2013.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to prior period financial statements to conform to the current year
presentation.
2. Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2013, the FASB issued ASU 2013-01, “Balance Sheet (Topic 210): Clarifying the Scope of Disclosures about
Offsetting Assets and Liabilities.” The amendments in this ASU clarify the scope for derivatives accounted for in
accordance with Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, including bifurcated embedded derivatives, repurchase
agreements and reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowing and securities lending transactions that are
either offset or subject to netting arrangements. An entity is required to apply the amendments for fiscal years
beginning on or after January 1, 2013. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2013-01 to have a material
impact on its financial statements.
3. Dividends
No cash dividends were paid during the three month periods ended March 31, 2014 and 2013.
4. Contingencies
In September 2009, the Company was notified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) of a final settlement
offer to settle its potential liability as a generator of waste containing hazardous substances that were disposed of at a
waste disposal site in Santa Barbara County, California. The Company responded to the EPA in October 2009 by
indicating that the waste contained petroleum products that fall within the exception to the definition of hazardous
substances for petroleum-related substances of the pertinent EPA regulations. Management has concluded that under
both federal and state regulations no reasonable basis exists for any valid claim against the Company. As such, the
likelihood of any liability is deemed remote. There has been no further communication from the EPA on this matter since
September 25, 2009.
Under the terms of the merger agreement between the Company and Yuma Energy, Inc., the Company may be required
to pay to Yuma a termination fee of approximately $1.0 million if the merger agreement is terminated under certain
circumstances.
F-109
5. Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
The Company recognized an income tax expense (benefit) of $(48,500) for the first quarter of 2014 compared to an
income tax provision of $61,869 for the same period in 2013.
Income tax expense (benefit) for the first quarter of 2014 was calculated as follows:
State
Federal
 
  
 
 
Current tax (benefit)
 $(450,000) $(75,000) $(525,000)
Deferred tax expense   377,400     99,100     476,500  
 
 
    
 $(72,600 ) $24,100   $(48,500 )
Total
Income tax expense (benefit) for the first quarter of 2013 was calculated as follows:
Federal   State
Current tax expense  $4,769   $1,000   $5,769  
Deferred tax expense   43,700    12,400    56,100 
    
 
 
 
 $48,469  $13,400  $61,869
Total
Deferred income taxes are recognized using the asset and liability method by applying income tax rates to cumulative
temporary differences based on when and how they are expected to affect the tax returns. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are adjusted for income tax rate changes. Deferred income tax assets have been offset by a valuation
allowance of $1,719,000 as of March 31, 2014. Management reviews deferred income taxes regularly throughout the year,
and accordingly makes any necessary adjustments to properly reflect the valuation allowance based upon current
financial trends and projected results.
6. Incentive and Retention Plan
On January 9, 2007, the Company's Board of Directors adopted an Incentive and Retention Plan (the “Incentive Plan”)
pursuant to which the Company's officers and other employees selected by the Company's Compensation Committee
are entitled to receive payments if they are employed by the Company as of the date of a Corporate Transaction (as
such term is defined in the Incentive Plan). A Corporate Transaction includes certain mergers involving the Company,
sales of Company assets, and other changes in the control of the Company, as specified in the Incentive and Retention
Plan. In general, the amount that is payable to each plan participant will equal the number of plan units that have been
granted to him or her, multiplied by the increase in the value of the Company between January 9, 2007 and the date of a
Corporate Transaction. There has been no Corporate Transaction since the adoption of the Incentive Plan. No
employees have been selected by the Compensation Committee to receive payments under the Incentive Plan.
7. Related-party Transaction
Effective January 1, 1990, John H. Alexander, a former officer and director of the Company, participated with a group of
investors that acquired the mineral and fee interest on one of the Company's oil and gas leases (the “Santa Fe Energy
lease”) in the Carneros Creek field after the Company declined to participate. The thirty-three percent interest owned by
Mr. Alexander represents a minority interest in the investor group. Mr. Alexander resigned as President, Chief Executive
Officer and director of the Company effective September 30, 2013. Royalties on oil and gas production from this
property paid to the investor group approximated $43,000 during the first quarter of 2013. Because Mr. Alexander is no
longer an officer, director or employee of the Company, the amounts paid to Mr. Alexander for royalties during the first
quarter of 2014 are no longer considered a related-party transaction.
F-110
8. Stock Based Compensation
Stock-Option Plan
The Company has issued stock options as compensation for non-employee members of the Board of Directors under
its 2006 Equity Incentive Plan.  These options vest immediately and are exercisable for a five-year period from the date
of the grant.
The following is a summary of the Company’s stock option activity.
Outstanding at December 31, 2013
Weighted-
Options   Price
  105,000  $ 5.17
Weighted-  Average
 
  Average   Remaining   Aggregate 
 
  Exercise   Contractual  Intrinsic
Life (Years)  Value
    4.66
$
-
Granted
Exercised
Forfeited
Outstanding at March 31, 2014 (unaudited)
-
  -
  -
  105,000  $ 5.17
Vested and expected to vest at March 31, 2014  105,000  $ 5.17
Exercisable at March 31, 2014
  105,000  $ 5.17
4.41
     
    4.41
    4.41
$
   
  $
  $
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
As of March 31, 2014, there were no unvested stock options or unrecognized stock option expense.
The following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding and exercisable at March 31, 2014.
Exercise  Number
Price
   
$ 5.40
  5.16
of Shares  Life (Years)  Price
     
    
   5,000
    2.17
   100,000     4.52
   105,000
$ 5.40
    5.16
Options Outstanding
Weighted   Weighted   
  Average
  Average    
  Remaining   Exercise   Number
Options Exercisable 
  Weighted 
  Average  
  Exercise
of Shares  Price
   
    
   5,000
  $ 5.40
   100,000     5.16
   105,000
9. Fair Value
Effective January 1, 2008, the Company adopted FASB ASC 820 (formerly SFAS No. 157) for its nonfinancial assets and
nonfinancial liabilities measured on a non-recurring basis. The Company adopted the provisions of FASB ASC 820 for
measuring the fair value of our financial assets and liabilities during 2008. As defined in FASB ASC 820, fair value is the
price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market
participants at the measurement date. The Company utilizes market data or assumptions that it believes market
participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions about risk and the risks inherent in the
inputs to the valuation technique. FASB ASC 820 establishes a three-tiered fair value hierarchy which prioritizes the
inputs used in measuring fair value as follows:
Level 1 - Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
Level 2 - Inputs, other than quoted prices, that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. These
include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or
liabilities in markets that are not active; and
F-111
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its
own assumptions. Included in this category is the Company's determination of the value of its asset retirement
obligation liability. The obligation has increased $9,417 during the three months ended March 31, 2014 as a result of
normal accretion expense.
The carrying amount of our cash and cash equivalents, short term investments, accounts receivable and accounts
payable reported in the balance sheets approximates fair value because of the short maturity of those instruments.
Fair Value on Nonrecurring Basis
Certain assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis in accordance with GAAP (for example,
when there is evidence of impairment). There were no instances of impairment recorded in the quarter ended March 31,
2014.
10. Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company recognizes a liability at discounted fair value for the future retirement of tangible long-lived assets and
associated assets retirement cost associated with the petroleum and natural gas properties. The fair value of the liability
is capitalized as part of the cost of the related asset and amortized to expense over its useful life. The liability accretes
until the date of expected settlement of the retirement obligations. The related accretion expense is recognized in the
statement of operations. The provision will be revised for the effect of any changes to timing related to cash flow or
undiscounted abandonment costs. Actual expenditures incurred for the purpose of site reclamation are charged to the
asset retirement obligations to the extent that the liability exists on the balance sheet. Differences between the actual
costs incurred and the fair value of the liability recorded are recognized in income in the period the actual costs are
incurred.
There are no legally restricted assets for the settlement of asset retirement obligations. A reconciliation of the
Company's asset retirement obligations from the periods presented, are as follows:
Balance at December 31, 2013 $1,305,862 
 
Incurred during the period
   0
Additions for new wells
 
   0
   9,417
Accretion expense
 
Balance at March 31, 2014
 $1,315,279
11. Registration Statement on Form S-3
The Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC on November 5, 2013, that was declared
effective on November 21, 2013. The registration statement is designed to provide the Company the flexibility to offer
and sell from time to time up to $30 million of the Company's common stock. The Company may offer and sell such
securities through one or more methods of distribution, subject to market conditions and the Company's capital needs.
The terms of any offering under the shelf registration statement will be established at the time of such offering and will
be described in a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC prior to the completion of the offering. The Company has
not filed any supplemental prospectus with the SEC or sold any common stock under this registration statement.
12. Merger Agreement
On February 6, 2014, the Company and privately held Yuma Energy, Inc. (“Yuma”) announced they had entered into a
definitive merger agreement for an all-stock transaction. Upon completion of the transaction, which is subject to the
approval of shareholders of both companies, the Company will change its name to “Yuma Energy, Inc.,” and relocate its
headquarters to Houston, Texas, while maintaining offices in Bakersfield, California, to oversee its California operations.
Under the terms of the merger agreement, the Company will reincorporate in Delaware and the Delaware successor
corporation will issue an aggregate of approximately 66 million shares of its common stock to Yuma shareholders,
resulting in former Yuma shareholders owning approximately 93% of the post-merger company. Upon closing, there will
be an aggregate of approximately 71 million shares of common stock outstanding. The transaction is expected to
qualify as a tax-deferred reorganization under Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”).
F-112
The merger agreement is subject to the approval of the shareholders of both companies, as well as other customary
approvals, including authorization to list the newly issued shares on the NYSE MKT. The companies anticipate
completing the transaction in mid-2014.
The foregoing description of the merger agreement is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of such
agreement. See Note 14.
13. Settlement Agreement
In February 2002, the Company entered into an employment agreement with John H. Alexander pursuant to which Mr.
Alexander agreed to serve as the Company's Vice President. On June 3, 2004, Mr. Alexander was appointed as the
Company's President and Chief Executive Officer. The employment agreement was for an initial term of six years, which
term automatically renews annually if written notice is not tendered. The agreement was automatically renewed on June
3, 2013. On September 30, 2013, Mr. Alexander resigned as the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
In connection with Mr. Alexander’s resignation, Mr. Alexander and the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement
and General Release of Claims, dated as of September 30, 2013 (the “Settlement Agreement”). Pursuant to the
Settlement Agreement, among other things:
·Mr. Alexander’s existing employment agreement terminated effective as of September 30, 2013;
The Company agreed to pay an aggregate amount of $967,329 to Mr. Alexander in satisfaction of amounts that are owed to Mr.
Alexander under his employment agreement, with such amount to be paid in three equal installments of $322,443 each, on April
·
5, 2014, January 5, 2015, and January 5, 2016. These amounts are included in restricted cash and deferred compensation
liability;
The Company agreed to secure these payments owed to Mr. Alexander in a “rabbi trust” pursuant to a Trust Agreement, dated as
·
of October 1, 2013 between the Company and Gilbert Ansolabehere, as trustee (the “Trust Agreement”);
· Mr. Alexander agreed to resign as a director and officer of the Company;
The Company and Mr. Alexander entered into a Consulting Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2013 (the “Consulting
·
Agreement”), pursuant to which Mr. Alexander will serve as a consultant to the Company on a part-time basis through
September 30, 2014 for a fee of $10,000 per month;
·The Company and Mr. Alexander waived known and unknown claims against each other;
·Michael D. Herman, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company and Interim President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Company, agreed to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock held by Messrs. Alexander and Turco; and
The Company and Mr. Alexander entered into an Indemnity Agreement, dated as of September 30, 2013 (the “Indemnity
Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to indemnify Mr. Alexander against certain claims, losses, costs and
·
expenses that may result in the future from lawsuits and other proceedings in connection with his service as a director and an
officer of the Company.
On March 18, 2014, the Trust Agreement noted above was terminated by agreement of the Company, Mr. Alexander and
the trustee, and the funds were disbursed. At March 31, 2014, the Company had recorded a liability for deferred
compensation of $282,314. These amounts represent payroll tax withholding related to certain Severance Award
Agreements issued to Mr. Alexander.
F-113
14. Subsequent Events
On April 25, 2014, Pyramid Delaware Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Company (“Pyramid Delaware”), filed a Registration Statement on Form S-4 (“Form S-4”) with the SEC to effectuate (i)
the proposed reincorporation of the Company from California to Delaware through the merger of the Company with and
into Pyramid Delaware (the “reincorporation”), and (ii) the proposed merger of Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a
Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid Delaware (“Merger Subsidiary”), with and into Yuma
Energy, Inc. (“Yuma”), with Yuma becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid Delaware (the “merger”). As a result
of the reincorporation and the merger, Pyramid Delaware will be the publicly held corporation through which the
Company’s common stock will be traded. In order to complete the merger, the Company’s shareholders must vote to
approve and adopt the merger agreement (which includes (i) approval of the principal terms and conditions of the
reincorporation; (ii) approval of the amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the amended and restated
bylaws of Pyramid Delaware; (iii) approval of the issuance of shares of Pyramid Delaware common stock to
stockholders of Yuma; and (iv) approval of the change of Pyramid Delaware’s name to “Yuma Energy, Inc.”), and Yuma
shareholders must vote to approve and adopt the merger agreement as well. See Note 12.
On April 25, 2014, the Company’s Board of Directors approved the issuance of 100,000 shares of Company common
stock under the Company’s 2006 Equity Incentive Plan to certain employees, directors and consultants, which vest
upon a change in control.
The Company evaluated subsequent events after the balance sheet date of March 31, 2014 through May, 15, 2014.
F-114
Annex A
AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER AND REORGANIZATION
dated as of
August 1, 2014
by and among
Pyramid Oil Company,
PYRAMID DELAWARE MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC.,
PYRAMID MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC.,
and
YUMA ENERGY, INC.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE II INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE III THE MERGER
SECTION 3.01The Merger
SECTION 3.02Effective Time of the Merger
SECTION 3.03Effects of the Merger
SECTION 3.04Conversion of Shares
SECTION 3.05Dissenting Shares
SECTION 3.06Payment of Merger Consideration
SECTION 3.07The Closing
SECTION 3.08Tax Consequences
Page
 
A-2
A-2
A-2
A-2
A-2
A-2
A-2
A-4
A-4
A-7
A-7
SECTION 4.01Certificate of Incorporation
SECTION 4.02Bylaws
SECTION 4.03Directors and Officers
A-7
ARTICLE IVTHE SURVIVING CORPORATION OF THE MERGER; DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
A-7
 
A-7
 
 
A-7
ARTICLE V REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF PYRAMID AND MERGER SUBSIDIARY A-7
A-7
 
 
A-8
A-8
 
 
A-10
SECTION 5.01Organization and Qualification
SECTION 5.02Capitalization
SECTION 5.03Authority; Non-Contravention; Approvals
SECTION 5.04Reports and Financial Statements
ARTICLE VIREPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE COMPANY
A-10
SECTION 5.05Proxy Statement/Prospectus
A-10
SECTION 5.06No Violation of Law
A-10
SECTION 5.07Material Contracts; Compliance with Contracts
A-11
SECTION 5.08Brokers and Finders
A-11
SECTION 5.09No Prior Activities of Merger Subsidiary
A-11
SECTION 5.10Litigation; Government Investigations
A-11
SECTION 5.11Taxes
A-13
SECTION 5.12Employee Benefit Plans; ERISA; Employment  Agreements
A-15
SECTION 5.13Tax Matters
A-17
SECTION 5.14Liabilities
A-17
SECTION 5.15Absence of Certain Changes or Events
A-17
SECTION 5.16Compliance
A-17
SECTION 5.17Environmental Matters
A-18
SECTION 5.18Insurance
SECTION 5.19Affiliate Transactions
A-18
SECTION 5.20Recommendation of Pyramid Board of Directors; Opinion of Financial AdvisorA-19
SECTION 5.21Certain Payments
A-19
A-19
SECTION 5.22Title to Assets
A-20
SECTION 5.23No Other Representations or Warranties
A-20
A-20
A-20
SECTION 6.01Organization and Qualification
SECTION 6.02
Capitalization
SECTION 6.03Authority; Non-Contravention; Approvals
SECTION 6.04Financial Statements
SECTION 6.05Liabilities
SECTION 6.06Absence of Certain Changes or Events
SECTION 6.07Litigation; Government Investigations
SECTION 6.08Proxy Statement/Prospectus
A-21
A-22
A-23
A-23
A-23
A-23
A-i
ARTICLE VII COVENANTS
SECTION 6.09 No Violation of Law
SECTION 6.10 Material Contracts; Compliance with Contracts
SECTION 6.11 Taxes
SECTION 6.12 Employee Benefit Plans; ERISA; Employment  Agreements
SECTION 6.13 Environmental Matters
SECTION 6.14 Title to Assets
SECTION 6.15 Intellectual Property
SECTION 6.16 Insurance
SECTION 6.17 Certain Payments
SECTION 6.18 Brokers and Finders
SECTION 6.19 Production and Reserves
SECTION 6.20 Tax Matters
SECTION 6.21 No Other Representations or Warranties
SECTION 7.01 Conduct of Business by the Company Pending the Merger
SECTION 7.02 Conduct of Business by Pyramid Pending the Merger
SECTION 7.03 No Solicitation
SECTION 7.04 Access to Information; Confidentiality
SECTION 7.05 Notices of Certain Events
SECTION 7.06 Merger Subsidiary
SECTION 7.07 Company Stockholder Meeting or Written Consent
SECTION 7.08 Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting
SECTION 7.09 Proxy Statement/Prospectus; Registration Statement
SECTION 7.10 Public Announcements
SECTION 7.11 Expenses and Fees
SECTION 7.12 Agreement to Cooperate
SECTION 7.13 Exemption From Liability Under Section 16(b)
SECTION 7.14 Certain Tax Matters
A-24
A-24
A-24
A-26
A-28
A-28
A-29
A-29
A-30
A-30
A-30
A-30
A-32
A-32
A-32
A-33
A-34
A-36
A-36
A-36
A-37
A-37
A-38
A-38
A-38
A-39
A-39
A-39
SECTION 7.15 Company Financial Statements
SECTION 7.16 Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance
ARTICLE VIIIINTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE IX CONDITIONS TO THE MERGER
 
 
 
ARTICLE X TERMINATION
 
 
 
ARTICLE XI MISCELLANEOUS
A-40
A-40
A-41
A-41
A-41
SECTION 9.01 Conditions to the Obligations of Each Party
SECTION 9.02 Conditions to Obligation of the Company to Effect  the Merger
A-42
SECTION 9.03 Conditions to Obligations of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to Effect the MergerA-43
A-43
A-43
A-45
A-45
A-45
A-45
A-45
A-46
A-46
A-47
SECTION 11.01Non-Survival of Representations and Warranties
SECTION 11.02Notices
SECTION 11.03Interpretation
SECTION 11.04Assignments and Successors
SECTION 11.05Governing Law
A-47
A-47
A-47
A-47
A-47
A-47
A-48
A-48
SECTION 10.01Termination
SECTION 10.02Termination Fee
SECTION 10.03Effect of Termination
SECTION 11.06
Waiver of Jury Trial
SECTION 11.07Exclusive Jurisdiction; Venue
SECTION 11.08No Third-Party Rights
SECTION 11.09Counterparts
SECTION 11.10Amendments; No Waivers
SECTION 11.11Entire Agreement
SECTION 11.12Severability
SECTION 11.13Specific Performance
A-ii
Exhibits: 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit A Company Voting Agreement
 
Exhibit B Pyramid Voting Agreement
Exhibit C Form of Certificate of Merger
 
Exhibit D Form of Restated Articles of Incorporation of Pyramid 
Exhibit E Officers and Directors of Pyramid
A-iii
Subject Matters of Disclosure Schedules to the
Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization
The following is a list of the subject matters addressed in the disclosure schedules delivered by Yuma Energy, Inc. to
Pyramid Oil Company and the disclosure schedules delivered by Pyramid Oil Company to Yuma Energy, Inc. Pursuant
to Item 601(b)(2) of Regulation S-K, Pyramid Oil Company agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted
schedule or exhibit to the Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization to the SEC upon
request.
List of Subject Matters in Pyramid Oil Company Disclosure Schedule
5.02  Capitalization
5.03  Non-Contravention; Authorization
5.06  Violation of Law
5.07  Material Contracts
5.10  Litigation; Government Investigations
5.11  Taxes
5.12  Employee Benefit Plans; ERISA; Employment Agreements
5.14  Liabilities
5.17  Environmental Matters
5.18  Insurance
5.22  Title to Assets
7.02  Conduct of Business by Pyramid Pending the Merger
9.02(f) Consents, Approval and Waivers
List of Subject Matters in Yuma Energy, Inc. Disclosure Schedule
Absence of Certain Changes or Events
 Litigation
 No Violation of Law
 Company Material Contracts
6.01(b) Company and Subsidiaries
6.02(a) Capitalization
6.02(b) Company Stock Plans and Holders of Company Restricted Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Units
6.02(c) Pending Awards
6.03(c) Authority; Non-Contravention; Approvals
6.04(c) Accounting Controls
6.06
6.07
6.09
6.10
6.11(a) Taxes
6.11(l)  Hedging Transactions Not Accounted For Under SFAS 133
6.12(a) Company Employee Plans
6.12(f)  Accelerated Benefits
6.12(g) Exceptions to All Company Employees Terminable At-Will
6.12(h) Company Employment, Consulting, Termination and Severance Agreements
6.13
6.14(a) Owned Properties and Leased Properties
6.14(b) Title to Assets
6.16
9.03(e) Company Consents, Approvals and Waivers to be Obtained Prior to the Merger Effective Time
Environmental Matters
Company Insurance Policies
A-iv
AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER AND REORGANIZATION
THIS AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER AND REORGANIZATION (this “Agreement”)
entered into as of August 1, 2014, by and among YUMA ENERGY, INC., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”),
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY, a California corporation (“Pyramid”), PYRAMID DELAWARE MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC., a
Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid (“Delaware Merger Subsidiary”), and PYRAMID
MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Pyramid (“Merger Subsidiary”).
WHEREAS, the Company, Pyramid, Delaware Merger Subsidiary and Merger Subsidiary have entered into that certain
Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization as of February 6, 2014 (the “February 6, 2014 Agreement”); and
WHEREAS, the reincorporation contemplated by the February 6, 2014 Agreement will be abandoned; and
WHEREAS, Delaware Merger Subsidiary will no longer be necessary to effectuate the proposed reincorporation and will
therefore be deleted as a party to this Agreement; and
WHEREAS, the parties wish to amend and restate the February 6, 2014 Agreement in its entirety; and
WHEREAS, the respective Boards of Directors of the Company, Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary have determined that
this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby are fair to, advisable and in the best interests of their
respective stockholders, and have approved the Merger (as defined below) and this Agreement, on the terms and
subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement; and
WHEREAS, the Company, Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary intend to effect a merger of Merger Subsidiary with and into
the Company (the “Merger”), upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Agreement and in accordance with the
Delaware General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”). Upon consummation of the Merger, Merger Subsidiary will cease to
exist, and the Company will continue as a wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid; and
WHEREAS, in connection with the Merger, the parties desire to make certain representations, warranties, covenants and
agreements and prescribe certain conditions to the Merger, as provided herein; and
WHEREAS, as a material inducement to Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to enter into this Agreement, certain
stockholders of the Company shall have concurrently herewith entered into a voting agreement (the “Company Voting
Agreement”) in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit A, pursuant to which, among other things, such
stockholders shall have agreed to vote the shares of Company Common Stock (as defined below) beneficially owned by
them in favor of the approval and adoption of this Agreement, the approval of the Merger and the approval of the
transactions contemplated hereby; and
WHEREAS, as a material inducement to the Company to enter into this Agreement, a major shareholder of Pyramid shall
have concurrently herewith entered into a voting agreement (the “Pyramid Voting Agreement”) in substantially the form
attached hereto as Exhibit B, pursuant to which, among other things, such shareholder shall have agreed to vote the
shares of common stock, no par value per share, of Pyramid (the “Pyramid Common Stock”), beneficially owned by him
in favor of the approval and adoption of this Agreement, the approval of the Merger and the approval of the transactions
contemplated hereby; and
WHEREAS, the parties intend that (a) all references in this Agreement to “the date hereof” or “the date of this
Agreement” shall refer to the original execution date of the February 6, 2014 Agreement, and (b) the date on which the
representations, warranties and covenants made by any party to this Agreement shall not change as a result of the
execution of this Agreement and shall be made as of such dates as they were in the February 6, 2014 Agreement, in
each of cases (a) and (b), except as otherwise expressly indicated in this Agreement.
A-1
WHEREAS, for U.S. federal income Tax (as such term is defined in Section 5.11(m)) purposes, the parties intend that (a)
the Merger will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder (the “Code”), (b) this Agreement will constitute a plan
of reorganization within the meaning of U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.368-2(g), and (c) Pyramid, Merger Subsidiary
and the Company will each be a party to such reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(b) of the Code.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the respective representations, warranties, covenants and
agreements set forth herein, the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE II
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE III
THE MERGER
SECTION 3.01          The Merger. Upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Agreement, at the Merger Effective
Time (as defined in Section 3.02), Merger Subsidiary shall be merged with and into the Company in accordance with the
DGCL. Upon the Merger, the separate corporate existence of Merger Subsidiary shall cease and the Company shall
continue as the surviving corporation of the Merger (the “Surviving Corporation”) and shall continue its existence under
the DGCL.
SECTION 3.02          Effective Time of the Merger. Unless this Agreement is earlier terminated pursuant to the terms
hereof, the Merger shall become effective as promptly as practicable following the filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of Delaware (the “Secretary of State”) of a certificate of merger in accordance with the requirements of the DGCL
and the form of which is attached hereto as Exhibit C (the “Certificate of Merger”), in accordance with Section 3.08
hereof. When used in this Agreement, the term “Merger Effective Time” means the date and time at which the Certificate
of Merger is accepted by the Secretary of State for filing, or such later time as shall be set forth in the Certificate of
Merger.
SECTION 3.03          Effects of the Merger. The Merger shall have the effects provided for in this Agreement and in
Section 259 of the DGCL. Without limiting the foregoing, upon the Merger, all the rights, privileges, immunities, powers
and franchises of Merger Subsidiary shall vest in the Company and all the obligations, duties, debts and liabilities of
Merger Subsidiary shall be the obligations, duties, debts and liabilities of the Company.
SECTION 3.04          Conversion of Shares. At the Merger Effective Time and subject to the other provisions of this Article
III, by virtue of the Merger and without any action on the part of the parties or the holders of any of the following
securities:
(a)          each issued and outstanding share of capital stock of Merger Subsidiary shall be converted into one validly
issued, fully paid and nonassessable share of common stock of the Surviving Corporation, par value $0.01 per share;
A-2
(b)          each issued and outstanding share of the common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company
(“Company Common Stock”), owned by any subsidiary of the Company, Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary and shares of
Company Common Stock held by the Company as treasury stock (all such shares, the “Excluded Shares”), shall
automatically be cancelled and retired and shall cease to exist, and no payment or consideration shall be made with
respect thereto;
(c)          each share of Company Common Stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time
(excluding any Excluded Shares and any Dissenting Shares (as such term is defined in Section 3.05(a)) shall no longer
be outstanding, shall automatically be cancelled and retired and shall cease to exist, and shall automatically be
converted into and exchangeable for the right to receive the Per Share Common Stock Consideration (as such term is
defined in Section 3.06(i));
(d)          each share of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company (the “Series A Preferred
Stock”), issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time shall no longer be outstanding, shall
automatically be cancelled and retired and shall cease to exist, and shall automatically be converted into the right to
receive that number of whole shares of Pyramid Common Stock equal to the product obtained by multiplying (A) the
number of shares of Company Common Stock into which one share of Series A Preferred Stock is convertible
immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time by (B) the Per Share Common Stock Consideration;
(e)          each share of Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company (the “Series B Preferred
Stock,” and together with the Series A Preferred Stock, the “Company Preferred Stock”), issued and outstanding
immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time shall no longer be outstanding, shall automatically be cancelled and
retired and shall cease to exist, and shall automatically be converted into the right to receive that number of whole
shares of Pyramid Common Stock equal to the product obtained by multiplying (A) the number of shares of Company
Common Stock into which one share of Series B Preferred Stock is convertible immediately prior to the Merger Effective
Time by (B) the Per Share Common Stock Consideration;
(f)          each restricted stock unit (each, a “Company RSU”) which was issued pursuant any stock option, purchase or
award plan, program or arrangement of the Company (collectively, the “Company Stock Plans”), evidenced by an RSU
agreement between the holder and the Company (each, a “Company RSU Agreement”), and outstanding immediately
prior to the Merger Effective Time, shall be assumed by Pyramid and converted automatically at the Merger Effective
Time into a restricted stock unit denominated in Pyramid Common Stock having the same terms and conditions as the
Company RSU (each, an “Assumed RSU”), except that (i) each such Company RSU Agreement will entitle the holder,
upon vesting and settlement, to that number of whole shares of Pyramid Common Stock equal to the product obtained
by multiplying (A) the number of shares of Company Common Stock that were issuable with regard to such Company
RSU Agreement immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time by (B) the Per Share Common Stock Consideration, and
rounding such product down to the nearest whole number of shares of Pyramid Common Stock, and (ii) all references
to the “Company” in the applicable Company Stock Plans and the Company RSU Agreements will be references to
Pyramid. The Company will not take any action to accelerate the vesting of any Company RSU (other than to implement
any existing agreements or arrangements for such acceleration in effect as of the date of this Agreement);
(g)          each outstanding share of restricted stock of the Company (each, a “Company Restricted Share”) under any
Company Stock Plan and evidenced by a restricted share agreement between the holder and the Company (each, a
“Company Restricted Share Agreement”), that will not vest at or immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time shall be
assumed by Pyramid and shall be converted into restricted stock of Pyramid Common Stock with associated rights to
the issuance of additional shares of Pyramid Common Stock (the “Assumed Restricted Shares”), as follows: (i) the
Assumed Restricted Shares issued pursuant to each Company Restricted Share Agreement will entitle the holder, upon
vesting, to that number of whole shares of Pyramid Common Stock equal to the product obtained by multiplying (A) the
number of Company Restricted Shares issued pursuant to such Company Restricted Share Agreement immediately
prior to the Merger Effective Time by (B) the Per Share Common Stock Consideration, and rounding such product down
to the nearest whole number of shares of Pyramid Common Stock, and (ii) all references to the “Company” in the
applicable Company Stock Plans and the Company Restricted Share Agreements will be references to Pyramid;
A-3
(h)         each Company Restricted Share that is not an Assumed Restricted Share (the “Vested Company Restricted
Shares”) shall vest and such shares of Company Common Stock shall no longer be outstanding, shall automatically be
cancelled and retired and shall cease to exist, and shall automatically be converted into and exchangeable for the right
to receive the Per Share Common Stock Consideration; and
(i)          the Company (or its Board of Directors or the appropriate committee thereof, or the President of the Company, if
applicable) shall (i) make any amendments to the terms of the Company Stock Plans, take all corporate action necessary
for the adjustment of Company RSUs and Company Restricted Shares, and take any other actions necessary or
appropriate to give effect to the transactions contemplated by this Section 3.04, and (ii) take all reasonable actions
necessary to ensure that from and after the Merger Effective Time, other than as set forth in this Section 3.04, Pyramid
will not be bound by any options, warrants, rights, awards or other arrangements that would entitle any person, other
than Pyramid, to beneficially own shares of Pyramid or receive any payments in respect of such options, warrants,
rights, awards or arrangements.
SECTION 3.05          Dissenting Shares. For purposes of this Agreement, the term “Dissenting Shares” means shares of
Company Common Stock and Company Preferred Stock held immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time by a holder
of Company Common Stock and Company Preferred Stock (each, a “Company Stockholder”), who did not vote in favor
of the Merger (or consent thereto in writing) and with respect to which demand to the Company for purchase of such
shares is duly made and perfected in accordance with Section 262 of the DGCL and not subsequently and effectively
withdrawn or forfeited. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.04(c) or any other provision of this Agreement to the
contrary, Dissenting Shares shall not be converted into or be exchangeable for the right to receive the Merger
Consideration at or after the Merger Effective Time (and at the Merger Effective Time, such Dissenting Shares shall no
longer be outstanding and shall automatically be cancelled and retired and shall cease to exist), but shall entitle the
holder thereof to receive such consideration as may be determined to be due to holders pursuant to the DGCL, unless
and until the holder of such Dissenting Shares withdraws his or her demand for such appraisal in accordance with the
DGCL or becomes ineligible for such appraisal. If a holder of Dissenting Shares shall withdraw his or her demand for
such appraisal or shall become ineligible for such appraisal (through failure to perfect or otherwise), then, as of the
Merger Effective Time or the occurrence of such event, whichever last occurs, such holder’s Dissenting Shares shall
automatically be converted into and represent the right to receive the Merger Consideration, as provided in Section 3.04
and in accordance with the DGCL.
(a)          The Company shall give Pyramid (i) prompt notice of any demands received by the Company for appraisal of
shares of Company Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock and (ii) the opportunity to participate in negotiations
and proceedings with respect to any such demands.
SECTION 3.06          Payment of Merger Consideration.
(a)          Prior to the Merger Effective Time, Pyramid shall appoint an agent, reasonably satisfactory to the Company, to
act as disbursing agent (the “Disbursing Agent”) for the payment of the Merger Consideration upon surrender of
certificates representing shares of Company Common Stock and Company Preferred Stock (the “Certificates”). At or
prior to the Merger Effective Time, Pyramid shall deposit or cause to be deposited with the Disbursing Agent in trust for
the benefit of the Company Stockholders (i) certificates representing the shares of Pyramid Common Stock (or make
appropriate alternative arrangements if uncertificated shares of Pyramid Common Stock represented by a book entry
will be issued) sufficient to pay the Merger Consideration, and (ii) as needed, cash sufficient to make payments in lieu of
issuing fractional shares of Pyramid Common Stock in accordance with Section 3.06(e).
(b)          Promptly after the Merger Effective Time, Pyramid shall cause the Disbursing Agent to mail to each individual,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, joint venture, unincorporated organization, trust or any
other entity, including a governmental authority (each, a “person”), who was a record holder as of the Merger Effective
Time of a Certificate which immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time represented shares of Company Common
Stock or Company Preferred Stock, and whose shares were converted into the right to receive the Merger Consideration
pursuant to Section 3.04, a form of letter of transmittal (which shall specify that delivery shall be effected, and risk of loss
and title to the Certificates shall pass, only upon proper delivery of the Certificates to the Disbursing Agent, and which
shall be in such form and shall have such other customary provisions as Pyramid may reasonably specify) and
instructions for use in effecting the surrender of the Certificates in exchange for payment of the Merger Consideration.
Upon surrender to the Disbursing Agent of a Certificate, together with such letter of transmittal duly executed and such
other documents as may be reasonably required by the Disbursing Agent, the holder of such Certificate shall be paid
promptly in exchange therefor the Merger Consideration and such Certificate shall forthwith be canceled. If payment is
to be made to a person other than the person in whose name the Certificate surrendered is registered, it shall be a
condition of payment that the Certificate so surrendered be properly endorsed or otherwise be in proper form for
transfer and that the person requesting such payment pay any transfer or other taxes required by reason of the
payment of the Merger Consideration to a person other than the registered holder of the Certificate surrendered or
establish to the satisfaction of Pyramid that such Tax has been paid or is not applicable. Until surrendered in
accordance with the provisions of this Section 3.06, each Certificate (other than Certificates representing Excluded
Shares and other than Certificates representing Dissenting Shares) shall represent for all purposes only the right to
receive, as and when payable hereunder, the applicable amount of the Merger Consideration in accordance with Section
3.04.
A-4
(c)          From and after the Merger Effective Time, there shall be no registration of transfers of shares of Company
Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock which were outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time on
the stock transfer books of the Surviving Corporation. From and after the Merger Effective Time, the holders of shares of
Company Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time shall
cease to have any rights with respect to such shares of Company Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock except
as otherwise provided in this Agreement or by applicable law. All Merger Consideration paid upon the surrender of
Certificates in accordance with the terms of this Article III shall be deemed to have been paid in full satisfaction of all
rights pertaining to the shares of Company Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock previously represented by
such Certificates. If, after the Merger Effective Time, Certificates are presented to Pyramid or the Surviving Corporation
for any reason, such Certificates shall be cancelled and exchanged as provided in this Article III. At the close of
business on the day of the Merger Effective Time, the stock ledger of the Company shall be closed.
(d)          If any Certificate shall have been lost, stolen or destroyed, upon the making of an affidavit of that fact by the
person claiming such Certificate to be lost, stolen or destroyed and, if reasonably required by Pyramid, the posting by
such person of a bond, in such reasonable amount as Pyramid may direct, as indemnity against any claim that may be
made against it with respect to such Certificate, the Disbursing Agent will pay, in exchange for such lost, stolen or
destroyed Certificate, the Merger Consideration to be paid in respect of the shares of Company Common Stock,
Company Preferred Stock or Vested Company Restricted Shares formerly represented by such Certificate, as
contemplated by this Article III.
(e)          No fraction of a share of Pyramid Common Stock shall be issued by virtue of the Merger, but in lieu thereof each
holder of shares of Company Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock who would otherwise be entitled to a fraction
of a share of Pyramid Common Stock in connection with the Merger (after aggregating all fractional shares of Pyramid
Common Stock to be received by such holder) shall receive from Pyramid an amount of cash (rounded down to the
nearest whole cent), without interest, equal to the product obtained by multiplying (x) such fraction, by (y) the average
closing price of one share of Pyramid Common Stock for the five consecutive trading days ending on the trading day
immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time, as reported on the NYSE MKT.
(f)          At any time after 180 days after the Merger Effective Time, Pyramid shall be entitled to require the Disbursing
Agent to deliver to it any Merger Consideration which had been deposited by Pyramid with the Disbursing Agent and
not disbursed in exchange for Certificates. Thereafter, holders of shares of Company Common Stock and Company
Preferred Stock shall look only to Pyramid (subject to the terms of this Agreement and abandoned property, escheat
and other similar laws) as general creditors thereof with respect to any Merger Consideration that may be payable upon
surrender of the Certificates held by them. If any Certificates shall not have been surrendered prior to two years after the
Merger Effective Time (or immediately prior to such time on which any payment in respect thereof would otherwise
escheat or become the property of any governmental unit or agency), the payment in respect of such Certificates shall,
to the extent permitted by applicable law, become the property of Pyramid, free and clear of all claims or interest of any
person previously entitled thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, none of Pyramid, the Company, the Surviving
Corporation or the Disbursing Agent shall be liable to any holder of a share of Company Common Stock or Company
Preferred Stock for any Merger Consideration delivered in respect of such share of Company Common Stock or
Company Preferred Stock to a public official pursuant to any abandoned property, escheat or other similar law.
A-5
(g)          Pyramid and the Disbursing Agent shall be entitled to deduct and withhold from the Merger Consideration
otherwise payable to a holder of shares of Company Common Stock or Company Preferred Stock pursuant to this
Agreement such amounts as may be required to be deducted and withheld with respect to the making of such payment
under the Code, or under any provision of state, local or foreign Tax law. To the extent amounts are so withheld and
paid over to the appropriate taxing authority, the withheld amounts shall be treated for all purposes of this Agreement as
having been paid to the person in respect of which such deduction and withholding was made.
(h)          If, between the date of this Agreement and the Merger Effective Time, the shares of Pyramid Common Stock
shall be changed or proposed to be changed into a different number or class of shares by reason of the occurrence of
or record date with respect to any reclassification, recapitalization, split-up, combination, exchange of shares or similar
readjustment, in any such case within such period, or a stock dividend thereon shall be declared with a record date
within such period, appropriate adjustments shall be made to the Merger Consideration (as such term is defined below
in Section 3.06(i).
(i)          Merger Consideration Definitions.
(a)          The term “Per Share Common Stock Consideration” shall mean the quotient of (i) the Merger Consideration
divided by (ii) the Closing Company Share Number.
(b)          The term “Closing Company Share Number” shall mean the sum of (i) the aggregate number of shares of
Company Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time, plus (ii) the aggregate number of
shares of Company Common Stock issuable upon the conversion of shares of Series A Preferred Stock and Series B
Preferred Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time, and plus (iii) the aggregate number of
Company Restricted Shares outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time. For avoidance of doubt,
Dissenting Shares shall not be deemed outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time for purposes of
determining the Closing Company Share Number.
(c)          The term “Merger Consideration” shall mean the result of (i) the Initial Merger Consideration less (ii) the
Aggregate Dissenting Share Amount, as adjusted pursuant to Section 3.06(h).
(d)          The term “Initial Merger Consideration” shall mean Sixty-Six Million, Three Hundred Thirty-Six Thousand, Seven
Hundred and One (66,336,701) shares of newly issued Pyramid Common Stock, as adjusted pursuant to Section 3.06(h).
(e)          The term “Initial Per Share Consideration” shall mean the quotient of (i) the Initial Merger Consideration divided
by (ii) the Initial Company Share Number.
(f)          The term “Initial Company Share Number” shall mean the sum of (i) the aggregate number of shares of Company
Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time, plus (ii) the aggregate number of shares of
Company Common Stock issuable upon the conversion of shares of Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred
Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time, plus (iii) the aggregate number of Company Restricted
Shares outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time, and plus (iv) the Aggregate Converted Dissenting
Shares. For avoidance of doubt, Dissenting Shares shall not be deemed outstanding immediately prior to the Merger
Effective Time for purposes of determining the Initial Company Share Number.
(g)          The term “Aggregate Converted Dissenting Shares” shall mean the sum of (i) the aggregate number of shares
of Company Common Stock that are deemed Dissenting Shares immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time plus (ii)
the aggregate number of shares of Company Common Stock issuable upon the conversion of shares of Series A
Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock that are deemed Dissenting Shares immediately prior to the Merger
Effective Time.
A-6
(h)          The term “Aggregate Dissenting Share Amount” shall mean the product of (i) the Aggregate Converted
Dissenting Shares multiplied by (ii) the Initial Per Share Consideration, and rounding the product down to the nearest
whole number.
SECTION 3.07          The Closing. The consummation of Merger (the “Closing”) shall take place at the offices of
TroyGould PC, 1801 Century Park East, 16th Floor, Los Angeles, California 90067, which shall be no later than the
second business day following the satisfaction or waiver of all conditions set forth in Article IX (other than those
conditions that by their nature are to be satisfied at the Closing) or such other place and date as the parties may
mutually determine (the “Closing Date”). As soon as practicable following the Closing, the Company and Merger
Subsidiary shall file with the Secretary of State the duly executed Certificate of Merger and such other documents as
may be required by the DGCL, and the parties shall take all such other and further actions as may be required by law to
make the Merger effective.
SECTION 3.08          Tax Consequences. It is the intention of the parties hereto that the Merger qualify as a reorganization
under Section 368(a) of the Code.
ARTICLE IV
THE SURVIVING CORPORATION OF THE MERGER; DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
SECTION 4.01          Certificate of Incorporation. The certificate of incorporation of Merger Subsidiary in effect at the
Merger Effective Time shall be the certificate of incorporation of the Surviving Corporation, except that the name of the
Surviving Corporation shall be changed to “The Yuma Companies, Inc.,” unless and until amended in accordance with
applicable law and the terms of this Agreement.
SECTION 4.02          Bylaws. The bylaws of Merger Subsidiary in effect at the Merger Effective Time shall be the bylaws of
the Surviving Corporation, unless and until amended in accordance with applicable law.
SECTION 4.03          Directors and Officers. The persons who are directors and officers of the Company immediately prior
to the Merger Effective Time shall be the directors and officers of the Surviving Corporation in their same positions and
shall hold office in accordance with the DGCL, the certificate of incorporation of the Surviving Corporation and the
bylaws of Surviving Corporation.
ARTICLE V
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF PYRAMID AND MERGER SUBSIDIARY
Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary (each, a “Pyramid Entity,” and collectively, the “Pyramid Entities”), jointly and severally,
represent and warrant to the Company that, except as set forth in the disclosure schedule delivered to the Company by
Pyramid at or prior to the execution and delivery of the February 6, 2014 Agreement (the “Pyramid Disclosure
Schedule”), which shall be arranged in sections corresponding to the numbered sections of this Article V, it being
agreed that disclosure of any item on the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule shall be deemed disclosure with respect to all
Sections of this Agreement if the relevance of such item is reasonably apparent from the face of the Pyramid Disclosure
Schedule:
SECTION 5.01          Organization and Qualification. Each of the Pyramid Entities is a corporation duly organized, validly
existing and in good standing under the laws of the jurisdiction of its incorporation and has the requisite corporate
power and authority to own, lease and operate its assets and properties and to carry on its business as it is now being
conducted. Each of the Pyramid Entities is duly qualified and licensed to transact business and is in good standing in
each jurisdiction in which the properties owned, leased or operated by it or the nature of the business conducted by it
makes such qualification necessary, except where the failure to be so organized, existing, qualified, licensed and in
good standing would not reasonably be expected to have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect (as hereinafter defined). In
this Agreement, the term “Pyramid Material Adverse Effect” means any change, event, circumstance, development or
occurrence (other than an effect arising out of or resulting from the entering into or the public announcement or
disclosure of this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby) that, individually or in the aggregate, (i) has a
material adverse effect on the business, financial condition or ongoing operations of Pyramid or (ii) has a material
adverse effect on Pyramid’s ability to consummate the Merger; provided, however, that in no event shall a decrease in
Pyramid’s stock price by itself constitute a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect. True, accurate and complete copies of
Pyramid’s Restated Articles of Incorporation and Amended and Restated Bylaws and Merger Subsidiary’s Certificate of
Incorporation and Bylaws, in each case, as in effect on the date hereof, including all amendments thereto, have
heretofore been made available to the Company.
A-7
SECTION 5.02          Capitalization.
(a)          The authorized capital stock of Pyramid consists of 50,000,000 shares of Pyramid Common Stock and
10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, no par value (“Pyramid Preferred Stock”) of Pyramid. As of the date hereof,
(i) 4,688,085 shares of Pyramid Common Stock are issued and outstanding, all of which have been duly authorized,
validly issued, fully paid, nonassessable and free of preemptive rights, (ii) no shares of Pyramid Preferred Stock are
issued and outstanding, (iii) no shares of Pyramid capital stock are held in treasury by Pyramid, and (iv) 105,000 shares
of Pyramid Common Stock are reserved for issuance upon exercise of Pyramid Options.
(b)          The shares of Pyramid Common Stock to be issued pursuant to the Merger, when issued and delivered in
accordance with this Agreement, will be duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable and issued in
compliance with federal and state securities laws.
(c)          Except for the Pyramid Options, there are no outstanding subscriptions, options, calls, contracts, commitments,
understandings, restrictions, arrangements, rights or warrants, including any right of conversion or exchange under
any outstanding security, instrument or other agreement and also including any rights plan or other anti-takeover
agreement, obligating Pyramid or any subsidiary of Pyramid to issue, deliver or sell, or cause to be issued, delivered or
sold, additional shares of the capital stock of Pyramid or obligating Pyramid or any subsidiary of Pyramid to grant,
extend or enter into any such agreement or commitment. There are no outstanding stock appreciation rights or similar
derivative securities or rights of Pyramid or any subsidiary of Pyramid. Except for the Pyramid Voting Agreement, there
are no voting trusts, irrevocable proxies or other agreements or understandings to which Pyramid or any subsidiary of
Pyramid is a party or is bound with respect to the voting of any shares of Pyramid Common Stock.
(d)          Except as provided in Section 5.02 of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, Pyramid has no subsidiaries other than
Delaware Merger Subsidiary and Merger Subsidiary, and does not own any equity interest in any entity other than
Delaware Merger Subsidiary and Merger Subsidiary. Delaware Merger Subsidiary and Merger Subsidiary do not have
any subsidiaries.
SECTION 5.03          Authority; Non-Contravention; Approvals.
(a)          Pyramid has the requisite corporate power and authority to enter into this Agreement and, subject to Pyramid
Shareholder Approval (as defined below), to perform its obligations hereunder and to consummate the transactions
contemplated hereby. The execution and delivery by Pyramid of this Agreement, the performance by Pyramid of its
obligations hereunder, and the consummation by Pyramid of the transactions contemplated hereby, have been duly
authorized by all necessary corporate action on the part of Pyramid, subject only to the approval of the Pyramid
Shareholder Approval Matters (as defined in Section 7.08) by the shareholders of Pyramid. The affirmative vote of the
holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Pyramid Common Stock outstanding on the applicable record date
(“Pyramid Shareholder Approval”) is the only vote of the holders of any class or series of Pyramid’s capital stock
necessary to adopt or approve the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters. This Agreement has been duly executed and
delivered by each of the Pyramid Entities, and, assuming the due authorization, execution and delivery hereof by the
Company, constitutes a valid and legally binding agreement of each of the Pyramid Entities, enforceable against the
Pyramid Entities in accordance with its terms, subject to applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium
and similar laws affecting creditors’ rights and remedies generally, and subject, as to enforceability, to general principles
of equity, including principles of commercial reasonableness, good faith and fair dealing (regardless of whether
enforcement is sought in a proceeding at law or in equity).
A-8
(b)          Pyramid’s Board of Directors, by resolutions duly adopted by unanimous vote at a meeting of all directors of
Pyramid duly called and held and, as of the date hereof, not subsequently rescinded or modified in any way, has, as of
the date hereof (i) approved this Agreement and the Merger, and determined that this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby, including the Merger, are fair to, and in the best interests of Pyramid shareholders, and (ii)
resolved to recommend that Pyramid’s shareholders approve the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters and directed
that such matters be submitted for consideration of the shareholders of Pyramid at the Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting.
The Board of Directors of Merger Subsidiary, at a meeting duly called and held, has unanimously approved this
Agreement and the Merger. Pyramid, in its capacity as the sole stockholder of Delaware Merger Subsidiary and Merger
Subsidiary, hereby approves of this Agreement.
(c)          The execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement by each of the Pyramid Entities and the
consummation of the Merger and the other transactions contemplated hereby do not and will not violate, conflict with or
result in a breach of any provision of, or constitute a default (or an event which, with notice or lapse of time or both,
would constitute a default) under, or result in the termination of, or accelerate the performance required by, or result in a
right of termination or acceleration under, contractually require any offer to purchase or any prepayment of any debt, or
result in the creation of any lien, security interest or encumbrance upon any of the properties or assets of Pyramid
under any of the terms, conditions or provisions of (i) the Restated Articles of Incorporation or the Amended and
Restated Bylaws of Pyramid, (ii) subject to compliance with the requirements set forth in clauses (i)-(v) of Section 5.03(d)
and obtaining the Pyramid Shareholder Approval, any statute, law, ordinance, rule, regulation, judgment, decree, order,
injunction, writ, permit or license of any court or governmental authority applicable to Pyramid or any Pyramid
subsidiary or any of their respective properties or assets, or (iii) any contract, agreement, commitment or understanding
to which Pyramid or any Pyramid subsidiary is now a party or by which Pyramid or any Pyramid subsidiary or any of
their respective properties or assets may be bound or affected, except as provided in Section 5.03 of the Pyramid
Disclosure Schedule, and other than, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) of this Section 5.03(c), such violations, conflicts,
breaches, defaults, terminations, accelerations, contractual requirements or creations of liens, security interests or
encumbrances that would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Pyramid Material
Adverse Effect and would not prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Merger.
(d)          Except for (i) the filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) of a Registration Statement on
Form S-4 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), by Pyramid, with respect to the
transactions contemplated hereby (the “Registration Statement”) and applicable filings pursuant to the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), including the filing with the SEC of Pyramid’s proxy statement
relating to the Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting (the “Proxy Statement/Prospectus”), (ii) the filing of the Certificate of
Merger with the Secretary of State in connection with the Merger, (iii) the filing of a Current Report on Form 8-K with the
SEC within four business days after the execution of this Agreement and on the Closing Date, (iv) filings with the
Secretary of State and the secretary of state of the State of California in connection with the amendments to its articles
of incorporation in the form attached hereto as Exhibit D (the “Pyramid Restated Articles”), and (v) such approvals as
may be required under applicable state securities or “blue sky” laws or the rules and regulations of the NYSE MKT, and
except as provided in Section 5.03 of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, no declaration, filing or registration with, or
notice to, or authorization, consent or approval, ratification or permission of (any of the foregoing being a “Consent”),
any governmental or regulatory body or authority or other person is necessary under any Pyramid Material Contract or
otherwise for the execution and delivery of this Agreement by Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary or the consummation by
Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary of the transactions contemplated hereby, other than such Consents which, if not made or
obtained, as the case may be, would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Pyramid
Material Adverse Effect and would not prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Merger.
(e)          The Board of Directors of Pyramid has approved the Merger and this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby and thereby, and such approval is sufficient to render inapplicable to the Merger and this
Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby the anti-takeover provisions of the California Corporation Code
(“CCC”) to the extent, if any, such provisions are applicable to the Merger, this Agreement, and the transactions
contemplated hereby and thereby.  No other state takeover, control share, fair price or similar statute or regulation
applies to or purports to apply to Pyramid with respect to the Merger, this Agreement, or the transactions contemplated
hereby and thereby.
A-9
SECTION 5.04          Reports and Financial Statements.
(a)          Since January 1, 2011, Pyramid has timely filed with the SEC all material forms, statements, reports, certifications
and documents, including all exhibits, post-effective amendments and supplements thereto (the “Pyramid SEC
Reports”), required to be filed by it under each of the Securities Act, the Exchange Act and the respective rules and
regulations thereunder, all of which, as amended if applicable, complied when filed, or amended, in all material respects
with all applicable requirements of the appropriate act and the rules and regulations thereunder. As of their respective
dates, the Pyramid SEC Reports did not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which
they were made, not misleading, except to the extent corrected by a subsequent Pyramid SEC Report filed with the SEC
prior to the date hereof.
(b)          The financial statements of Pyramid included in the Pyramid SEC Reports (collectively, the “Pyramid Financial
Statements”) were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (except, with respect to any
unaudited financial statements, as permitted by applicable SEC rules or requirements) applied on a consistent basis
(except as may be indicated therein or in the notes thereto) and fairly present in all material respects the financial
position of Pyramid as of the dates thereof and the results of operations and changes in financial position of Pyramid
for the periods then ended (subject, in the case of any unaudited interim financial statements, to normal year-end
adjustments).
SECTION 5.05          Proxy Statement/Prospectus. None of the information to be supplied by any of the Pyramid Entities
for inclusion in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus will, at the time of the mailing thereof or any amendments or
supplements thereto, or at the time of the Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting, contain any untrue statement of a material
fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein,
in light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. The Registration Statement will comply, as of
its effective date, as to form in all material respects with all applicable laws, including the provisions of the Securities Act
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no representation or warranty is
made by any Pyramid Entity with respect to statements made or incorporated by reference therein supplied by the
Company in writing expressly for inclusion or incorporation by reference in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus or
Registration Statement.
SECTION 5.06          No Violation of Law. No Pyramid Entity is in violation of or has been given written (or, to the
knowledge of any Pyramid Entity, oral) notice of any violation of any law, statute, order, rule, regulation, ordinance or
judgment of any governmental or regulatory body or authority, except for violations which would not reasonably be
expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect. Neither Pyramid nor any Pyramid
subsidiary is in violation of the terms of any permits, licenses, franchises, variances, exemptions, orders and other
governmental Consents necessary to conduct their businesses as presently conducted, except for delays in filing
reports or violations which would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Pyramid
Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 5.07          Material Contracts; Compliance with Contracts. Section 5.07 of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule
includes a list of each contract to which Pyramid is a party or by which Pyramid or its assets are bound or affected as of
the date hereof which is required to be disclosed in the Pyramid SEC Reports (each, a “Pyramid Material Contract”).
With respect to each Pyramid Material Contract (i) the Pyramid Material Contract is legal, valid, binding and enforceable
and in full force and effect with respect to Pyramid, subject to applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization,
moratorium and similar laws affecting creditors’ rights and remedies generally, and subject, as to enforceability, to
general principles of equity, including principles of commercial reasonableness, good faith and fair dealing (regardless
of whether enforcement is sought in a proceeding at law or in equity) and (ii) Pyramid is not in material breach or
violation of or in material default in the performance or observance of any term or provision of, and, to the knowledge of
Pyramid, no event has occurred which, with lapse of time or action by a third party, would result in a default under, the
Material Contract.
A-10
SECTION 5.08          Brokers and Finders. Except for fees payable to Roth Capital Partners pursuant to an engagement
letter, dated December 19, 2013, Pyramid has not entered into any contract with any person that may result in the
obligation of Pyramid to pay any investment banking fees, finder’s fees or brokerage fees in connection with the
transactions contemplated hereby. Pyramid has provided to the Company a true, correct and complete copy of any and
all engagement or retention agreements with financial advisors or other advisors, to which Pyramid is a party and which
are related to the transactions contemplated hereby.
SECTION 5.09          No Prior Activities of Merger Subsidiary. Except for obligations incurred in connection with its
incorporation or organization and the negotiation, execution and consummation of this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby, Merger Subsidiary has not incurred any obligation or liability nor engaged in any business or
activity of any type or kind whatsoever or entered into any agreement or arrangement with any person.
SECTION 5.10          Litigation; Government Investigations. There are no material claims, suits, actions, proceedings,
arbitrations or other actions pending or, to the knowledge of Pyramid, threatened against, relating to or affecting
Pyramid, before any court, governmental department, commission, agency, instrumentality or authority, or any
arbitrator. No material investigation or review by any governmental or regulatory body or authority is pending or, to the
knowledge of Pyramid, threatened, nor has any governmental or regulatory body or authority indicated an intention to
conduct the same. Pyramid is not subject to any judgment, decree, injunction, rule or order of any court, governmental
department, commission, agency, instrumentality or authority, or any arbitrator, or any settlement agreement or
stipulation, which as of the date hereof prohibits the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby or would
reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 5.11          Taxes.
(a)          Pyramid has timely (i) filed with the appropriate governmental authorities all material Tax Returns (as defined in
Section 5.11(m)) required to be filed by it, and such Tax Returns are true, correct and complete in all material respects,
and (ii) paid in full or reserved in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles on the Pyramid Financial
Statements all material Taxes (as defined in Section 5.11(m) required to be paid. Pyramid has not requested an
extension of time within which to file a material Tax Return, which has not been since filed. There are no liens for Taxes
upon any property or asset of Pyramid, other than liens for Taxes not yet due and payable or Taxes contested in good
faith by appropriate proceedings or that are otherwise not material and reserved against in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. No deficiency with respect to Taxes has been proposed, asserted or assessed in
writing against Pyramid, which has not been fully paid or adequately reserved or reflected in the Pyramid SEC Reports,
and there are no material unresolved issues of law or fact arising out of a notice of a deficiency, proposed deficiency or
assessment from the Internal Revenue Service or any other governmental taxing authority with respect to Taxes of
Pyramid. Pyramid has not agreed to an extension of time with respect to a Tax deficiency, other than extensions which
are no longer in effect. Pyramid has not received (A) notice from any federal taxing authority of its intent to examine or
audit any of Pyramid’s or any of its subsidiaries’ Tax Returns or (B) notice from any state taxing authority of its intent to
examine or audit any of Pyramid’s or any of its subsidiaries’ Tax Returns, other than notices with respect to
examinations or audits by any state taxing authority that have not had and would not reasonably be expected to have a
Material Adverse Effect on Pyramid. Pyramid is not a party to any agreement providing for the allocation or sharing of
Taxes with any entity other than agreements the consequences of which are fully and adequately reserved for in the
Pyramid Financial Statements. Pyramid has not been a United States real property holding corporation within the
meaning of Code Section 897(c)(2) during the five-year period ending on the date hereof.
(b)          Pyramid has withheld and paid each material Tax required to have been withheld and paid in connection with
amounts paid or owing to any employee, independent contractor, creditor, shareholder or other party, and materially
complied with all information reporting and backup withholding provisions of applicable law.
(c)          The statutes of limitations for the federal income Tax Returns of Pyramid have expired or otherwise have been
closed for all taxable periods ending on or before December 31, 2007.
A-11
(d)          Since December 31, 2007, no Pyramid Entity has entered into an agreement or waiver extending any statute of
limitations relating to the payment or collection of a material amount of Taxes, nor is any request for such a waiver or
extension pending.
(e)          No Pyramid Entity is the subject of or bound by any material private letter ruling, technical advice memorandum,
closing agreement or similar material ruling, memorandum of agreement with any taxing authority.
(f)          No Pyramid Entity has entered into, has any liability in respect of, or has any filing obligations with respect to,
any “reportable transactions,” as defined in Section 1.6011-4(b)(1) of the U.S. Treasury Regulations.
(g)          No Pyramid Entity will be required to include any material item of income in, or exclude any material item of
deduction from, taxable income for any taxable period (or portion thereof) ending after the Closing Date as a result of
any (i) change in method of accounting for a taxable period ending on or prior to the Closing Date under Section 481(c)
of the Code (or any corresponding or similar provision of state, local or foreign Tax law), (ii) “closing agreement” as
described in Section 7121 of the Code (or any corresponding or similar provision of state, local or foreign Tax law)
executed on or prior to the Closing Date, or (iii) deferred intercompany gain or excess loss account described in the U.S.
Treasury Regulations under Section 1502 of the Code (or any corresponding or similar provision of state, local or
foreign Tax law).
(h)          No Pyramid Entity has taken or agreed to take any action or knows of any fact, agreement, plan or other
circumstance that would be reasonably likely to prevent the Merger from qualifying as a reorganization within the
meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
(i)          Pyramid has made available to the Company correct and complete copies of (i) all U.S. federal income Tax
Returns of Pyramid relating to taxable periods ending on or after December 31, 2007, filed through the date hereof and
(ii) any material audit report within the last three years relating to any material Taxes due from or with respect to Pyramid.
(j)          No jurisdiction where Pyramid does not file a Tax Return has made a claim that Pyramid is required to file a Tax
Return for a material amount of Taxes for such jurisdiction.
(k)          Within the last three years, No Pyramid Entity has owned any material assets located outside the United States
or conducted a material trade or business outside the United States.
(l)          Except as set forth in Section 5.11(l) of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, all of the transactions which Pyramid
has accounted for as hedges under the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) 133 have also been
treated as hedging transactions for federal income Tax purposes pursuant to U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.1221-2
and have been properly identified as such under U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.1221-2(f).
(m)          For purposes of this Agreement, “Tax” (including, with correlative meaning, the terms “Taxes”) means all
federal, state, local and foreign taxes, charges, fees, imposts, levies or other assessments, including all net income,
profits, franchise, gross receipts, environmental, customs duty, capital stock, communications services, severance,
stamp, payroll, sales, employment, unemployment, disability, social security, occupation, use, property, withholding,
excise, production, value added, occupancy, capital, ad valorem, transfer, inventory, license, customs duties, fees,
assessments and charges of any kind whatsoever and other taxes, duties or assessments of any nature whatsoever,
together with all interest, penalties, fines and additions imposed with respect to such amounts and any interest in
respect of such penalties and additions, and includes any liability for Taxes of another person by contract, as a
transferee or successor, under Treas. Reg. Section 1.1502-6 or analogous state, local or foreign law provision or
otherwise, and “Tax Return” means any return, report, claim for refund, estimate, information return or statement or
other similar document (including attached schedules) relating to or required to be filed with respect to any Tax,
including, any information return, claim for refund, amended return or declaration of estimated Tax.
A-12
SECTION 5.12          Employee Benefit Plans; ERISA; Employment Agreements.
(a)          Section 5.12(a) of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule contains a complete and accurate list of each plan, program,
policy, practice, contract, agreement or other arrangement providing for employment, compensation, retirement,
deferred compensation, loans, severance, separation, relocation, termination pay, performance awards, bonus,
incentive, stock option, stock purchase, stock bonus, phantom stock, stock appreciation right, change in control,
supplemental retirement, fringe benefits, cafeteria benefits, salary continuation, vacation, sick, or other paid leave,
employment or consulting, hospitalization or other medical, dental, life (including all individual life insurance policies as
to which Pyramid is the owner, the beneficiary or both) or other insurance or coverage, disability, death benefit, or other
benefits, whether written or unwritten, including without limitation each “employee benefit plan” within the meaning of
Section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (“ERISA”), which is or has been
sponsored, maintained, contributed to, or required to be contributed to by Pyramid and, with respect to any such plans
which are subject to Code Section 401(a), any trade or business (whether or not incorporated) that is or at any relevant
time was treated as a single employer with Pyramid within the meaning of Section 414(b), (c), (m) or (o) of the Code (an
“ERISA Affiliate”) for the benefit of any person who performs or who has performed services for Pyramid or with respect
to which Pyramid or any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid has or may have any liability (including without limitation contingent
liability) or obligation (collectively, the “Pyramid Employee Plans”).
(b)          Pyramid has furnished to the Company true and complete copies of documents embodying each of Pyramid
Employee Plans and related plan documents, including without limitation trust documents, group annuity contracts,
plan amendments, insurance policies or contracts, participant agreements, employee booklets, administrative service
agreements, summary plan descriptions, compliance and nondiscrimination tests for the last three plan years, standard
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (“COBRA”) forms and related notices, registration statements
and prospectuses and, to the extent still in its possession, any material employee communications relating
thereto.  With respect to each Pyramid Employee Plan, if any, that is subject to ERISA reporting requirements, Pyramid
has provided copies of the Form 5500 reports filed for the last five plan years.
(c)          Compliance.  (i) Each Pyramid Employee Plan has been administered in accordance with its terms and in
compliance with the requirements prescribed by any and all statutes, rules and regulations (including ERISA and the
Code), except as could not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Pyramid Material Adverse
Effect; and Pyramid and each ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid have performed all material obligations required to be
performed by them under, are not in material respect in default under or violation of and have no knowledge of any
material default or violation by any other party to, any of Pyramid Employee Plans; (ii) any Pyramid Employee Plan
intended to be qualified under Section 401(a) of the Code has either obtained from the Internal Revenue Service a
favorable determination letter as to its qualified status under the Code, including all currently effective amendments to
the Code, or has time remaining to apply under applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations or Internal Revenue Service
pronouncements for a determination or opinion letter and to make any amendments necessary to obtain a favorable
determination or opinion letter; (iii) none of Pyramid Employee Plans promises or provides retiree medical or other
retiree welfare benefits to any person; (iv) there has been no “prohibited transaction,” as such term is defined in
Section 406 of ERISA or Section 4975 of the Code, with respect to any Pyramid Employee Plan; (v) none of Pyramid or,
to the knowledge of Pyramid, any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid is subject to any liability or penalty under Sections 4976
through 4980 of the Code or Title I of ERISA with respect to any Pyramid Employee Plan; (vi) all contributions required to
be made by Pyramid or any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid to any Pyramid Employee Plan have been timely paid and
accrued; (vii) with respect to each Pyramid Employee Plan, no “reportable event” within the meaning of Section 4043 of
ERISA (excluding any such event for which the thirty day notice requirement has been waived under the regulations to
Section 4043 of ERISA) nor any event described in Section 4062, 4063 or 4041 of ERISA has occurred; (viii) each
Pyramid Employee Plan subject to ERISA has prepared in good faith and timely filed all requisite governmental reports,
which were true and correct as of the date filed, and has properly and timely filed and distributed or posted all notices
and reports to employees required to be filed, distributed or posted with respect to each such Pyramid Employee Plan;
(ix) no suit, administrative proceeding, action or other litigation has been brought, or to the knowledge of Pyramid is
threatened, against or with respect to any such Pyramid Employee Plan, including any audit or inquiry by the Internal
Revenue Service or United States Department of Labor; and (x) there has been no amendment to, written interpretation
or announcement by Pyramid or any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid that would materially increase the expense of
maintaining any Pyramid Employee Plan above the level of expense incurred with respect to that Pyramid Employee
Plan for the most recent fiscal year included in Pyramid Financial Statements. No current or former officer, director,
employee, leased employee, consultant or agent (or their respective beneficiaries) of Pyramid or a subsidiary has or will
obtain a right to receive a gross-up payment from Pyramid or a subsidiary with respect to any Tax that may be imposed
upon such individual pursuant to Section 409A of the Code, Section 4999 of the Code or otherwise.
A-13
(d)          Neither Pyramid nor any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid has ever maintained, established, sponsored, participated
in, contributed to, or is obligated to contribute to, or otherwise incurred any obligation or liability (including without
limitation any contingent liability) under any “multiemployer plan” (as defined in Section 3(37) of ERISA) or to any
“pension plan” (as defined in Section 3(2) of ERISA) subject to Title IV of ERISA or Section 412 of the Code.  None of
Pyramid or any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid has any actual or potential withdrawal liability (including without limitation any
contingent liability) for any complete or partial withdrawal (as defined in Sections 4203 and 4205 of ERISA) from any
multiemployer plan.
(e)          With respect to each Pyramid Employee Plan, Pyramid has complied with (i) the applicable health care
continuation and notice provisions of the COBRA and the regulations thereunder or any state law governing health care
coverage extension or continuation; (ii) the applicable requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 and the
regulations thereunder; (iii) the applicable requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (“HIPAA”); and (iv) the applicable requirements of the Cancer Rights Act of 1998.  Pyramid has no unsatisfied
obligations to any employees, former employees or qualified beneficiaries pursuant to COBRA, HIPAA or any state law
governing health care coverage extension or continuation.
(f)          The consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement will not (i) entitle any current or former
employee or other service provider of Pyramid or any ERISA Affiliate of Pyramid to severance benefits or any other
payment (including without limitation unemployment compensation, golden parachute, bonus or benefits under any
Pyramid Employee Plan), except as expressly provided in this Agreement; or (ii) accelerate the time of payment or
vesting of any such benefits or increase the amount of compensation due any such employee or service provider.  No
benefit payable or that may become payable by Pyramid pursuant to any Pyramid Employee Plan or as a result of or
arising under this Agreement shall constitute an “excess parachute payment” (as defined in Section 280G(b)(1) of the
Code) subject to the imposition of an excise Tax under Section 4999 of the Code or the deduction for which would be
disallowed by reason of Section 280G of the Code and no such benefit will fail to be deductible for federal income Tax
purposes by virtue of Section 162(m) of the Code.  Each Pyramid Employee Plan can be amended, terminated or
otherwise discontinued after the Merger Effective Time in accordance with its terms, without material liability to Pyramid
or the Company other than ordinary administration expenses typically incurred in a termination event. Pyramid will
terminate its 5304-Simple Plan effective immediately before the Merger Effective Time if requested by the Company.
(g)          Pyramid is in compliance with all currently applicable laws and regulations respecting terms and conditions of
employment, including without limitation applicant and employee background checking, immigration laws,
discrimination laws, verification of employment eligibility, employee leave laws, classification of workers as employees
and independent contractors, wage and hour laws, and occupational safety and health laws.  There are no proceedings
pending or, to the knowledge of Pyramid, reasonably expected or threatened, between Pyramid, on the one hand, and
any or all of its current or former employees, on the other hand, including without limitation any claims for actual or
alleged harassment or discrimination based on race, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, religion, disability, or
similar tortious conduct, breach of contract, wrongful termination, defamation, intentional or negligent infliction of
emotional distress, interference with contract or interference with actual or prospective economic disadvantage.  There
are no claims pending, or, to the knowledge of Pyramid, reasonably expected or threatened, against Pyramid under any
workers’ compensation or long-term disability plan or policy.  Pyramid has no unsatisfied obligations to any employees,
former employees, or qualified beneficiaries pursuant to COBRA, HIPAA, or any state law governing health care
coverage extension or continuation. Except as set forth in Section 5.12(g) of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, Pyramid
is not a party to any collective bargaining agreement or other labor union contract.  Pyramid is not paying and is not
obligated to pay any employee or any former employee any disability or workers compensation payments or
unemployment benefits. The employment of each of Pyramid’s employees is terminable by Pyramid at will.  To the best
of the knowledge of Pyramid, no employee of Pyramid intends to terminate his or her employment with Pyramid.
(h)          Except as set forth in Section 5.12(h) of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, Pyramid is not a party to or bound by
any employment, consulting, termination, severance or similar agreement with any individual officer, director or
employee of Pyramid or any agreement pursuant to which any such person is entitled to receive any benefits from
Pyramid upon the occurrence of a change in control of Pyramid or similar event.
A-14
(i)          All Pyramid Employee Plans that are subject to Section 409A of the Code are in compliance with the
requirements of such Code section and regulations and other guidance thereunder. Except as set forth in Section
5.12(i) of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, no Pyramid Common Stock or other security of Pyramid, any of its
subsidiaries or other affiliates and no real property is held in trust or otherwise set aside for funding benefit obligations
under any Pyramid Employee Plan.
SECTION 5.13          Tax Matters. Neither Pyramid nor any of Pyramid’s subsidiaries has taken or agreed to take any
action that would prevent the Merger from constituting a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the
Code. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(a)          The Merger will be carried out strictly in accordance with this Agreement, there are no other written or oral
agreements relating to the Merger other than those expressly referred to in this Agreement, and Pyramid will obtain
control of the Company as defined in Section 368(c) of the Code for Pyramid voting Common Stock.
(b)          In connection with the Merger, no shares of Company Common Stock will be acquired by Pyramid, Pyramid or a
Related Person (as such term is defined below) for consideration other than shares of Pyramid Common Stock, except
for payments to holders of Dissenting Shares, if any, and any cash paid in lieu of issuing fractional shares of Pyramid
Common Stock. In accordance with Treasury Regulation Section 1.368-1(e)(4), (5), and (7), for purposes of this
Agreement, the term “Related Person” means, (i) a corporation that, immediately before or immediately after a purchase,
exchange, redemption, or other acquisition of Company Common Stock or Pyramid Common Stock, as the case may
be, is a member of an Affiliated Group (as defined below) of which the Company or Pyramid, as applicable, (or any
successor corporation thereto) is a member; or (ii) a corporation in which the Company or Pyramid, as applicable, (or
any successor corporation thereto), owns, or which owns with respect to the Company or Pyramid, as applicable, (or
any successor corporation thereto), directly or indirectly, immediately before or immediately after such purchase,
exchange, redemption, or other acquisition, at least 50% of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock
entitled to vote or at least 50% of the total value of shares of all classes of stock, taking into account for purposes of this
clause (ii) any stock owned by 5% or greater stockholders of the Company or Pyramid, as applicable, (or any successor
thereto) or such corporation, a proportionate share of the stock owned by entities in which the Company or Pyramid, as
applicable, (or any successor thereto) or such corporation owns an interest, and any stock which may be acquired
pursuant to the exercise of options. For purposes of this Agreement, the term “Affiliated Group” means one or more
chains of corporations connected through stock ownership with a common Pyramid corporation, but only if: (i) the
common parent owns directly stock that possesses at least 80% of the total voting power, and has a value at least equal
to 80% of the total value, of the stock in at least one of the other corporations, and (ii) stock possessing at least 80% of
the total voting power, and having a value at least equal to 80% of the total value, of the stock in each corporation
(except the common parent) is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations.
(c)          Pyramid is a publicly traded company and its value is determined on that basis. The Merger Consideration was
negotiated by the parties on an arm’s length basis. Pyramid believes, based on the volume weighted average closing
price of Pyramid Common Stock over the fifteen trading days prior to the date of this Agreement, that the fair market
value of the Merger Consideration received by each stockholder of the Company will be approximately equal to the fair
market value of Company Common Stock and Company Preferred Stock exchanged in the Merger.
(d)          Other than cash paid in lieu of issuing fractional shares of Pyramid Common Stock, neither Pyramid nor any
Related Person has any plan or intention to redeem or otherwise reacquire, directly or indirectly, any shares of Pyramid
Common Stock to be issued in the Merger.
(e)          Pyramid has no stock repurchase program and has no current plan or intention to adopt such a plan.
A-15
(f)          Neither Pyramid nor any Related Person owns, nor has it owned during the past five years, any shares of stock
of the Company. Neither Pyramid nor any Related Person has caused any other person to acquire stock of the
Company on behalf of Pyramid or a Related Person, and will not directly or indirectly acquire any stock of the Company
in connection with the Merger, except as described in this Agreement.
(g)          Pyramid has not, directly or indirectly, transferred any cash or property to the Company (or any entity controlled
directly or indirectly by the Company) for less than full and adequate consideration and has not made any loan to the
Company (or any entity controlled directly or indirectly by the Company) in anticipation of the Merger.
(h)          There is no intercompany indebtedness existing between Pyramid, Merger Subsidiary and the Company that
was or will be issued, acquired, or settled at a discount in connection with the Merger.
(i)          Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary will each pay its expenses incurred in connection with or as part of the Merger.
Pyramid has not paid and will not pay, directly or indirectly, any expenses (including transfer taxes) incurred by any
holder of shares of Company Common Stock in connection with or as part of the Merger or any related transactions.
Pyramid has not agreed to assume, nor will it directly or indirectly assume, any expense or other liability, whether fixed
or contingent, of any holder of shares of Company Common Stock.
(j)          Any compensation paid to the holders of shares of Company Common Stock who enter (or have entered) into
employment, consulting or noncompetitive contracts, if any, with Pyramid (a) will be for services actually rendered or to
be rendered, (b) will be commensurate with amounts paid to third parties bargaining at arm’s length for similar services,
and (c) will not represent consideration for the surrender of the shares of Company Common Stock in the Merger.
(k)          Following the Merger, Pyramid will continue the historic business of the Company or use a significant portion of
its assets in a business, within the meaning of U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.368-1(d). Substantially all the assets
of Merger Subsidiary (ninety percent (90%) of the fair value of its net assets and seventy percent (70%) of the fair value
of its gross assets) will be held by the Company at and after the Merger Effective Time.
(l)          Other than cash paid in lieu of issuing fractional shares of Pyramid, Pyramid is paying no consideration in the
Merger other than the Merger Consideration.
(m)          Pyramid has substantial non-tax business purposes and reasons for the Merger, and the terms of the Merger
are the product of arm’s length negotiations.
(n)          Pyramid will not take any position on any Tax Return, or take any other Tax reporting position that is
inconsistent with the treatment of the Merger as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code,
unless otherwise required by a “determination” (as defined in Code Section 1313(a)(1)).
(o)          No stock or securities of Pyramid will be issued to any Company Stockholder for services rendered to or for the
benefit of Pyramid, Pyramid or the Company in connection with the Merger except as provided in this Agreement.
(p)          No stock or securities of Pyramid will be issued for any indebtedness owed to any Company Stockholder in
connection with the Merger.
(q)          The payment of cash in lieu of fractional shares of Pyramid Common Stock is solely for the purpose of avoiding
the expense and inconvenience to Pyramid of issuing fractional shares and does not represent separately bargained for
consideration. The total cash that will be paid in the Merger to the holders of Company Common Stock instead of
issuing fractional shares of Pyramid Common Stock will not exceed one percent (1%) of the total consideration that will
be paid in the Merger to Company Stockholders in exchange for their Company Common Stock.
A-16
(r)          Pyramid has not distributed the stock of any corporation in a transaction satisfying the requirements of Section
355 of the Code since February 4, 2009. The stock of Pyramid has not been distributed in a transaction satisfying the
requirements of Section 355 of the Code since February 4, 2009.
(s)          At and after the Merger Effective Time, Pyramid will be a corporation duly incorporated, validly existing and in
good standing under the laws of the State of California.
(t)          After the Merger Effective Time and as part of a plan that includes the Merger, Pyramid will not liquidate the
Company, merge the Company with or into another entity (including Pyramid), or sell or otherwise transfer any of the
stock of the Company.
(u)          Immediately after the Merger Effective Time, Pyramid expects that Pyramid will not be treated as a “United States
real property holding corporation” within the meaning of Section 897(c)(2) of the Code (a “USRPHC”), taking into
account the United States real property owned by the Company.
(v)          Prior to the Merger, Merger Subsidiary will be a newly formed corporation duly incorporated, validly existing and
in good standing under the laws of the State of Delaware and Pyramid will be in control of Merger Subsidiary within the
meaning of Section 368(c) of the Code.
(w)          Merger Subsidiary will have no liabilities assumed by the Company and will not transfer to the Company any
assets subject to liabilities in the Merger.
SECTION 5.14          Liabilities. As of the date hereof, Pyramid has incurred no liabilities or obligations (whether absolute,
accrued, contingent or otherwise) of any nature, except (a) liabilities, obligations or contingencies (i) which are accrued
or reserved against in Pyramid Financial Statements or reflected in the notes thereto (ii) which were incurred since
September 30, 2013 in the ordinary course of business and consistent with past practices, or (iii) which were disclosed
in Pyramid’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and exhibits thereto, filed with the SEC on October 4, 2013, (b) liabilities,
obligations or contingencies which (i) would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a
Pyramid Material Adverse Effect, or (ii) have been discharged or paid in full prior to the date hereof in the ordinary
course of business, and (c) liabilities, obligations and contingencies which are of a nature not required to be reflected in
the financial statements of Pyramid prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles consistently
applied. As of the date hereof, Merger Subsidiary has no assets or liabilities.
SECTION 5.15          Absence of Certain Changes or Events. Since December 31, 2012, (a) except with respect to the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement, Pyramid has carried on and operated its businesses in all material
respects in the ordinary course of business and (b) there have not been any changes, events, circumstances,
developments or occurrences that would reasonably be expected to have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 5.16          Compliance. Pyramid is in compliance in all material respects with the provisions of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002 and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the listing and corporate governance
rules and regulations of NYSE MKT that are in each case applicable to Pyramid.
SECTION 5.17          Environmental Matters. Pyramid is in material compliance with all applicable Environmental Laws (as
defined below), which compliance includes the possession by Pyramid of all material permits and other governmental
authorizations required under applicable Environmental Laws and material compliance with the terms and conditions
thereof. Pyramid has made available to the Company an accurate and complete list for any property owned or leased at
any time by Pyramid of any and all material permits, spill reports and notifications from any governmental body, court,
administrative agency or commission or other governmental authority or instrumentality held, prepared or received, as
applicable, by Pyramid at any time during the past 10 years with respect to the generation, treatment, storage and
disposition by Pyramid of Hazardous Materials (as defined below). Pyramid has not received since January 1, 2004, any
written notice, whether from a governmental body, court, administrative agency or commission or other governmental
authority or instrumentality, citizens group, employee or otherwise, that alleges that Pyramid is not in compliance with
any Environmental Law, and, to the knowledge of Pyramid, there are no circumstances that may prevent or interfere with
Pyramid’s compliance with any Environmental Law in the future. To the knowledge of Pyramid: (a) no current or prior
owner of any property leased or controlled by Pyramid has received since January 1, 2004 any written notice or other
communication relating to property owned or leased at any time by Pyramid, whether from a governmental body, court,
administrative agency or commission or other governmental authority or instrumentality, citizens group, employee or
otherwise, that alleges that such current or prior owner or Pyramid are not in compliance with or violated any
Environmental Law relating to such property and (b) Pyramid does not have any material liability under any
Environmental Law. Pyramid is not aware of any ongoing environmental corrective action or remediation action at any
of its properties.
A-17
For purposes of this Agreement, the term (i) “Environmental Law” means any federal, state, local or foreign law,
ordinance, regulation, rule, code, order, judgment, decree or other requirement of law (collectively, “laws”) relating to
pollution or protection of human health or the environment (including ambient air, surface water, ground water, land
surface or subsurface strata), including any law or regulation relating to emissions, discharges, releases or threatened
releases of Hazardous Materials, or otherwise relating to the manufacture, processing, distribution, use, treatment,
storage, disposal, transport or handling of Hazardous Materials, and (ii) “Hazardous Materials” means (a) any material,
substance, chemical, pollutant, waste, product, derivative, compound, mixture, solid, liquid, mineral or gas, in each case,
whether naturally occurring or man-made, that is hazardous, acutely hazardous, toxic, or words of similar import or
regulatory effect under Environmental Laws, including, without limitation, crude oil or any fraction thereof, and (b) any
petroleum or petroleum-derived products, radon, radioactive materials or wastes, asbestos in any form, lead or lead-
containing materials, urea formaldehyde foam insulation and polychlorinated biphenyls.
SECTION 5.18          Insurance. Section 5.18 of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule sets forth each insurance policy
maintained by Pyramid as of the date hereof and each general liability, umbrella and excess liability policy currently
maintained by Pyramid (each, a “Pyramid Insurance Policy”). Each Pyramid Insurance Policy is in full force and effect
with respect to the period covered and is valid, outstanding and enforceable, and all premiums or installment payments
of premiums, as applicable, due thereon have been paid in full. No insurer under any Pyramid Insurance Policy has
canceled or generally disclaimed liability under any such policy or, to the knowledge of Pyramid, indicated any intent to
do so or not to renew any such policy. To the knowledge of Pyramid, all material claims under the Pyramid Insurance
Policies have been filed in a timely fashion.
SECTION 5.19          Affiliate Transactions. Pyramid’s SEC Reports completely and correctly disclose, as of the date of
this Agreement, all agreements, contracts, transfers or assets or liabilities or other commitments or transactions
required to be disclosed by applicable securities laws, whether or not entered into in the ordinary course of business, to
or by which Pyramid, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, any (A) present executive officer or director of Pyramid
or any person that has served as such an executive officer or director within the past two years or any of such executive
officer’s or director’s immediate family members, (B) record or beneficial owner of more than 5% of Pyramid Common
Stock as of the date hereof, or (C) to the knowledge of Pyramid, any affiliate of any such executive officer, director or
owner are or have been a party or otherwise bound or affected, and that (a) are currently pending, in effect or have been
in effect during the past 12 months, and (b) involve continuing liabilities and obligations that, individually or in the
aggregate, have been, are or will be material to Pyramid taken as a whole.
A-18
SECTION 5.20          Recommendation of Pyramid Board of Directors; Opinion of Financial Advisor.
(a)          The Pyramid Board, at a meeting duly called and held, duly adopted resolutions (i) determining that this
Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby are fair to, and in the best interests of, the shareholders of
Pyramid, (ii) approving this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, (iii) resolving to recommend adoption
of this Agreement and the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters, and (iv) directing that the adoption of this Agreement
and the approval of the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters and the other transactions contemplated hereby be
submitted to Pyramid’s shareholders for consideration in accordance with this Agreement, which resolutions, as of the
date of this Agreement, have not been subsequently rescinded, modified or withdrawn in any way.
(b)          Pyramid has received an opinion of ROTH Capital Partners, LLC (“Roth”), to the effect that, as of the date of
such opinion, the Merger is fair, from a financial point of view, to Pyramid shareholders. A correct and complete copy of
the form of such opinion has been made available to the Company. Pyramid has received the approval of Roth to permit
the inclusion of a copy of its written opinion in its entirety and/or references thereto in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus,
subject to Roth’s and its legal counsel’s review of the Proxy Statement/Prospectus and approval of any references to
Roth or its written opinion included therein.
SECTION 5.21          Certain Payments. Pyramid has not, nor to the knowledge of Pyramid, has any director, officer, agent
or employee of Pyramid, or any other person, directly or indirectly, made any contribution, gift, bribe, rebate, payoff,
influence payment, kickback or other payment to any entity or person, private or public, regardless of form, whether in
money, property or services, in material violation of any applicable law.
SECTION 5.22          Title to Assets.
(a)          Section 5.22 of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule sets forth a complete and correct list of (i) all real property and
interests in real property owned in fee (individually, an “Owned Property” and collectively, the “Owned Properties”) by
Pyramid, and (ii) all real property and interests in real property leased, subleased, or otherwise occupied as lessee
(individually, a “Leased Property” and collectively, the “Leased Properties”) by Pyramid, setting forth information
sufficient to specifically identify such Owned Properties and Leased Properties, as the case may be, and the legal owner
thereof.
(b)          Pyramid has good title to all of its Owned Properties, as reflected in Pyramid Financial Statements, except for
properties and assets that have been disposed of in the ordinary course of business since September 30, 2013, free and
clear of all mortgages, liens, pledges, charges or encumbrances of any nature whatsoever, except (i) liens for current
taxes, payments of which are not yet delinquent or are being disputed in good faith by appropriate proceedings and
(ii) such imperfections in title and easements and encumbrances, if any, as are not substantial in character, amount or
extent and do not materially detract from the value, or interfere with the present use of the property subject thereto or
affected thereby, or otherwise impair Pyramid’s assets, business or operations.
(c)          Pyramid is in possession of all of its Leased Properties pursuant to each lease or sublease, and Pyramid is
entitled to and has exclusive possession of such Leased Properties, and the Leased Properties are not subject to any
other legally binding lease, tenancy, license or easement of any kind that materially interferes with Pyramid’s use of its
Leased Properties as currently used. Pyramid has good and valid title to the leasehold estate or other interest created
under each applicable lease, free and clear of any liens, claims or encumbrances created by, through or under Pyramid,
except where the failure to have such good and valid title would not have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect.
(d)          Pyramid has defensible title to all Pyramid Oil and Gas Properties (as such term is defined below) forming the
basis for the reserves reflected in Pyramid Financial Statements as attributable to interests owned by Pyramid, except
for those defects in title that do not have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect, and are free and clear of all liens, except for
liens associated with obligations reflected in Pyramid Financial Statements. The oil and gas leases and other
agreements that provide Pyramid with operating rights in the Pyramid Oil and Gas Properties are legal, valid and binding
and in full force and effect, and the rentals, royalties and other payments due thereunder have been properly and timely
paid and there is no existing default (or event that, with notice or lapse of time or both, would become a default) under
any of such oil and gas leases or other agreements, except, in each case, as individually or in the aggregate has not
had, and would not be reasonably likely to have or result in, a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect. As used in this
Agreement, the term “Pyramid Oil and Gas Properties” means all of Pyramid’s right, title and interest in, to and under, or
derived from oil and gas leases, licenses, authorities to prospect and rights, wells and units, including all land, facilities,
personal property and equipment, contracts and information pertaining or relating thereto.
A-19
SECTION 5.23          No Other Representations or Warranties. Except for the representations and warranties contained in
this Article V, neither Pyramid nor any other person makes any other express or implied representation or warranty on
behalf of Pyramid or any of its affiliates in connection with this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby.
ARTICLE VI
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE COMPANY
The Company represents and warrants to the Pyramid Entities that, except as set forth in the disclosure schedule
delivered to Pyramid by the Company at or prior to the execution and delivery of this Agreement (the “Company
Disclosure Schedule”), which shall be arranged in sections corresponding to the numbered sections of this Article VI, it
being agreed that disclosure of any item on the Company Disclosure Schedule shall be deemed disclosure with respect
to all Sections of this Agreement if the relevance of such item is reasonably apparent from the face of the Company
Disclosure Schedule:
SECTION 6.01          Organization and Qualification.
(a)          Each of the Company and its subsidiaries is a corporation or other entity duly organized, validly existing and in
good standing under the laws of the jurisdiction of its incorporation and has the requisite corporate power or entity
power and authority to own, lease and operate its assets and properties and to carry on its business as it is now being
conducted. Each of the Company and its subsidiaries is duly qualified and licensed to transact business and is in good
standing in each jurisdiction in which the properties owned, leased or operated by it or the nature of the business
conducted by it makes such qualification necessary, except where the failure to be so organized, existing, qualified,
licensed and in good standing would not reasonably be expected to have a Company Material Adverse Effect (as
hereinafter defined). In this Agreement, the term “Company Material Adverse Effect” means any change, event,
circumstance, development or occurrence (other than an effect arising out of or resulting from the entering into or the
public announcement or disclosure of this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby) that, individually or in
the aggregate, (i) has a material adverse effect on the business, financial condition or ongoing operations of the
Company, or (ii) has a material adverse effect on the Company’s ability to consummate the Merger. True, accurate and
complete copies of the certificate of incorporation (including any certificate of designations), bylaws or like
organizational documents of the Company and each of its subsidiaries, in each case, as in effect on the date hereof,
including all amendments thereto, have heretofore been made available to Pyramid.
(b)          Section 6.01(b) of the Company Disclosure Schedule lists the Company and each of its subsidiaries and sets
forth as to each the type of entity, its jurisdiction of organization and, except in the case of the Company, its
stockholders or other equity holders. Except for the capital stock of, or other equity or voting interests in, its
subsidiaries, the Company does not own, directly or indirectly, any capital stock of, or other equity or voting interests in,
any other entity.
SECTION 6.02          Capitalization.
(a)          The authorized capital stock of the Company consists of 200,000 shares of Company Common Stock, 50,000
shares of Series A Preferred Stock, 35,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock, and 40,000 shares of blank check
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share. As of the date hereof, (i) 54,000 shares of Company Common Stock are
issued and outstanding, all of which have been duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid, nonassessable and free of
preemptive rights, (ii) 15,638 shares of Series A Preferred Stock are issued and outstanding, all of which have been duly
authorized, validly issued, fully paid, nonassessable and free of preemptive rights, (iii) 19,656 shares of Series B
Preferred Stock are issued and outstanding, all of which have been duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid,
nonassessable and free of preemptive rights, (iv) 2,739 Company Restricted Shares are issued and outstanding, all of
which have been duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid, nonassessable and free and clear of all preemptive rights,
and (v) 149 shares of Company Common Stock are reserved for issuance upon vesting and settlement of outstanding
Company RSUs. The outstanding shares of Company Common Stock, the Company Preferred Stock, the Company
Restricted Shares and the Company RSUs have been issued in compliance with all applicable securities laws. Since the
date hereof, except as permitted by this Agreement or as disclosed in Section 6.02(a) of the Company Disclosure
Schedule, (x) no shares of capital stock of the Company have been issued, and (y) no options, warrants or securities
convertible into, or commitments with respect to the issuance of, shares of capital stock of the Company have been
issued, granted or made. Section 6.02(a) of the Company Disclosure Schedule sets forth a true, correct and complete
list of the holders of record of Company Common Stock and Company Preferred Stock as of the date hereof.
A-20
(b)          Section 6.02(b) of the Company Disclosure Schedule sets forth a complete and accurate list of all Company
Stock Plans and all holders of Company Restricted Shares and Company RSUs, indicating with respect to each
Company Restricted Share and each Company RSU, the number of shares of Company Common Stock subject to such
Company Restricted Shares and Company RSUs, the date of grant, settlement terms, vesting period and the expiration
date thereof. The Company has delivered or made available to Pyramid accurate and complete copies of all Company
Stock Plans, the standard forms of the Company Restricted Share Agreement and the Company RSU Agreement
evidencing Company Restricted Shares and Company RSUs, and any Company Restricted Share Agreements and
Company RSU Agreements evidencing a Company Restricted Share or a Company RSU that deviates in any material
manner from the Company’s standard forms of the Company Restricted Share Agreement and the Company RSU
Agreement.
(c)          Except for Company Restricted Shares and Company RSUs, there are no outstanding subscriptions, options,
calls, contracts, commitments, understandings, restrictions, arrangements, rights or warrants, including any right of
conversion or exchange under any outstanding security, instrument or other agreement and also including any rights
plan or other anti-takeover agreement, obligating the Company to issue, deliver or sell, or cause to be issued, delivered
or sold, additional shares of the capital stock of the Company or obligating the Company to grant, extend or enter into
any such agreement or commitment. There are no outstanding stock appreciation rights or similar derivative securities
or rights of the Company. Except for the Company Voting Agreement, there are no voting trusts, irrevocable proxies or
other agreements or understandings to which the Company is a party or is bound with respect to the voting of any
shares of capital stock of the Company.
(d)          All of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock (or equivalent equity interests of entities other than
corporations) of each of the Company’s subsidiaries are owned, directly or indirectly, by the Company free and clear of
any liens, other than statutory liens for Taxes not yet due and payable and such other restrictions as may exist under
applicable law, and liens in favor of the Company’s lenders, and all such shares or other ownership interests have been
duly authorized, validly issued and are fully paid and non-assessable and free of preemptive rights, with no personal
liability attaching to the ownership thereof.
SECTION 6.03          Authority; Non-Contravention; Approvals.
(a)          The Company has the requisite corporate power and authority to enter into this Agreement and, subject to the
Company Stockholders’ Approval (as defined below), to perform its obligations hereunder and to consummate the
transactions contemplated hereby. The execution and delivery by the Company of this Agreement, the performance by
the Company of its obligations hereunder, and the consummation by the Company of the transactions contemplated
hereby, have been duly authorized by all necessary corporate action on the part of the Company, subject only to the
Company Stockholders’ Approval. The only vote or approval of the holders of any class or series of capital stock of the
Company required for approval of this Agreement or the Merger is the affirmative vote of the (i) holders of a majority of
the outstanding shares of Company Common Stock, (ii) holders of 66⅔ of the Series A Preferred Stock voting as a
separate class, and (iii) holders of 66⅔ of the Series B Preferred Stock voting as a separate class, entitled to vote
thereon (the “Company Stockholders’ Approval”). There are no bonds, debentures, notes or other indebtedness of the
Company having the right to vote (or convertible into, or exchangeable for, securities having the right to vote) on any
matters on which the Company Stockholders may vote. This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by the
Company, and, assuming the due authorization, execution and delivery hereof by the Pyramid Entities, constitutes a
valid and legally binding agreement of the Company, enforceable against the Company in accordance with its terms,
subject to applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium and similar laws affecting creditors’ rights and
remedies generally, and subject, as to enforceability, to general principles of equity, including principles of commercial
reasonableness, good faith and fair dealing (regardless of whether enforcement is sought in a proceeding at law or in
equity).
A-21
(b)          The Company’s Board of Directors, by resolutions duly adopted by unanimous vote at a meeting of all directors
of the Company duly called and held and, as of the date hereof, not subsequently rescinded or modified in any way, has,
as of the date hereof (i) approved this Agreement and the Merger, and determined that this Agreement and the
transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger, are fair to, and in the best interests of, the Company’s
stockholders, and (ii) resolved to recommend that the Company’s stockholders adopt this Agreement and approve the
Merger.
(c)          Except as set forth in Section 6.03(c) of the Company Disclosure Schedule, the execution, delivery and
performance of this Agreement by the Company and the consummation of the Merger and the transactions
contemplated hereby do not and will not violate, conflict with or result in a breach of any provision of, or constitute a
default (or an event which, with notice or lapse of time or both, would constitute a default) under, or result in the
termination of, or accelerate the performance required by, or result in a right of termination or acceleration under,
contractually require any offer to purchase or any prepayment of any debt, or result in the creation of any lien, security
interest or encumbrance upon any of the properties or assets of the Company under any of the terms, conditions or
provisions of (i) the certificate of incorporation or the bylaws of the Company, (ii) subject to compliance with the
requirements set forth in clauses (i)-(iv) of Section 6.03(d) and obtaining the Company Stockholders’ Approval, any
statute, law, ordinance, rule, regulation, judgment, decree, order, injunction, writ, permit or license of any court or
governmental authority applicable to the Company or any of its properties or assets, or (iii) any contract to which the
Company is now a party or by which the Company or any of its properties or assets may be bound or affected, other
than, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) of this Section 6.03(c), such violations, conflicts, breaches, defaults, terminations,
accelerations, contractual requirements or creations of liens, security interests or encumbrances that would not
reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Company Material Adverse Effect and would not
prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Merger.
(d)          Except for (i) the filing with the SEC of the Registration Statement, (ii) the filing of the Certificate of Merger with
the Secretary of State in connection with the Merger, (iii) such approvals as may be required under applicable state
securities or “blue sky” laws or the rules and regulations of the NYSE MKT, and (iv) the credit facility administered by
Société Générale, no declaration, filing or registration with, or notice to, Consent of, any governmental or regulatory
body or authority or other person is necessary under any Company Material Contract (as defined in Section 6.10(a)) or
otherwise for the execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Company or the consummation by the Company of
the transactions contemplated hereby, other than such Consents which, if not made or obtained, as the case may be,
would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Company Material Adverse Effect and
would not prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Merger.
(e)          The Board of Directors of the Company has approved the Merger, this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby, and such approval is sufficient to render inapplicable to the Merger, this Agreement and the
transactions contemplated hereby the provisions of Section 203 of DGCL to the extent, if any, such section is applicable
to the Merger, this Agreement, and the transactions contemplated hereby.  No other state takeover control share, fair
price or similar statute or regulation applies to or purports to apply to the Company with respect to the Merger, this
Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby and thereby.
SECTION 6.04          Financial Statements.
(a)          The Company has made available to Pyramid true and complete copies of (i) the Company’s unaudited balance
sheet as of September 30, 2013 (the “Company Balance Sheet”), and the related unaudited statement of operations and
statement of cash flows of the Company for the periods covered therein, and (ii) the Company’s audited balance sheets
as of December 31, 2012, December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010, and the related audited statements of operations
and statements of cash flows of the Company for the periods covered therein (collectively, the “Company Financial
Statements”). The Company Financial Statements (i) are consistent with, and have been prepared from, the books and
records of the Company, and (ii) were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (except,
with respect to any unaudited financial statements) applied on a consistent basis (except as may be indicated therein or
in the notes thereto) and fairly present in all material respects the financial position of the Company as of the dates
thereof and the results of operations and changes in financial position of the Company for the periods then ended
(subject, in the case of any unaudited interim financial statements, to normal year-end adjustments).
A-22
(b)          The Company has not effected any securitization transactions or “off-balance sheet arrangements” (as defined
in Item 303(c) of SEC Regulation S-K) since December 31, 2009.
(c)          Since January 1, 2010, there have been no formal internal investigations regarding financial reporting or
accounting policies and practices discussed with, reviewed by or initiated at the direction of the chief executive officer,
chief financial officer or general counsel of the Company, the Board of Directors of the Company or any committee
thereof. Since January 1, 2010, neither the Company nor its independent auditors have identified (i) any significant
deficiency or material weakness in the system of internal accounting controls utilized by the Company, (ii) any fraud,
whether or not material, that involves the Company’s management or other employees who have a role in the
preparation of financial statements or the internal accounting controls utilized by the Company, or (iii) any claim or
allegation regarding any of the foregoing.
SECTION 6.05          Liabilities. As of the date hereof, the Company has incurred no liabilities or obligations (whether
absolute, accrued, contingent or otherwise) of any nature, except (a) liabilities, obligations or contingencies (i) which are
accrued or reserved against in the Company Financial Statements or reflected in the notes thereto or (ii) which were
incurred since the date of the Company Balance Sheet in the ordinary course of business and consistent with past
practices, (b) liabilities, obligations or contingencies which (i) would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the
aggregate, to have a Company Material Adverse Effect, or (ii) have been discharged or paid in full prior to the date
hereof in the ordinary course of business, and (c) liabilities, obligations and contingencies which are of a nature not
required to be reflected in the financial statements of the Company prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles consistently applied.
SECTION 6.06          Absence of Certain Changes or Events. Since December 31, 2012, (a) except with respect to the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement, the Company and each of its subsidiaries has carried on and operated its
businesses in all material respects in the ordinary course of business and (b) there have not been any changes, events,
circumstances, developments or occurrences that would reasonably be expected to have a Company Material Adverse
Effect.
SECTION 6.07          Litigation; Government Investigations. There are no material claims, suits, actions, proceedings,
arbitrations or other actions pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened against, relating to or affecting
the Company or any of its subsidiaries, before any court, governmental department, commission, agency,
instrumentality or authority, or any arbitrator. No material investigation or review by any governmental or regulatory
body or authority is pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened, nor has any governmental or regulatory
body or authority indicated an intention to conduct the same. Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries is subject
to any judgment, decree, injunction, rule or order of any court, governmental department, commission, agency,
instrumentality or authority, or any arbitrator, or any settlement agreement or stipulation, which as of the date hereof
prohibits the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby or would reasonably be expected, individually or
in the aggregate, to have a Company Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 6.08          Proxy Statement/Prospectus. None of the information to be supplied by the Company or its
stockholders for inclusion in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus will, at the time of the mailing thereof or any amendments
or supplements thereto, or as of the date of the Company Stockholder Written Consents (as such term is defined in
Section 7.07(a)), contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are made,
not misleading. The Proxy Statement/Prospectus will comply, as of its mailing date, as to form in all material respects
with all applicable laws, including the provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder, except that no representation is made by the Company with respect to information supplied in writing by
any Pyramid Entity for inclusion therein.
A-23
SECTION 6.09          No Violation of Law. Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries is in violation of or has been
given written (or, to the knowledge of the Company, oral) notice of any violation of any law, statute, order, rule,
regulation, ordinance or judgment of any governmental or regulatory body or authority, except for violations which
would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Company Material Adverse Effect. Neither
the Company nor any of its subsidiaries is in violation of the terms of any permits, licenses, franchises, variances,
exemptions, orders and other governmental Consents necessary to conduct their respective businesses as presently
conducted, except for delays in filing reports or violations which would not reasonably be expected, individually or in
the aggregate, to have a Company Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 6.10          Material Contracts; Compliance with Contracts.
(a)          Section 6.10 of the Company Disclosure Schedule includes a list of each contract, agreement, license,
arrangement or understanding to which the Company or any of its subsidiaries is a party or by which the Company or
any its subsidiaries or their respective assets are bound or affected as of the date hereof (each, a “Company Material
Contract”):
(i)          which would be deemed a “material contract” within the meaning of Item 601(b)(10) of SEC Regulation S-K;
(ii)          pursuant to which payments are required or acceleration of benefits is required upon a change of control of the
Company or similar event;
(iii)          which is material to the Company’s or any of the Company’s subsidiaries’ assets, including the Company’s
Intellectual Property (as such term is defined in Section 6.15), or business and which requires the Consent or waiver of a
third party prior to the Company consummating the transactions contemplated hereby; or
(iv)          which relates to (A) any acquisition by or from the Company or any of its subsidiaries, or any grant by or to the
Company or any of its subsidiaries, of any right, title or interest in, under or to any of the Company’s Intellectual
Property, contracts, agreements, arrangements or understandings or (B) any covenant not to sue granted by the
Company to any person or granted by any person to the Company for the benefit of the Company, with respect to any of
the Company’s Intellectual Property, all of which the Company’s Intellectual Property in clauses (A) and (B) is material to
the Company, other than standardized nonexclusive licenses obtained by the Company in the ordinary course of
business.
(b)          With respect to each Company Material Contract (i) the Company Material Contract is legal, valid, binding and
enforceable and in full force and effect with respect to the Company or its applicable subsidiary, subject to applicable
bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium and similar laws affecting creditors’ rights and remedies generally,
and subject, as to enforceability, to general principles of equity, including principles of commercial reasonableness,
good faith and fair dealing (regardless of whether enforcement is sought in a proceeding at law or in equity) and
(ii) neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries is in material breach or violation of or in material default in the
performance or observance of any term or provision of, and, to the knowledge of the Company, no event has occurred
which, with lapse of time or action by a third party, would result in a default under, the Company Material Contract.
(c)          True, accurate and complete copies of each Company Material Contract have heretofore been made available to
Pyramid.
SECTION 6.11          Taxes.
(a)          The Company has timely (i) filed with the appropriate governmental authorities all material Tax Returns (as
defined below) required to be filed by it, and such Tax Returns are true, correct and complete in all material respects,
and (ii) paid in full or reserved in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles on the Company Financial
Statements all material Taxes (as defined below) required to be paid. The Company has not requested an extension of
time within which to file a material Tax Return, which has not been since filed. There are no liens for Taxes upon any
property or asset of the Company, other than liens for Taxes not yet due and payable or Taxes contested in good faith
by appropriate proceedings or that are otherwise not material and reserved against in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. No deficiency with respect to Taxes has been proposed, asserted or assessed in
writing against the Company, which has not been fully paid or adequately reserved or reflected in the Company
Financial Statements, and there are no material unresolved issues of law or fact arising out of a written notice of a
deficiency, proposed deficiency or assessment from the Internal Revenue Service or any other governmental taxing
authority with respect to Taxes of the Company. The Company has not agreed to an extension of time with respect to a
Tax deficiency, other than extensions which are no longer in effect. Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has
received (A) notice from any federal taxing authority of its intent to examine or audit any of the Company’s or any of its
subsidiaries’ Tax Returns or (B) notice from any state taxing authority of its intent to examine or audit any of the
Company’s or any of its subsidiaries’ Tax Returns, other than notices with respect to examinations or audits by any
state taxing authority that have not had and would not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on the
Company. The Company is not a party to any agreement providing for the allocation or sharing of Taxes with any entity
other than agreements the consequences of which are fully and adequately reserved for in the Company Financial
Statements. The Company has been a United States real property holding corporation within the meaning of Code
Section 897(c)(2) during the five-year period ending on the date hereof.
A-24
(b)          The Company and each of its subsidiaries has withheld and paid each material Tax required to have been
withheld and paid in connection with amounts paid or owing to any employee, independent contractor, creditor,
stockholder or other party, and materially complied with all information reporting and backup withholding provisions of
applicable law.
(c)          The statutes of limitations for the federal income Tax Returns of the Company and its subsidiaries have expired
or otherwise have been closed for all taxable periods ending on or before December 31, 2007.
(d)          Since December 31, 2007, neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has entered into an agreement or
waiver extending any statute of limitations relating to the payment or collection of a material amount of Taxes, nor is any
request for such a waiver or extension pending.
(e)          Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries is the subject of or bound by any material private letter ruling,
technical advice memorandum, closing agreement or similar material ruling, memorandum of agreement with any taxing
authority.
(f)          Neither the Company nor its subsidiaries has entered into, has any liability in respect of, or has any filing
obligations with respect to, any “reportable transactions,” as defined in Section 1.6011-4(b)(1) of the U.S. Treasury
Regulations.
(g)          Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries will be required to include any material item of income in, or
exclude any material item of deduction from, taxable income for any taxable period (or portion thereof) ending after the
Closing Date as a result of any (i) change in method of accounting for a taxable period ending on or prior to the Closing
Date under Section 481(c) of the Code (or any corresponding or similar provision of state, local or foreign Tax law), (ii)
“closing agreement” as described in Section 7121 of the Code (or any corresponding or similar provision of state, local
or foreign Tax law) executed on or prior to the Closing Date, or (iii) deferred intercompany gain or excess loss account
described in the U.S. Treasury Regulations under Section 1502 of the Code (or any corresponding or similar provision
of state, local or foreign Tax law).
(h)          Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has taken or agreed to take any action or knows of any fact,
agreement, plan or other circumstance that would be reasonably likely to prevent the Merger from qualifying as a
reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
(i)          The Company has made available to Pyramid correct and complete copies of (i) all U.S. federal income Tax
Returns of the Company and its subsidiaries relating to taxable periods ending on or after December 31, 2007, filed
through the date hereof and (ii) any material audit report within the last three years relating to any material Taxes due
from or with respect to the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
A-25
(j)          No jurisdiction where the Company or any of its subsidiaries does not file a Tax Return has made a claim that the
Company or any of its subsidiaries is required to file a Tax Return for a material amount of Taxes for such jurisdiction.
(k)          Within the last three years, neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has owned any material assets
located outside the United States or conducted a material trade or business outside the United States.
(l)          Except as set forth in Section 6.11(l) of the Company Disclosure Schedule, all of the transactions which the
Company has accounted for as hedges under SFAS 133 have also been treated as hedging transactions for federal
income Tax purposes pursuant to U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.1221-2 and have been properly identified as such
under U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.1221-2(f).
SECTION 6.12          Employee Benefit Plans; ERISA; Employment Agreements.
(a)          Section 6.12(a) of the Company Disclosure Schedule contains a complete and accurate list of each plan,
program, policy, practice, contract, agreement or other arrangement providing for employment, compensation,
retirement, deferred compensation, loans, severance, separation, relocation, termination pay, performance awards,
bonus, incentive, stock option, stock purchase, stock bonus, phantom stock, stock appreciation right, change in
control, supplemental retirement, fringe benefits, cafeteria benefits, salary continuation, vacation, sick, or other paid
leave, employment or consulting, hospitalization or other medical, dental, life (including all individual life insurance
policies as to which the Company or any of its subsidiaries is the owner, the beneficiary or both) or other insurance or
coverage, disability, death benefit, or other benefits, whether written or unwritten, including without limitation each
“employee benefit plan” within the meaning of Section 3(3) of ERISA, which is or has been sponsored, maintained,
contributed to, or required to be contributed to by the Company and, with respect to any such plans which are subject
to Code Section 401(a), any trade or business (whether or not incorporated) that is or at any relevant time was treated as
an ERISA Affiliate of the Company or any of its subsidiaries for the benefit of any person who performs or who has
performed services for the Company or any of its subsidiaries, or with respect to which the Company, any of its
subsidiaries, or any ERISA Affiliate of the Company or any of its subsidiaries has or may have any liability (including
without limitation contingent liability) or obligation (collectively, the “Company Employee Plans”).
(b)          The Company has furnished to Pyramid true and complete copies of documents embodying each of the
Company Employee Plans and related plan documents, including without limitation trust documents, group annuity
contracts, plan amendments, insurance policies or contracts, participant agreements, employee booklets,
administrative service agreements, summary plan descriptions, compliance and nondiscrimination tests for the last
three plan years, standard COBRA forms and related notices, registration statements and prospectuses and, to the
extent still in its possession, any material employee communications relating thereto.  With respect to each Company
Employee Plan, if any, that is subject to ERISA reporting requirements, the Company has provided copies of the
Form 5500 reports filed for the last five plan years.
(c)          Compliance.  (i) Each Company Employee Plan has been administered in accordance with its terms and in
compliance with the requirements prescribed by any and all statutes, rules and regulations (including ERISA and the
Code), except as could not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material
Adverse Effect; and the Company and each ERISA Affiliate of the Company have performed all material obligations
required to be performed by them under, are not in material respect in default under or violation of and have no
knowledge of any material default or violation by any other party to, any of the Company Employee Plans; (ii) any
Company Employee Plan intended to be qualified under Section 401(a) of the Code has either obtained from the Internal
Revenue Service a favorable determination letter as to its qualified status under the Code, including all currently
effective amendments to the Code, or has time remaining to apply under applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations or
Internal Revenue Service pronouncements for a determination or opinion letter and to make any amendments
necessary to obtain a favorable determination or opinion letter; (iii) none of the Company Employee Plans promises or
provides retiree medical or other retiree welfare benefits to any person; (iv) there has been no “prohibited transaction,”
as such term is defined in Section 406 of ERISA or Section 4975 of the Code, with respect to any Company Employee
Plan; (v) none of Company or, to the knowledge of the Company, any ERISA Affiliate of the Company is subject to any
liability or penalty under Sections 4976 through 4980 of the Code or Title I of ERISA with respect to any Company
Employee Plan; (vi) all contributions required to be made by Company or any ERISA Affiliate of the Company to any
Company Employee Plan have been timely paid and accrued; (vii) with respect to each Company Employee Plan, no
“reportable event” within the meaning of Section 4043 of ERISA (excluding any such event for which the thirty day
notice requirement has been waived under the regulations to Section 4043 of ERISA) nor any event described in
Section 4062, 4063 or 4041 of ERISA has occurred; (viii) each Company Employee Plan subject to ERISA has prepared
in good faith and timely filed all requisite governmental reports, which were true and correct as of the date filed, and has
properly and timely filed and distributed or posted all notices and reports to employees required to be filed, distributed
or posted with respect to each such Company Employee Plan; (ix) no suit, administrative proceeding, action or other
litigation has been brought, or to the knowledge of Company is threatened, against or with respect to any such
Company Employee Plan, including any audit or inquiry by the Internal Revenue Service or United States Department of
Labor; and (x) there has been no amendment to, written interpretation or announcement by Company or any ERISA
Affiliate of the Company that would materially increase the expense of maintaining any Company Employee Plan above
the level of expense incurred with respect to that Company Employee Plan for the most recent fiscal year included in the
Company Financial Statements. No current or former officer, director, employee, leased employee, consultant or agent
(or their respective beneficiaries) of the Company or any subsidiary of the Company has or will obtain a right to receive
a gross-up payment from the Company or any subsidiary of the Company with respect to any Tax that may be imposed
upon such individual pursuant to Section 409A of the Code, Section 4999 of the Code or otherwise.
A-26
(d)          Neither the Company nor any ERISA Affiliate of the Company has ever maintained, established, sponsored,
participated in, contributed to, or is obligated to contribute to, or otherwise incurred any obligation or liability (including
without limitation any contingent liability) under any “multiemployer plan” (as defined in Section 3(37) of ERISA) or to
any “pension plan” (as defined in Section 3(2) of ERISA) subject to Title IV of ERISA or Section 412 of the Code.  None
of Company or any ERISA Affiliate of the Company has any actual or potential withdrawal liability (including without
limitation any contingent liability) for any complete or partial withdrawal (as defined in Sections 4203 and 4205 of ERISA)
from any multiemployer plan.
(e)          With respect to each Company Employee Plan, the Company and each of its subsidiaries has complied with
(i) the applicable health care continuation and notice provisions of COBRA and the regulations thereunder or any state
law governing health care coverage extension or continuation; (ii) the applicable requirements of the Family and Medical
Leave Act of 1993 and the regulations thereunder; (iii) the applicable requirements of HIPAA; and (iv) the applicable
requirements of the Cancer Rights Act of 1998.  Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has unsatisfied
obligations to any employees, former employees or qualified beneficiaries pursuant to COBRA, HIPAA or any state law
governing health care coverage extension or continuation.
(f)          The consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement will not (i) entitle any current or former
employee or other service provider of the Company, any subsidiary of the Company, or any ERISA Affiliate of the
Company or any subsidiary of the Company to severance benefits or any other payment (including without limitation
unemployment compensation, golden parachute, bonus or benefits under any Company Employee Plan), except as
expressly provided in this Agreement; or (ii) accelerate the time of payment or vesting of any such benefits or increase
the amount of compensation due any such employee or service provider.  No benefit payable or that may become
payable by the Company or any subsidiary of the Company pursuant to any Company Employee Plan or as a result of
or arising under this Agreement shall constitute an “excess parachute payment” (as defined in Section 280G(b)(1) of the
Code) subject to the imposition of an excise Tax under Section 4999 of the Code or the deduction for which would be
disallowed by reason of Section 280G of the Code and no such benefit will fail to be deductible for federal income Tax
purposes by virtue of Sections 162(m) of the Code.  Each Company Employee Plan can be amended, terminated or
otherwise discontinued after the Merger Effective Time in accordance with its terms, without material liability to Pyramid,
the Company or any subsidiary of the Company other than ordinary administration expenses typically incurred in a
termination event.
(g)          The Company and each subsidiary of the Company is in compliance with all currently applicable laws and
regulations respecting terms and conditions of employment, including without limitation applicant and employee
background checking, immigration laws, discrimination laws, verification of employment eligibility, employee leave laws,
classification of workers as employees and independent contractors, wage and hour laws, and occupational safety and
health laws.  There are no proceedings pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, reasonably expected or
threatened, between the Company or any of its subsidiaries, on the one hand, and any or all of their respective current
or former employees, on the other hand, including without limitation any claims for actual or alleged harassment or
discrimination based on race, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, religion, disability, or similar tortious conduct,
breach of contract, wrongful termination, defamation, intentional or negligent infliction of emotional distress,
interference with contract or interference with actual or prospective economic disadvantage.  There are no claims
pending, or, to the knowledge of the Company, reasonably expected or threatened, against the Company or any of its
subsidiaries under any workers’ compensation or long-term disability plan or policy.  Neither the Company nor any of its
subsidiaries has unsatisfied obligations to any employees, former employees, or qualified beneficiaries pursuant to
COBRA, HIPAA, or any state law governing health care coverage extension or continuation. Neither the Company nor
any of its subsidiaries is a party to any collective bargaining agreement or other labor union contract.  Neither the
Company nor any of its subsidiaries is paying or is obligated to pay any employee or any former employee any disability
or workers compensation payments or unemployment benefits. The employment of each of the Company’s employees
and each of the employees of each subsidiary of the Company is terminable by the Company or its subsidiaries, as
applicable, at will.  To the best of the knowledge of the Company, no employee of the Company or any of its subsidiaries
intends to terminate his employment with the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
A-27
(h)          Neither the Company nor any subsidiary of the Company is a party to or bound by any employment, consulting,
termination, severance or similar agreement with any individual officer, director or employee of the Company or any
subsidiary of the Company, or any agreement pursuant to which any such person is entitled to receive any benefits
from the Company or any subsidiary of the Company upon the occurrence of a change in control of the Company or
similar event.
(i)          All Company Employee Plans that are subject to Section 409A of the Code are in compliance with the
requirements of such Code section and regulations and other guidance thereunder. No Company Common Stock or
other security of the Company, any of its subsidiaries or other affiliates and no real property is held in trust or otherwise
set aside for funding benefit obligations under any Company Employee Plan.
SECTION 6.13          Environmental Matters. The Company and each of its subsidiaries is in material compliance with all
applicable Environmental Laws, which compliance includes the possession by the Company or its subsidiary, as
applicable, of all material permits and other governmental authorizations required under applicable Environmental Laws
and material compliance with the terms and conditions thereof. The Company has made available to Pyramid an
accurate and complete list for any property owned or leased at any time by the Company of any and all material permits,
spill reports and notifications from any governmental body, court, administrative agency or commission or other
governmental authority or instrumentality held, prepared or received, as applicable, by the Company at any time during
the past 10 years with respect to the generation, treatment, storage and disposition by the Company of Hazardous
Materials. The Company has not received since January 1, 2004, any written notice, whether from a governmental body,
court, administrative agency or commission or other governmental authority or instrumentality, citizens group,
employee or otherwise, that alleges that the Company or any of its subsidiaries is not in compliance with any
Environmental Law, and, to the knowledge of the Company, there are no circumstances that may prevent or interfere
with the Company’s or any of its subsidiaries’ compliance with any Environmental Law in the future. To the knowledge
of the Company: (a) no current or prior owner of any property leased or controlled by the Company has received since
January 1, 2004 any written notice or other communication relating to property owned or leased at any time by the
Company, whether from a governmental body, court, administrative agency or commission or other governmental
authority or instrumentality, citizens group, employee or otherwise, that alleges that such current or prior owner or the
Company are not in compliance with or violated any Environmental Law relating to such property and (b) the Company
does not have any material liability under any Environmental Law.          The Company is not aware of any ongoing
environmental corrective action or remediation action at any of its properties.
SECTION 6.14          Title to Assets.
(a)          Section 6.14 of the Company Disclosure Schedule sets forth a complete and correct list of (i) all Owned Property
of the Company and its subsidiaries, and (ii) all Leased Property of the Company and its subsidiaries, setting forth
information sufficient to specifically identify such Owned Properties and Leased Properties, as the case may be, and the
legal owner thereof.
A-28
(b)          The Company and its subsidiaries have good title to all of their Owned Properties, as reflected in the Company
Balance Sheet, except for properties and assets that have been disposed of in the ordinary course of business since
the date of such balance sheet, free and clear of all mortgages, liens, pledges, charges or encumbrances of any nature
whatsoever, except (i) liens for current Taxes, payments of which are not yet delinquent or are being disputed in good
faith by appropriate proceedings and (ii) such imperfections in title and easements and encumbrances, if any, as are not
substantial in character, amount or extent and do not materially detract from the value, or interfere with the present use
of the property subject thereto or affected thereby, or otherwise have a Company Material Adverse Effect.
(c)          The Company and its subsidiaries are in possession of all of their Leased Properties pursuant to each lease or
sublease, and the Company is entitled to and has exclusive possession of such Leased Properties, and the Leased
Properties are not subject to any other legally binding lease, tenancy, license or easement of any kind that materially
interferes with the Company’s use of the Leased Properties as currently used. The Company has good and valid title to
the leasehold estate or other interest created under each applicable lease, free and clear of any liens, claims or
encumbrances created by, through or under the Company, except where the failure to have such good and valid title
would not have a Company Material Adverse Effect.
(d)          The Company and its subsidiaries have defensible title to all Company Oil and Gas Properties (as such term is
defined below) forming the basis for the reserves reflected in the Company Financial Statements as attributable to
interests owned by the Company, except for those defects in title that do not have a Company Material Adverse Effect,
and are free and clear of all liens, except for liens associated with obligations reflected in the Company Financial
Statements. The oil and gas leases and other agreements that provide the Company with operating rights in the
Company Oil and Gas Properties are legal, valid and binding and in full force and effect, and the rentals, royalties and
other payments due thereunder have been properly and timely paid and there is no existing default (or event that, with
notice or lapse of time or both, would become a default) under any of such oil and gas leases or other agreements,
except, in each case, as individually or in the aggregate has not had, and would not be reasonably likely to have or
result in, a Company Material Adverse Effect. As used in this Agreement, the term “Company Oil and Gas Properties”
means all of the Company’s and any of its subsidiaries’ right, title and interest in, to and under, or derived from oil and
gas leases, licenses, authorities to prospect and rights, wells and units, including all land, facilities, personal property
and equipment, contracts and information pertaining or relating thereto.
SECTION 6.15          Intellectual Property. The Company and its subsidiaries own free and clear of any lien, or possess
licenses or other valid rights to use, all patents, patent rights, domain names, trademarks (registered or unregistered),
trade dress, trade names, copyrights (registered or unregistered), service marks, trade secrets, know-how and other
confidential or proprietary rights and information, inventions (patentable or unpatentable), processes, formulae, as well
as all goodwill symbolized by any of the foregoing (collectively, “Intellectual Property”) necessary in connection with the
business of the Company and its subsidiaries as currently conducted, except where the failure to possess such rights
or licenses would not have a Company Material Adverse Effect. To the knowledge of the Company, (i) the conduct,
products or services of the business of the Company and its subsidiaries as currently conducted do not infringe upon
any Intellectual Property of any third party except where such infringement would not have a Company Material Adverse
Effect, and (ii) there are no claims or suits pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened (x) alleging that the
Company’s and its subsidiaries’ conduct, products or services infringe upon any Intellectual Property of any third party
except where such infringement would not have a Company Material Adverse Effect, or (y) challenging the Company’s
and its subsidiaries’ ownership of, right to use, or the validity or enforcement of any license or other agreement relating
to the Company’s Intellectual Property except where such challenge would not have a Company Material Adverse
Effect. The execution and delivery of this Agreement and the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby
will not result in the loss of, or any encumbrance on, the rights of the Company or any of its subsidiaries with respect to
the Intellectual Property owned or used by them, except where such loss or encumbrance would not have a Company
Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 6.16          Insurance. Section 6.16 of the Company Disclosure Schedule sets forth each insurance policy
maintained by or on behalf of the Company and its subsidiaries as of the date hereof and each general liability, umbrella
and excess liability policy currently maintained by the Company and its subsidiaries (each, a “Company Insurance
Policy”). Each Company Insurance Policy is in full force and effect with respect to the period covered and is valid,
outstanding and enforceable, and all premiums or installment payments of premiums, as applicable, due thereon have
been paid in full. No insurer under any Company Insurance Policy has canceled or generally disclaimed liability under
any such policy or, to the knowledge of the Company, indicated any intent to do so or not to renew any such policy. To
the knowledge of the Company, all material claims under the Company Insurance Policies have been filed in a timely
fashion.
A-29
SECTION 6.17          Certain Payments. The Company has not, nor to the knowledge of the Company, has any director,
officer, agent or employee of the Company or its subsidiaries, or any other person, directly or indirectly, made any
contribution, gift, bribe, rebate, payoff, influence payment, kickback or other payment to any entity or person, private or
public, regardless of form, whether in money, property or services, in material violation of any applicable law.
SECTION 6.18          Brokers and Finders. The Company has not entered into any contract with any person that may
result in the obligation of the Company or the Surviving Corporation to pay any investment banking fees, finder’s fees
or brokerage fees in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby. The Company has provided to Pyramid a
true, correct and complete copy of any and all engagement or retention agreements with financial advisors or other
advisors, to which the Company is a party and which are related to the transactions contemplated hereby.
SECTION 6.19          Production and Reserves. Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc., whose report as of July 31, 2013
and dated August 28, 2013 (the “Reserve Report”) provided to Pyramid, was as of the date of such report, and is, as of
the date hereof, an independent reserve engineer and acts as independent reserve engineer with respect to the
Company. The information underlying the estimates of reserves of the Company and its subsidiaries contained in
Reserve Report, which information was supplied by the Company to Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc., for purposes
of reviewing the Reserve Report and estimates of the Company and preparing the letter of Netherland, Sewell &
Associates, Inc., including production and costs of operation, was true and correct in all material respects on the dates
such estimates were made and such information was supplied and was prepared in accordance with customary
industry practices. Other than (i) the production of reserves in the ordinary course of business, and (ii) the intervening
price fluctuations, the Company is not aware of any facts or circumstances that would result in a Company Material
Adverse Effect in its proved reserves in the aggregate, or the aggregate present value of estimated future net revenues
of the Company or the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows therefrom, as described in the
Reserve Report and reflected in the reserve information as of the respective dates such information is given.
SECTION 6.20          Tax Matters. Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has taken or agreed to take any action
that would prevent the Merger from constituting a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(a)          The Merger will be carried out strictly in accordance with this Agreement, the Company is not a party to any
other written or oral agreements regarding the Merger other than those expressly referred to in this Agreement, and
Pyramid will obtain control of the Company as defined in Section 368(c) of the Code in exchange for Pyramid voting
Common Stock.
(b)          Pyramid is a publicly traded company and its value is determined on that basis. The Merger Consideration was
negotiated by the parties on an arm’s length basis. The Company believes, based on the volume weighted average
closing price of Pyramid Common Stock over the fifteen trading days prior to the date of this Agreement, that the fair
market value of the Merger Consideration received by each stockholder of the Company will be approximately equal to
the fair market value of Company Common Stock and Company Preferred Stock exchanged in the Merger.
(c)          Prior to the Merger Effective Time and in connection with or anticipation of the Merger, (i) none of the shares of
Company Common Stock will be redeemed, (ii) no extraordinary dividends will be made with respect to the shares of
Company Common Stock, and (iii) none of the shares of Company Common Stock will be acquired by the Company or
any Related Person.
A-30
(d)          The Company and Company Stockholders will each pay their respective expenses, if any, incurred in
connection with the Merger.
(e)          Any compensation paid to the Company Stockholders who enter (or have entered) into employment, consulting
or noncompetitive contracts, if any, with Pyramid (a) will be for services actually rendered or to be rendered, (b) will be
commensurate with amounts paid to third parties bargaining at arm’s length for similar services, and (c) will not
represent consideration for the surrender of the shares of Company Common Stock in the Merger.
(f)          No debt of the Company is guaranteed by any Company Stockholder.
(g)          The Company owns no stock of Pyramid.
(h)          No assets of the Company have been sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of which would prevent Pyramid
from continuing the historic business of the Company or from using a significant portion of the Company’s historic
business assets in a business following the Merger, within the meaning of U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.368-1(d)
or prevent the Company from holding substantially all of the Company’s assets at and after the Merger Effective Time
(ninety percent (90%) of the fair value of its net assets and seventy percent (70%) of the fair value of its gross assets,
taking into account cash paid to dissenters).
(i)          The Company is not an investment company as defined in Section 368(a)(2)(F) of the Code. An investment
company is (1) a regulated investment company; (2) a real estate investment trust; or (3) a corporation (i) fifty percent
(50%) or more of the value of whose total assets are stock and securities, and (ii) eighty percent (80%) or more of the
value of whose total assets are held for investment. In making the fifty percent and eighty percent determinations under
the preceding sentence, stock and securities in any subsidiary corporation shall be disregarded and a parent
corporation shall be deemed to own its ratable share of the subsidiary’s assets, and a corporation shall be considered a
subsidiary if a parent owns fifty percent (50%) or more of the combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to
vote, or fifty percent (50%) or more of the total value of shares of all classes of stock outstanding. For this purpose,
“total assets” shall not include cash and cash items (including receivables) and government securities.
(j)          The Company is not under the jurisdiction of a court in a title 11 or similar case within the meaning of Section
368(a)(3)(A) of the Code.
(k)         There is no indebtedness existing between Pyramid, Merger Subsidiary and the Company that was or will be
issued, acquired, or settled at a discount in connection with the Merger.
(l)          The Company has substantial non-tax business purposes and reasons for the Merger, and the terms of the
Merger are the product of arm’s length negotiations.
(m)        The Company will not take, and the Company is not aware of any plan or intention of any of the Company
Stockholders to take, any position on any Tax Return, or take any other Tax reporting position, that is inconsistent with
the treatment of the Merger as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code, unless otherwise
required by a “determination” (as defined in Code Section 1313(a)(1)).
(n)         No stock or securities of the Company will be issued to any Company Stockholder for services rendered to or
for the benefit of Pyramid or the Company in connection with the Merger (except to the extent of outstanding Company
Restricted Shares or Company RSUs described in Section 3.04).
(o)         No stock or securities of Pyramid or of the Company will be issued to any Company Stockholder for any
indebtedness owed to any Company Stockholder in connection with the Merger.
(p)         No assets were transferred to the Company, nor did the Company assume any liabilities, in anticipation of the
Merger. On the date of the Merger the fair market value of the assets of the Company will exceed the sum of its liabilities,
plus the amount of liabilities, if any, to which the assets are subject.
A-31
(q)         The Company has not distributed the stock of any corporation in a transaction satisfying the requirements of
Section 355 of the Code since February 4, 2009. The stock of the Company has not been distributed in a transaction
satisfying the requirements of Section 355 of the Code since February 4, 2009.
(r)          During the five-year period leading up to and ending as of the Merger Effective Time, the Company was a
USRPHC.
(s)         At the Merger Effective Time, except as contemplated by Section 3.04, the Company will not have outstanding
any warrants, options, convertible securities, or any other type of right pursuant to which any person could acquire
stock in the Company.
SECTION 6.21          No Other Representations or Warranties. Except for the representations and warranties contained in
this Article VI, neither the Company nor any other person makes any other express or implied representation or
warranty on behalf of the Company or any of its affiliates in connection with this Agreement or the transactions
contemplated hereby.
ARTICLE VII
COVENANTS
SECTION 7.01          Conduct of Business by the Company Pending the Merger. Except as otherwise contemplated by
this Agreement or disclosed in the Company Disclosure Schedule, after the date hereof and until the Merger Effective
Time or earlier termination of this Agreement (the “Pre-Closing Period”), unless Pyramid shall otherwise agree in writing
(which agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed), the Company shall:
(a)         conduct its business in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice;
(b)         use its commercially reasonable efforts to mitigate or compromise the liabilities of the Company from time to
time;
(c)         not (i) amend or propose to amend its certificate of incorporation or its bylaws, except as agreed to by the parties
hereto, (ii) split, combine, subdivide or reclassify any shares of outstanding capital stock, (iii) declare, set aside or pay
any dividend or distribution payable in cash, stock, property or otherwise, or make any other distribution in respect of
any shares of its capital stock, except for dividends by a direct or wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company to its parent,
or a semi-annual (or pro-rated) cash or in-kind dividend on the Company Preferred Stock, or (iv) repurchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire, or modify or amend, any shares of its capital stock or any other securities or any rights, warrants or
options to acquire any such shares or other securities;
(d)         except as set forth in Section 6.02(a) of the Company Disclosure Schedule, not issue, sell, pledge, grant or
dispose of, or agree to issue, sell, pledge, grant or dispose of, any Company Restricted Shares, Company RSUs, or any
additional shares of, or any options, warrants or rights of any kind to acquire any shares of, its capital stock of any class
or any debt or equity securities convertible into or exchangeable for its capital stock, except that the Company
may issue shares upon conversion of Company Preferred Stock outstanding on the date hereof;
(e)         not (i) redeem, purchase, acquire or offer to purchase or acquire any shares of its capital stock or any options,
warrants or rights to acquire any of its capital stock or any security convertible into or exchangeable for its capital stock,
(ii) make any acquisition of any capital stock, assets or businesses of any other person other than expenditures for
current assets in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice and expenditures for fixed or capital
assets in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice, (iii) sell, pledge, dispose of or encumber any
assets or businesses that are material to the Company, except (A) sales, leases, rentals and licenses in the ordinary
course of business consistent with past practice, (B) pursuant to contracts that are in force at the date of this
Agreement and are disclosed in Section 6.10 of the Company Disclosure Schedule, (C) dispositions of obsolete or
worthless assets or, or (iv) enter into any contract with respect to any of the foregoing;
A-32
(f)          use all reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organization and goodwill, keep available the services
of its present officers and key employees, and preserve the goodwill and business relationships with customers and
others having business relationships with it, other than as expressly permitted by the terms of this Agreement;
(g)         not make capital expenditures or enter into any binding commitment or contract to make capital expenditures,
except (i) capital expenditures which the Company is currently committed to make, (ii) capital expenditures in the
ordinary course of the Company’s business, (iii) capital expenditures for repairs and other capital expenditures
necessary in light of circumstances not anticipated as of the date of this Agreement which are necessary to avoid
significant disruption to the Company’s business or operations consistent with past practice, and (iv) repairs and
maintenance in the ordinary course of business;
(h)         not adopt a plan or agreement of complete or partial liquidation or dissolution;
(i)          not pay, discharge or satisfy any material claims, material liabilities or material obligations (absolute, accrued,
asserted or unasserted, contingent or otherwise), other than the payment, discharge or satisfaction (A) of any such
material claims, material liabilities or material obligations in the ordinary course of business consistent with past
practice or (B) of material claims, material liabilities or material obligations reflected or reserved against in, or
contemplated by, the Company Financial Statements (or the notes thereto);
(j)          not enter into any contract that restrains, limits or impedes the ability of the Company or the Surviving
Corporation to compete with or conduct any business or line of business, including geographic limitations on the
activities of the Company;
(k)          except in the ordinary course of the Company’s business, not materially modify or amend, or terminate any
Company Material Contract, or waive, relinquish, release or terminate any material right or material claim, or enter into
any contract that would have been a Company Material Contract if it had been in existence at the time of the execution of
this Agreement; and
(l)          not agree to take any of the foregoing actions.
SECTION 7.02          Conduct of Business by Pyramid Pending the Merger. Except as otherwise contemplated by this
Agreement or disclosed in the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, during the Pre-Closing Period, unless the Company shall
otherwise agree in writing (which agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed), Pyramid shall:
(a)         conduct its business in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice;
(b)         not (i) amend or propose to amend its Restated Articles of Incorporation or its Amended and Restated Bylaws,
(ii) split, combine, subdivide or reclassify any shares of Common Stock, or (iii) declare, set aside or pay any dividend or
distribution payable in cash, stock, property or otherwise, or make any other distribution in respect of any shares of
Common Stock;
(c)         use all reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organization and goodwill, keep available the services
of its present officers and key employees, and preserve the goodwill and business relationships with customers and
others having business relationships with it, other than as expressly permitted by the terms of this Agreement;
(d)         not adopt a plan or agreement of complete or partial liquidation or dissolution;
(e)         not pay, discharge or satisfy any material claims, material liabilities or material obligations (absolute, accrued,
asserted or unasserted, contingent or otherwise), other than the payment, discharge or satisfaction (A) of any such
material claims, material liabilities or material obligations in the ordinary course of business consistent with past
practice or (B) of material claims, material liabilities or material obligations reflected or reserved against in, or
contemplated by, Pyramid Financial Statements (or the notes thereto);
A-33
(f)          not enter into any contract that restrains, limits or impedes its ability to compete with or conduct any business or
line of business, including geographic limitations on its activities;
(g)         not make any changes in financial or Tax accounting methods, principles or practices (or change an annual
accounting period), except insofar as may be required by a change in generally accepted accounting principles or
applicable law;
(h)         not enter into, amend, modify or renew any employment, consulting, severance or similar contract with, pay any
bonus or grant any increase in salary, wage or other compensation or any increase in any employee benefit to, any of its
directors, officers or employees, except in each such case (i) as may be required by applicable law or (ii) to satisfy
obligations existing as of the date hereof pursuant to the terms of contracts that are in effect on the date hereof;
(i)          not enter into, establish, adopt, amend or modify any pension, retirement, stock purchase, savings, profit
sharing, deferred compensation, consulting, bonus, group insurance or other employee benefit, incentive or welfare
plan, agreement, program or arrangement, in respect of any of its directors, officers or employees, except, in each such
case (i) as may be required by applicable law or pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, (ii) to satisfy obligations
existing as of the date hereof pursuant to the terms of contracts that are in effect on the date hereof or (iii) if requested
by the Company, Pyramid will terminate its 5304-Simple Plan effective immediately before the Merger Effective Time”;
(j)          except to the extent required under existing employee and director benefit plans, agreements or arrangements
as in effect on the date hereof or as expressly provided by this Agreement, not accelerate the payment, right to payment
or vesting of any bonus, severance, profit sharing, retirement, deferred compensation, stock option, insurance or other
compensation or benefits;
(k)         not agree to the settlement of any claim, litigation, investigation or other action that is material to it;
(l)          except in the ordinary course of its business, not materially modify or amend, or terminate any Pyramid Material
Contract, or waive, relinquish, release or terminate any material right or material claim, or enter into any contract that
would have been a Pyramid Material Contract if it had been in existence at the time of the execution of this Agreement;
and
(m)        not agree to take any of the foregoing actions.
SECTION 7.03          No Solicitation.
(a)          General.  Each party hereto agrees that it shall not, nor shall it authorize or permit any of the officers, directors,
investment bankers, attorneys or accountants retained by it to, and that it shall use commercially reasonable efforts to
cause its non-officer employees and other agents not to (and shall not authorize any of them to) directly or indirectly:
(i) solicit, initiate, encourage, induce or knowingly facilitate the communication, making, submission or announcement
of any Acquisition Proposal (as defined below) or Acquisition Inquiry (as defined below) or take any action that could
reasonably be expected to lead to an Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry; (ii) furnish any information regarding
such party to any person in connection with or in response to an Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry;
(iii) engage in discussions or negotiations with any person with respect to any Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition
Inquiry; (iv) approve, endorse or recommend any Acquisition Proposal (unless permitted pursuant to Sections 7.07 and
7.08); or (v) execute or enter into any letter of intent or similar document or any contract contemplating or otherwise
relating to any Acquisition Proposal; provided, however, that, notwithstanding anything contained in this Section
7.03(a), prior to obtaining the Company Stockholders’ Approval, the Company may, and prior to obtaining Pyramid
Shareholder Approval, Pyramid may, furnish nonpublic information regarding such party to, and enter into discussions
or negotiations with, any person in response to a bona fide written Acquisition Proposal, which such party’s Board of
Directors determines in good faith, after consultation with a nationally recognized independent financial advisor and its
outside legal counsel, constitutes, or is reasonably likely to result in, a Superior Offer (and is not withdrawn) if: (A) such
Acquisition Proposal was not solicited in violation of this Section 7.03(a); (B) the Board of Directors of such party
concludes in good faith based on the advice of outside legal counsel, that the failure to take such action is reasonably
likely to result in a breach of the fiduciary duties of the Board of Directors of such party under applicable laws; (C) at
least two business days prior to furnishing any such nonpublic information to, or entering into discussions with, such
person, such party gives the other parties written notice of the identity of such person and of such party’s intention to
furnish nonpublic information to, or enter into discussions with, such person; (D) such party receives from such person
an executed confidentiality agreement containing provisions at least as favorable to such party as those contained in
the Confidentiality Agreements; and (E) prior to furnishing any such nonpublic information to such person, such party
furnishes such nonpublic information to the other parties hereto (to the extent such nonpublic information has not been
previously furnished by such party to the other parties).  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each party
acknowledges and agrees that, in the event any representative of such party (whether or not such representative is
purporting to act on behalf of such party) takes any action that, if taken by such party, would constitute a breach of this
Section 7.03 by such party, the taking of such action by such representative shall be deemed to constitute a breach of
this Section 7.03 by such party for purposes of this Agreement.
A-34
For purposes of this Agreement, the term: (i) “Acquisition Inquiry” means, with respect to a party hereto, an
inquiry, indication of interest or request for information that could reasonably be expected to lead to an Acquisition
Proposal with such party; (ii) “Acquisition Proposal” means, with respect to a party hereto, any offer or proposal,
whether written or oral, from any person or group (as defined in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) other than
Pyramid, Delaware Merger Subsidiary, the Company or any affiliates thereof (each, a “third party”) to acquire beneficial
ownership (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act) of (a) 15% or more of any class of the equity securities of
such party or (b) 15% or more of the fair market value of the assets of such party, in each case pursuant to any merger,
consolidation, amalgamation, share exchange, business combination, issuance of securities, acquisition of securities,
reorganization, recapitalization, tender offer, exchange offer or other similar transaction or series of related transactions,
which is structured to permit a third party to acquire beneficial ownership of (y) 15% or more of any class of equity
securities of the party or (z) 15% or more of the fair market value of the assets of the party; provided, however, that, for
purposes of Sections 10.02(a) and 10.02(b), all such references to “15%” shall be deemed to be “50%”; and (iii)
“Superior Offer” means an unsolicited bona fide written offer by a third party to enter into (a) a merger, consolidation,
amalgamation, share exchange, business combination, issuance of securities, acquisition of securities, reorganization,
recapitalization, tender offer, exchange offer or other similar transaction as a result of which either (A) the stockholders
of a party hereto prior to such transaction in the aggregate cease to own at least 50% of the voting securities of the
entity surviving or resulting from such transaction (or the ultimate company entity thereof) or (B) in which a person or
“group” (as defined in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) directly or indirectly acquires beneficial ownership of
securities representing 50% or more of the voting power of the party’s capital stock then outstanding or (b) a sale, lease,
exchange transfer, license, acquisition or disposition of any business or other disposition of at least 50% of the assets
of the party, taken as a whole, in a single transaction or a series of related transactions that: (A) was not obtained or
made as a direct or indirect result of a breach of (or in violation of) this Agreement; and (B) is on terms and conditions
that the Board of Directors of Pyramid or the Company, as applicable, determines, in its reasonable, good faith
judgment, after obtaining and taking into account such matters that its Board of Directors deems relevant following
consultation with its outside legal counsel and financial advisor: (x) is reasonably likely to be more favorable, from a
financial point of view, to Pyramid’s shareholders or the Company’s stockholders, as applicable, than the Merger and
the other transactions contemplated hereby; and (y) is reasonably capable of being consummated.
(b)         Notice of Proposal or Inquiry.  If any party or any representative of such party receives an Acquisition Proposal
or Acquisition Inquiry at any time during the Pre-Closing Period, then such party shall promptly (and in no event later
than 24 hours after such party becomes aware of such Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry) advise the other
parties hereto orally and in writing of such Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry (including the identity of the
person making or submitting such Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry, and the terms thereof). Such party shall
keep the other parties informed in all material respects with respect to the status and terms of any such Acquisition
Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry and any modification or proposed modification thereto.
(c)         Cease Current Discussions. Each party shall immediately cease and cause to be terminated any existing
discussions with any person that relate to any Acquisition Proposal or Acquisition Inquiry as of the date of this
Agreement.
A-35
SECTION 7.04          Access to Information; Confidentiality.
(a)         Subject to applicable law relating to the exchange of information, the parties shall afford to each other and the
other’s accountants, counsel, financial advisors, sources of financing and other representatives reasonable access
during normal business hours with reasonable notice throughout the period from the date hereof until the Merger
Effective Time to all of their respective properties, books, contracts and records (including, but not limited to, Tax
Returns) and, during such period, shall furnish promptly (i) a copy of each report, schedule and other document filed or
received by any of them pursuant to the requirements of federal or state securities laws or filed by any of them with the
SEC in connection with the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, and (ii) such other information concerning its
businesses, properties and personnel as any party shall reasonably request, and will use reasonable efforts to obtain
the reasonable cooperation of its officers, employees, counsel, accountants, consultants and financial advisors in
connection with the review of such other information by the parties and their respective representatives.
(b)         The parties hereto acknowledge that the Confidentiality Agreements, dated December 27, 2013, between
Pyramid and the Company (the “Confidentiality Agreements”) shall continue in full force and effect in accordance with
their terms.
SECTION 7.05          Notices of Certain Events.
(a)         The Company and Pyramid shall as promptly as reasonably practicable after their executive officers acquire
knowledge thereof, notify the other of: (i) any notice or other communication from any person alleging that the Consent
of such person (or another person) is or may be required in connection with the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement which Consent relates to a Pyramid Material Contract or a Company Material Contract, as applicable, or the
failure of which to obtain could materially delay consummation of the Merger; (ii) any notice or other communication
from any governmental or regulatory agency or authority in connection with the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement; and (iii) any actions, suits, claims, investigations or proceedings commenced or, to its knowledge,
threatened, relating to or involving or otherwise affecting the Company or Pyramid, as the case may be that, if pending
on the date of this Agreement, would have been required to have been disclosed pursuant to Sections 7.09, 7.10 or 7.12,
or which relate to the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
(b)         Subject to the provisions of Section 7.03, each of the Company and Pyramid agrees to give prompt notice to the
other of, and to use its reasonable best efforts to remedy, (i) the occurrence or failure to occur of any event which
occurrence or failure to occur would reasonably be expected to cause any of its representations or warranties in this
Agreement to be untrue or inaccurate at the Merger Effective Time unless such occurrence or failure to occur would not
reasonably be expected to have a Company Material Adverse Effect or a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect, as the case
may be, and (ii) any failure on its part to comply with or satisfy any covenant, condition or agreement to be complied with
or satisfied by it hereunder unless such failure would not reasonably be expected to have a Company Material Adverse
Effect or a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect, as the case may be; provided, however, that the delivery of any notice
pursuant to this Section 7.05(b) shall not limit or otherwise affect the representations, warranties, covenants or
agreements of the parties, the remedies available hereunder to the party receiving such notice or the conditions to such
party’s obligation to consummate the Merger.
SECTION 7.06          Merger Subsidiary. Pyramid will take all action necessary to cause its subsidiary to perform its
obligations under this Agreement and to consummate the Merger on the terms and conditions set forth in this
Agreement. Until the Merger Effective Time, Merger Subsidiary will not carry on any business or conduct any operations
other than the execution of this Agreement, the performance of its obligations hereunder and matters ancillary hereto.
A-36
SECTION 7.07          Company Stockholder Meeting or Written Consent.
(a)          Promptly after the S-4 Effective Date (as defined in Section 7.09(a)), the Company shall solicit approval at a
meeting or by written consent (each a “Company Stockholder Written Consent” and collectively, the “Company
Stockholder Written Consents”) from the holders of Company Common Stock, Series A Preferred Stock and Series B
Preferred Stock for purposes of adopting this Agreement and approving the Merger, and all other transactions
contemplated by this Agreement, and the Company shall use its reasonable best efforts to obtain the requisite approval
from its stockholders by the date twenty business days after the S-4 Effective Date.
(b)          The Company agrees that, subject to Section 7.07(c): (i) the Board of Directors of the Company shall
recommend that the Company’s stockholders vote to adopt and approve this Agreement and the Merger and shall use
reasonable best efforts to solicit such approval within the time set forth in Section 7.07(a) (the recommendation of the
Board of Directors of the Company that the Company’s stockholders vote to adopt and approve this Agreement and the
Merger being referred to as the “Company Board Recommendation”); and (ii) the Company Board Recommendation
shall not be withdrawn or modified in a manner adverse to Pyramid, and no resolution by the Board of Directors of the
Company or any committee thereof to withdraw or modify the Company Board Recommendation in a manner adverse to
Pyramid shall be adopted or proposed.
(c)          Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section 7.07(b), at any time prior to the approval of this
Agreement by the Company’s stockholders, the Board of Directors of the Company may withhold, amend, withdraw or
modify the Company Board Recommendation in a manner adverse to Pyramid if, but only if the Board of Directors of the
Company determines in good faith, based on such matters as it deems relevant following consultation with its outside
legal counsel, that the failure to withdraw, withhold, amend, or modify such recommendation would result in a breach of
its fiduciary duties under applicable law; provided, that Pyramid receives written notice from the Company confirming
that the Board of Directors of the Company has determined to change its recommendation at least two business days in
advance of the Company Board Recommendation being so withdrawn, withheld, amended or modified in a manner
adverse to Pyramid.
(d)          The Company’s obligation to solicit the consent of its stockholders to sign the Company Stockholder Written
Consent in accordance with Section 7.07(a) shall not be limited or otherwise affected by the commencement, disclosure,
announcement or submission of any Superior Offer or other Acquisition Proposal, or by any withdrawal or modification
of the Company Board Recommendation.
SECTION 7.08          Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting.
(a)          Pyramid shall take all action necessary and within its powers under applicable law to call, give notice of and hold
a meeting (such meeting, the “Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting”) of the holders of Pyramid Common Stock to vote on (i)
this Agreement, (ii) the principal terms of the Merger, (iii) the issuance of shares of Pyramid Common Stock in the
Merger, and (iv) the Pyramid Restated Articles (collectively, the “Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters”). The Pyramid
Shareholders’ Meeting shall be held as promptly as practicable after the S-4 Effective Date. Pyramid shall take
reasonable measures to ensure that all proxies solicited in connection with the Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting are
solicited in compliance with all applicable laws.
(b)          Pyramid agrees that, subject to Section 7.08(c): (i) the Board of Directors of Pyramid shall recommend that the
holders of Pyramid Common Stock vote to approve the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters and shall use
commercially reasonable efforts to solicit such approval within the timeframe set forth in Section 7.08(a), (ii) the Proxy
Statement/Prospectus shall include a statement to the effect that the Board of Directors of Pyramid recommends that
Pyramid’s shareholders vote to approve the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters (the recommendation of the Board
of Directors of Pyramid that Pyramid’s shareholders vote to approve the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters being
referred to as the “Pyramid Board Recommendation”); and (iii) the Pyramid Board Recommendation shall not be
withdrawn or modified in a manner adverse to the Company, and no resolution by the Board of Directors of Pyramid or
any committee thereof to withdraw or modify the Pyramid Board Recommendation in a manner adverse to the Company
shall be adopted or proposed.
(c)          Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section 7.08(b), at any time prior to the approval of the
Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters by Pyramid’s shareholders, the Board of Directors of Pyramid may withhold,
amend, withdraw or modify the Pyramid Board Recommendation in a manner adverse to the Company if, but only if the
Board of Directors of Pyramid determines in good faith, based on such matters as it deems relevant following
consultation with its outside legal counsel, that the failure to withhold, amend, withdraw or modify such
recommendation would result in a breach of its fiduciary duties under applicable law; provided, that the Company
receives written notice from Pyramid confirming that the Board of Directors of Pyramid has determined to change its
recommendation at least two business days in advance of the Pyramid Board Recommendation being withdrawn,
withheld, amended or modified in a manner adverse to the Company.
A-37
(d)          Pyramid’s obligation to call, give notice of and hold the Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting in accordance with
Section 7.08(a) shall not be limited or otherwise affected by any withdrawal or modification of the Pyramid Board
Recommendation.
(e)          Nothing contained in this Agreement shall prohibit Pyramid or its Board of Directors from complying with Rules
14d-9 and 14e-2(a) promulgated under the Exchange Act; provided, however, that any disclosure made by Pyramid or
its Board of Directors pursuant to Rules 14d-9 and 14e-2(a) shall be limited to a statement that Pyramid is unable to take
a position with respect to the bidder’s tender offer unless the Board of Directors of Pyramid determines in good faith,
after consultation with its outside legal counsel, that such statement would result in a breach of its fiduciary duties
under applicable law. Pyramid shall not withdraw or modify in a manner adverse to the Company the Pyramid Board
Recommendation unless specifically permitted pursuant to the terms of Section 7.08(c).
SECTION 7.09          Proxy Statement/Prospectus; Registration Statement.
(a)          As promptly as practicable after the date of this Agreement, the parties hereto shall prepare and cause to be
filed with the SEC the Proxy Statement/Prospectus and Pyramid shall prepare and cause to be filed with the SEC the
Registration Statement, in which the Proxy Statement/Prospectus will be included as a prospectus.  Each of the parties
shall use commercially reasonable efforts to cause the Registration Statement and the Proxy Statement/Prospectus to
comply with the applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the SEC, to respond promptly to any comments of the
SEC or its staff and to have the Registration Statement declared effective under the Securities Act as promptly as
practicable after it is filed with the SEC. Each of the parties shall use commercially reasonable efforts to cause the Proxy
Statement/Prospectus to be mailed to the stockholders of Pyramid and the Company as promptly as practicable after
the date on which the Registration Statement is declared effective under the Securities Act (the “S-4 Effective Date”).
 Each party hereto shall promptly furnish to the other party all information concerning such party and such party’s
stockholders that may be required or reasonably requested in connection with any action contemplated by this Section
7.09.
(b)          Each party shall reasonably cooperate with the other and provide, and require its representatives, advisors,
accountants and attorneys to provide, the other party and its representatives, advisors, accountants and attorneys, with
all such information regarding such party as is required by law to be included in the Registration Statement or
reasonably requested from such party to be included in the Registration Statement.
SECTION 7.10          Public Announcements. In connection with the execution and delivery of this Agreement, Pyramid
and the Company shall issue a joint press release mutually agreed to by the Company and Pyramid. Pyramid, in its
discretion, shall be entitled to convene an investor conference call in conjunction with the issuance of such press
release. Except for the press release and such conference call, no party shall issue or cause the publication of any
press release or other public announcement (to the extent not previously issued or made in accordance with this
Agreement) with respect to this Agreement, the Merger or the other transactions contemplated hereby without the prior
written Consent of the other parties (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed), except as may be
required by law, including applicable SEC requirements, applicable fiduciary duties or by any applicable listing
agreement with the NYSE MKT (in which case such party shall not issue or cause the publication of such press release
or other public statement without prior consultation with the other party).
SECTION 7.11          Expenses and Fees. Each of the parties shall bear and pay all costs and expenses incurred by it in
connection with this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby.
A-38
SECTION 7.12          Agreement to Cooperate.
(a)          Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, including Section 7.03 and this Section 7.12, each of the
parties hereto shall use its reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to be taken, all actions and to do, or cause to be
done, all things necessary, proper or advisable under applicable law and regulations to consummate and make effective
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, including using its reasonable best efforts to obtain all necessary or
appropriate waivers, consents or approvals of third parties required in order to preserve material contractual
relationships of Pyramid and the Company and their respective subsidiaries and to effect all necessary registrations,
filings and submissions. In addition, subject to the terms and conditions herein provided and subject to the fiduciary
duties of the respective Boards of Directors of the Company and Pyramid, none of the parties hereto shall knowingly
take or cause to be taken any action that would reasonably be expected to materially delay or prevent consummation of
the Merger.
(b)          In the event that any administrative or judicial action or proceeding is instituted (or threatened to be instituted)
by a governmental authority or private party challenging the Merger or any other transaction contemplated by this
Agreement, or any other agreement contemplated hereby, the Company, Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary shall
cooperate in all respects with the other parties and shall use their reasonable best efforts to contest and resist any such
action or proceeding and to have vacated, lifted, reversed or overturned any order, whether temporary, preliminary or
permanent, that is in effect and that prohibits, prevents or restricts consummation of the transactions contemplated by
this Agreement. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, if so precluded in the exercise of their
directors’ fiduciary duties, none of Pyramid, Merger Subsidiary or any of their affiliates shall be required to defend,
contest or resist any action or proceeding, whether judicial or administrative, or to take any action to have vacated,
lifted, reversed or overturned any order, in connection with the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
SECTION 7.13          Exemption From Liability Under Section 16(b). Pyramid and the Company shall cause their
respective Boards of Directors and the Board of Directors of the Surviving Corporation to adopt prior to the Merger
Effective Time such resolutions as may be required to, and shall otherwise use reasonable efforts to, exempt the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement from the provisions of Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act to the maximum
extent permitted by law. The Company shall use reasonable efforts to provide the information to Pyramid required in
connection with the adoption of such resolutions to exempt the transactions contemplated by this Agreement from the
provisions of Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act to the maximum extent permitted by law.
SECTION 7.14          Certain Tax Matters.
(a)         Pyramid and the Company shall each use their reasonable best efforts to cause the Merger to qualify as a
“reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code, and before or after the Merger Effective Time, none of
Pyramid, Merger Subsidiary or the Company shall knowingly take any action, cause any action to be taken, fail to take
any action or cause any action to fail to be taken which action or failure to act could cause the Merger to fail to qualify as
a reorganization under Section 368(a) of the Code.
(b)         Pyramid and the Company shall comply with the record keeping and information reporting requirements set
forth in U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.368-3. This Agreement is intended to constitute a “plan of reorganization”
within the meaning of U.S. Treasury Regulation Section 1.368-2(g).
(c)         The Company and Pyramid shall cooperate in the preparation, execution and filing of all Tax Returns,
questionnaires, applications or other documents regarding any real property transfer or gains, sales, use, transfer,
value added, stock transfer and stamp Taxes, and transfer, recording, registration and other fees and similar Taxes
which become payable in connection with the Merger that are required or permitted to be filed on or before the Merger
Effective Time. Each of Pyramid and the Company shall pay, without deduction from any amount payable to holders of
Company Common Stock and without reimbursement from the other party, any such Taxes or fees imposed on it by any
governmental authority, which becomes payable in connection with the Merger.
(d)         Following the Merger, Pyramid and the Company will not take any action and will not fail to take any action that
would prevent the merger from satisfying the “continuity of business enterprise” requirement for a “reorganization” as
provided in U.S. Treasury Regulation 1.368-1(d).
A-39
SECTION 7.15          Company Financial Statements. As soon as practicable but prior to May 31, 2014, the Company shall
deliver to Pyramid true and complete copies of the Company’s audited balance sheet as of December 31, 2013, and the
related audited statements of operations and statements of cash flows of the Company for the periods covered therein,
together with all related notes and schedules thereto, accompanied by the report thereon of the Company’s
independent auditors (collectively, the “Company 2013 Audited Financial Statements”).  The Company shall ensure that
its financial statements comply in all material respects with the applicable rules and regulations of the SEC in
connection with the preparation and filing of the Registration Statement.
SECTION 7.16          Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance.
(a)         Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary agree that all rights to indemnification, advancement of expenses and
exculpation by the Company and Pyramid now existing in favor of each person who is now, or has been at any time
prior to the date hereof or who becomes prior to the Merger Effective Time an officer or director of (i) the Company and
its subsidiaries (each, a "Company Indemnified Party"), as provided in the Company’s certificate of incorporation,
bylaws or the DGCL, in each case as in effect on the date of this Agreement, or pursuant to any other contracts in effect
on the date hereof and disclosed in Section 6.10 of the Company Disclosure Schedule, shall be assumed by the
Surviving Corporation in the Merger at the Merger Effective Time, (ii) Pyramid and its subsidiaries (each, a "Pyramid
Indemnified Party" and collectively with the Company Indemnified Party, the “Indemnified Parties”), as provided in
Pyramid’s Restated Articles of Incorporation, Amended and Restated Bylaws, or the CCC, in each case as in effect on
the date of this Agreement, or pursuant to any other contracts in effect on the date hereof and disclosed in Section 5.07
of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule, shall be assumed by Pyramid without further action, and shall survive the Merger
and shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their terms, and, in the event that any proceeding is pending
or asserted or any claim made during such period, until the final disposition of such proceeding or claim.
(b)          For six years after the Merger Effective Time, to the fullest extent permitted under applicable law, Pyramid and
the Surviving Corporation shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless each Company Indemnified Party and each
Pyramid Indemnified Party, as applicable, against all losses, claims, damages, liabilities, fees, expenses, judgments and
fines arising in whole or in part out of actions or omissions in their capacity as such occurring at or prior to the Merger
Effective Time (including in connection with the transactions contemplated by this Agreement), and shall reimburse
each Company Indemnified Party and each Pyramid Indemnified Party for any legal or other expenses reasonably
incurred by such Company Indemnified Party or Pyramid Indemnified Party in connection with investigating or
defending any such losses, claims, damages, liabilities, fees, expenses, judgments and fines as such expenses are
incurred, subject to the Surviving Corporation’s or Pyramid’s receipt of an undertaking by such Company Indemnified
Party or Pyramid Indemnified Party, as the case may be, to repay such legal and other fees and expenses paid in
advance if it is ultimately determined in a final and non-appealable judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction that
such Company Indemnified Party or Pyramid Indemnified Party is not entitled to be indemnified under applicable law;
provided, however, that the Surviving Corporation and Pyramid will not be liable for any settlement effected without the
Surviving Corporation’s prior written consent, in the case of a Company Indemnified Party, or Pyramid’s prior written
consent, in the case of a Pyramid Indemnified Party (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed).
(c)          Pyramid shall, as to Pyramid, and the Surviving Corporation shall, as to the Surviving Corporation, (i) maintain in
effect for a period of six (6) years after the Merger Effective Time, if available, the current policies of directors’ and
officers’ liability insurance maintained by Pyramid and the Company, as applicable, immediately prior to the Merger
Effective Time (provided that Pyramid and the Surviving Corporation may substitute therefor policies, of at least the
same coverage and amounts and containing terms and conditions that are not less advantageous to the directors and
officers of Pyramid and the Company and its subsidiaries when compared to the insurance maintained by Pyramid and
the Company, as applicable, as of the date hereof), or (ii) obtain as of the Merger Effective Time “tail” insurance policies
with a claims period of six (6) years from the Merger Effective Time with at least the same coverage and amounts and
containing terms and conditions that are not less advantageous to the directors and officers of Pyramid and the
Company and its subsidiaries, as applicable, in each case with respect to claims arising out of or relating to events
which occurred before or at the Merger Effective Time (including in connection with the transactions contemplated by
this Agreement); provided, however, that in no event will Pyramid or the Surviving Corporation be required to expend a
premium for such coverage in excess of $100,000.00 (the “Maximum Premium”). If such insurance coverage cannot be
obtained at a premium equal to or less than the Maximum Premium, Pyramid and the Surviving Corporation will obtain,
and Pyramid will cause the Surviving Corporation to obtain, that amount of directors’ and officers’ insurance (or “tail”
coverage) obtainable for a premium equal to the Maximum Premium.
A-40
(d)          The obligations of Pyramid and the Surviving Corporation under this Section 7.16 shall survive the
consummation of the Merger and shall not be terminated or modified in such a manner as to adversely affect any
Company Indemnified Party or Pyramid Indemnified Party to whom this Section 7.16 applies without the consent of such
affected Company Indemnified Party or Pyramid Indemnified Party, as applicable (it being expressly agreed that the
Indemnified Parties to whom this Section 7.16 applies shall be third party beneficiaries of this Section 7.16, each of
whom may enforce the provisions of this Section 7.16).
(e)          In the event Pyramid, the Surviving Corporation or any of their respective successors or assigns (i) consolidates
with or merges into any other person and shall not be the continuing or surviving corporation or entity in such
consolidation or merger or (ii) transfers all or substantially all of its properties and assets to any person, then, and in
either such case, proper provision shall be made so that the successors and assigns of Pyramid or the Surviving
Corporation, as the case may be, shall assume all of the obligations set forth in this Section 7.16. The agreements and
covenants contained herein shall not be deemed to be exclusive of any other rights to which any Company Indemnified
Party and any Pyramid Indemnified Party is entitled, whether pursuant to law, contract or otherwise.  Nothing in this
Agreement is intended to, shall be construed to or shall release, waive or impair any rights to directors’ and officers’
insurance claims under any policy that is or has been in existence with respect to Pyramid, the Company or their
respective officers, directors and employees, it being understood and agreed that the indemnification provided for in
this Section 7.16 is not prior to, or in substitution for, any such claims under any such policies.
ARTICLE VIII
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ARTICLE IX
CONDITIONS TO THE MERGER
SECTION 9.01          Conditions to the Obligations of Each Party. The obligations of the parties to consummate the
Merger are subject to the fulfillment at or prior to the Merger Effective Time of the following conditions:
(a)         this Agreement and the Merger shall have been adopted and approved by the requisite vote of the stockholders
of the Company in accordance with the DGCL;
(b)         the principal terms of the Merger and the issuance of shares of Pyramid Common Stock in the Merger shall have
been adopted and approved by the requisite vote of the shareholders of Pyramid in accordance with the CCC;
(c)         none of the parties hereto shall be subject to any law, order, injunction, judgment or ruling enacted, promulgated,
issued, entered, amended or enforced by any governmental authority of competent jurisdiction that prohibits the
consummation of the Merger or makes the consummation of the Merger illegal;
(d)         the Registration Statement shall be declared effective under the Securities Act, and no stop order suspending
the effectiveness of the Registration Statement shall have been issued by the SEC and no proceeding for that purpose
shall have been initiated by the SEC and not concluded or withdrawn;
A-41
(e)         the issuance of the shares of Pyramid Common Stock to be issued as the Merger Consideration shall be exempt
from registration, or shall have been appropriately registered or qualified, under applicable state securities laws;
(f)          the shares of Pyramid Common Stock to be issued as the Merger Consideration shall have been approved for
listing on the NYSE MKT, effective upon notice of issuance;
(g)         no Governmental Entity (as defined below having jurisdiction over any party hereto shall have enacted, issued,
promulgated, enforced or entered any laws, or any order, writ, assessment, decision, injunction, decree, ruling or
judgment of a Governmental Entity (any of the foregoing, an “Order”), whether temporary, preliminary or permanent, that
make illegal, enjoin or otherwise prohibit consummation of the Merger or the other transactions contemplated by this
Agreement. For purposes of this Agreement, the term “Governmental Entity” means any supranational, national, state,
municipal, local or foreign government, any instrumentality, subdivision, court, administrative agency or commission or
other governmental authority, or any quasi-governmental or private body exercising any regulatory or other
governmental or quasi-governmental authority; and
(h)         the Board of Directors of Pyramid shall have received an opinion from Roth to the effect that, as of the date of the
February 6, 2014 Agreement and based upon and subject to the qualifications and assumptions set forth therein, the
terms of the Merger are fair, from a financial point of view, to Pyramid and its shareholders.
SECTION 9.02          Conditions to Obligation of the Company to Effect the Merger. Unless waived by the Company, the
obligation of the Company to consummate the Merger shall be subject to the fulfillment at or prior to the Merger Effective
Time of the following additional conditions:
(a)          (i) the representations and warranties of the Pyramid Entities set forth in Sections 6.02 (Capitalization),
and 5.03(a) – (c) (Authority; Non-Contravention) shall be true and correct in all respects as of the date hereof and as of
the Merger Effective Time as if made on and as of the Merger Effective Time (or, if given as of a specific date, at and as of
such date) and (ii) the other representations and warranties of the Pyramid Entities contained in this Agreement,
disregarding all qualifications and exceptions contained therein relating to materiality or Pyramid Material Adverse
Effect, shall be true and correct in all respects as of the date hereof and as of the Merger Effective Time as if made on
and as of the Merger Effective Time (or, if given as of a specific date, at and as of such date), except in the case of this
clause (ii) (x) for changes expressly permitted by this Agreement or (y) where the failure to be true and correct would not
reasonably be expected to have a Pyramid Material Adverse Effect. The Company shall have received a certificate of the
chief executive officer or the chief financial officer of Pyramid to that effect;
(b)          each Pyramid Entity shall have performed in all material respects all obligations required to be performed by it
under this Agreement on or prior to the Merger Effective Time, including terminating its 5304-Simple Plan if requested by
the Company, and the Company shall have received a certificate of the chief executive officer or the chief financial
officer of Pyramid to that effect;
(c)          at Closing, all of the directors and officers of Pyramid shall have resigned in writing from their positions as
directors and officers of Pyramid effective upon the election of the persons designated in Exhibit E attached hereto (the
“New Pyramid Board”), and the appointment of the persons designated in Exhibit E attached hereto, each to hold office
in accordance with the articles of incorporation and the bylaws of Pyramid until their respective successors are duly
elected or appointed and qualified; provided that the New Pyramid Board shall have a sufficient number of
“independent directors” to satisfy applicable SEC and NYSE MKT rules. The directors of Pyramid shall take such action
as may be necessary or desirable regarding such election and appointment of the foregoing individuals;
(d)          the environmental report prepared for the Company with respect to any material property of Pyramid shall be
reasonably acceptable to the Company and the Company’s land due diligence of Pyramid properties shall be
reasonably acceptable to the Company, provided that such report and such due diligence, respectively, shall be
deemed to be acceptable to the Company if the Company does not notify Pyramid in writing to the contrary on or before
February 20, 2014;
A-42
(e)          the Board of Directors of the Company shall have a good faith belief that the date on which the S-4 is filed and
on the Closing Date, that (i) the Merger will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code
and (ii) the Company and Pyramid will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368 of the
Code; and
(f)          the Company shall have been furnished with evidence satisfactory to it that Pyramid has obtained the consents,
approvals and waivers set forth in Section 9.02(f) of the Pyramid Disclosure Schedule.
SECTION 9.03          Conditions to Obligations of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to Effect the Merger. Unless waived by
Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary, the obligations of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to consummate the Merger shall be
subject to the fulfillment at or prior to the Merger Effective Time of the following additional conditions:
(a)          (i) the representations and warranties of the Company set forth in Sections 6.02 (Capitalization), and 6.03(a) – (c)
(Authority; Non-Contravention) shall be true and correct in all respects as of the date hereof and as of the Merger
Effective Time as if made on and as of the Merger Effective Time (or, if given as of a specific date, at and as of such date)
and (ii) the other representations and warranties of the Company contained in this Agreement, disregarding all
qualifications and exceptions contained therein relating to materiality or Company Material Adverse Effect, shall be true
and correct in all respects as of the date hereof and as of the Merger Effective Time as if made on and as of the Merger
Effective Time (or, if given as of a specific date, at and as of such date), except in the case of this clause (ii) (x) for
changes expressly permitted by this Agreement or (y) where the failure to be true and correct would not reasonably be
expected to have a Company Material Adverse Effect. Pyramid shall have received a certificate of the chief executive
officer or the chief financial officer of the Company to that effect;
(b)          the Company shall have performed in all material respects all obligations required to be performed by it under
this Agreement on or prior to the Merger Effective Time, and Pyramid shall have received a certificate of the chief
executive officer or the chief financial officer of the Company to that effect;
(c)         Dissenting Shares, if any, shall constitute less than 1% of the issued and outstanding shares of Company
Common Stock, less than 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock, and less than 5% of the
issued and outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock;
(d)         each of the Company’s agreements set forth in Section 9.03(d) of the Company Disclosure Schedule shall have
been terminated, effective prior to or as of the day immediately preceding the Closing Date, and Pyramid shall have
received from the Company evidence of such terminations in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to Pyramid;
(e)         Pyramid shall have been furnished with evidence satisfactory to it that the Company has obtained the consents,
approvals and waivers set forth in Section 9.03(e) of the Company Disclosure Schedule;
(f)          except as otherwise contemplated herein, all Vested Company Restricted Shares and any other rights to
purchase any shares of Company capital stock shall have been converted into or exercised for Company Common
Stock or shall have been cancelled; and
(g)         the environmental report delivered to Pyramid on or before the date hereof shall be reasonably acceptable to
Pyramid, provided that such report shall be deemed to be acceptable to Pyramid if Pyramid does not notify the
Company in writing to the contrary on or before February 20, 2014.
ARTICLE X
TERMINATION
SECTION 10.01          Termination. This Agreement may be terminated and the Merger may be abandoned, at any time
prior to the Effective Time (whether before or after the Pyramid Shareholder Approval or any approval of this Agreement
by the stockholders of the Company):
A-43
(a)          by mutual written consent of the Company and Pyramid duly authorized by each of their respective Boards of
Directors; or
(b)          by either the Company or Pyramid, if the Merger has not been consummated by December 31, 2014 (the
“Outside Date”); provided, however, that the right to terminate this Agreement under this Section 10.01(b) shall not be
available to (i) Pyramid, if the failure of any Pyramid Entity to fulfill any of its material obligations under this Agreement
caused the failure of the Closing to occur on or before such date, or (ii) the Company, if the failure of the Company to
fulfill any of its material obligations under this Agreement caused the failure of the Closing to occur on or before such
date, or (iii) Pyramid or the Company, if the failure of the Closing to occur on or before such date is due solely to the
failure of the condition set forth in Section 9.01(d) notwithstanding the performance by Pyramid of any obligations under
Section 7.09; or
(c)          by either the Company or Pyramid, if (x) there has been a breach by the other of any representation or warranty
contained in this Agreement which would reasonably be expected to have a Company Material Adverse Effect or a
Pyramid Material Adverse Effect, as the case may be, and which breach is not curable or, if curable, the breaching party
shall not be using on a continuous basis its reasonable best efforts to cure in all material respects such breach after
written notice of such breach by the terminating party or such breach has not been cured within ten business days after
written notice of such breach by the terminating party, or (y) there has been a breach of any of the covenants or
agreements set forth in this Agreement on the part of the other party, which would reasonably be expected to have a
Pyramid Material Adverse Effect or a Company Material Adverse Effect, as the case may be, and which breach is not
curable or, if curable, the breaching party shall not be using on a continuous basis its reasonable best efforts to cure
such breach after written notice of such breach by the terminating party or such breach has not been cured within
twenty business days after written notice of such breach by the terminating party; or
(d)          by either the Company or Pyramid after ten days following the entry of any final and non-appealable judgment,
injunction, order or decree by a court or governmental agency or authority of competent jurisdiction restraining or
prohibiting the consummation of the Merger; or
(e)         by the Company if, notwithstanding the existence of the Company Voting Agreement, prior to receipt of the
Company Stockholders’ Approval, the Company receives a Superior Offer, resolves to accept such Superior Offer,
complies with its Company Termination Fee payment obligations under Section 10.02 hereof and gives Pyramid at least
four business days’ prior written notice of its intention to terminate pursuant to this provision; provided, however, that
such termination shall not be effective until such time as the payment required by Section 10.02 shall have been
received by Pyramid; or
(f)          by the Company, if the Board of Directors of Pyramid shall have failed to recommend, or shall have withdrawn,
modified or amended in a manner adverse to the Company in any material respect the Pyramid Board Recommendation,
or shall have resolved to do any of the foregoing, or shall have recommended another Acquisition Proposal or if the
Board of Directors of Pyramid shall have resolved to accept a Superior Offer; or
(g)         by Pyramid if, notwithstanding the existence of the Pyramid Voting Agreement, prior to receipt of the Pyramid
Shareholders’ Approval, Pyramid receives a Superior Offer, resolves to accept such Superior Offer, complies with its
Pyramid Termination Fee payment obligations under Section 10.02 hereof and gives the Company at least four business
days’ prior written notice of its intention to terminate pursuant to this provision; provided, however, that such
termination shall not be effective until such time as the payment required by Section 10.02 shall have been received by
the Company; or
(h)         by Pyramid, if the Board of Directors of the Company shall have failed to recommend, or shall have withdrawn,
modified or amended in a manner adverse to Pyramid in any material respect the Company Board Recommendation, or
shall have resolved to do any of the foregoing, or shall have recommended another Acquisition Proposal or if the Board
of Directors of the Company shall have resolved to accept a Superior Offer; or
(i)          (i) by Pyramid, if the stockholders of the Company fail to approve the Merger in accordance with Section 7.07, or
(ii) by the Company, if the shareholders of Pyramid fail to approve the Pyramid Shareholder Approval Matters at the
Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting (including any adjournment or postponement thereof); or
A-44
(j)          by Pyramid, if the Company 2013 Audited Financial Statements are not delivered to Pyramid by May 31, 2014.
SECTION 10.02          Termination Fee.
(a)          Payment of Termination Fees by the Company. The Company shall pay to Pyramid a termination fee in an
amount in cash equal to $1,000,000 (the “Company Termination Fee”) in the event that (i) the Company terminates this
Agreement pursuant to Section 10.01(e); (ii) Pyramid terminates this Agreement pursuant to Sections 10.01(c) (as a
result of a breach by the Company) or 10.01(h); or (iii) Pyramid terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 10.01(i),
provided, in the case of this clause (iii), that (A) after the date hereof and prior to the date the Company solicits the
approval of the Company’s stockholders at a meeting or by written consent in accordance with Section 7.07, an
Acquisition Proposal has been publicly announced and not withdrawn or abandoned at the time of termination, and (B)
within one year after such termination, the Company enters into a definitive agreement with respect to or consummates
such Acquisition Proposal. Payment of the Company Termination Fee under this Section 10.02 shall be paid to Pyramid
within five business days following the date of termination of this Agreement; provided, however, that in the event of
payment pursuant to clause (iii) above, on the date of the execution and delivery by the Company of the definitive
agreement regarding such Acquisition Proposal.
(b)          Payment of Termination Fees by Pyramid. Pyramid shall pay to the Company a termination fee in an amount in
cash equal to $1,000,000 (the “Pyramid Termination Fee”) in the event that (i) Pyramid terminates this Agreement
pursuant to Section 10.01(g); (ii) the Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Sections 10.01(c) (as a result of a
breach by Pyramid) or 10.01(f); or (iii) the Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 10.01(i), provided, in
the case of this clause (iii), that (A) after the date hereof and prior to the Pyramid Shareholders’ Meeting, an Acquisition
Proposal has been publicly announced and not withdrawn or abandoned at the time of termination, and (B) within one
year after such termination, Pyramid enters into a definitive agreement with respect to or consummates such
Acquisition Proposal. Payment of the Pyramid Termination Fee under this Section 10.02 shall be paid to the Company
within five business days following the date of termination of this Agreement; provided, however, that in the event of
payment pursuant to clause (iii) above, on the date of the execution and delivery by Pyramid of the definitive agreement
regarding such Acquisition Proposal.
SECTION 10.03          Effect of Termination. In the event of termination of this Agreement by either Pyramid or the
Company pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.01, written notice thereof shall be given to the other party or parties,
specifying the provision hereof pursuant to which such termination is made, and there shall be no liability or further
obligation on the part of the Company, Pyramid, Merger Subsidiary or their respective officers or directors (except as set
forth in the first sentence of Section 5.08, Section 10.02 and this Section 10.03, all of which shall survive the termination).
Nothing in this Section 10.03 shall relieve any party from liability for fraud or any willful breach of this Agreement.
ARTICLE XI
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 11.01          Non-Survival of Representations and Warranties. Absent actual fraud, and any intentional, willful
and material breach of any representation or warranty contained in this Agreement by the Company or any Pyramid
Entity, as applicable, none of the representations and warranties contained in this Agreement or in any instrument
delivered under this Agreement will survive the Merger Effective Time. This Section 11.01 does not limit any covenant of
the parties to this Agreement which, by its terms, contemplates performance after the Merger Effective Time. The
Confidentiality Agreements will survive termination of this Agreement in accordance with their respective terms.
SECTION 11.02          Notices. All notices and other communications hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed
given if delivered personally, mailed by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested), sent via facsimile or e-mail
(with confirmation of transmission) or sent by a nationally recognized overnight courier (providing proof of delivery) to
the parties at the following addresses (or at such other address for a party as shall be specified by like notice):
A-45
If to the Company:
Yuma Energy, Inc.
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Houston, TX 77027
Attention:          Sam L. Banks
Facsimile:          (713) 968-7016
with a copy to (which shall not constitute notice hereunder):
Jones & Keller, P.C.
1999 Broadway, Suite 3150
Denver, CO 80202
Attention:          Reid A. Godbolt
Facsimile:          (303) 573-8133
If to Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary:
Pyramid Oil Company
2008 21st Street
Bakersfield, CA 93301
Attention:          Michael D. Herman
with a copy to (which shall not constitute notice hereunder):
TroyGould PC
1801 Century Park East, 16th Floor
Los Angeles, CA 90067
Attention:          William D. Gould
Facsimile:          (310) 201-4746
SECTION 11.03          Interpretation.
(a)          The headings contained in this Agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the
meaning or interpretation of this Agreement. In this Agreement, unless a contrary intention appears, (i) the words
“herein,” “hereof” and “hereunder” and other words of similar import refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any
particular Article, Section or other subdivision, (ii) ”knowledge” shall mean actual knowledge as of the date hereof of the
executive officers of the Company or Pyramid, as the case may be, after reasonable inquiry of any person directly
reporting to any such executive officer, (iii) “including” shall mean “including, without limitation,” and “includes” shall
mean “includes, without limitation,” and (iv) reference to any Article or Section means such Article or Section hereof. No
provision of this Agreement shall be interpreted or construed against any party hereto solely because such party or its
legal representative drafted such provision. For purposes of determining whether any fact or circumstance involves a
material adverse effect on the ongoing operations of a party, any special transaction charges incurred by such party as
a result of the consummation of transactions contemplated by this Agreement shall not be considered.
(b)          The parties hereto have participated jointly in the negotiation and drafting of this Agreement and, in the event an
ambiguity or question of intent or interpretation arises, this Agreement shall be construed as jointly drafted by the
parties hereto and no presumption or burden of proof shall arise favoring or disfavoring any party by virtue of the
authorship of any provision of this Agreement.
SECTION 11.04          Assignments and Successors. No party may assign any of its rights or delegate any of its
obligations under this Agreement without the prior written consent of the other parties. Any attempted assignment of
this Agreement or of any such rights or delegation of obligations without such consent shall be void and of no effect
This Agreement will be binding upon, and shall be enforceable by and inure solely to the benefit of, the parties hereto
and their respective successors and permitted assigns.
A-46
SECTION 11.05          Governing Law. THIS AGREEMENT, AND ANY DISPUTES ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO
THIS AGREEMENT OR THE PARTIES’ RELATIONSHIP TO EACH OTHER, SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND
CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE INTERNAL LAWS OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE, REGARDLESS OF THE
LAWS THAT MIGHT OTHERWISE GOVERN UNDER APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICTS OF LAW THEREOF.
SECTION 11.06          Waiver of Jury Trial. Each of the parties irrevocably waives any and all rights to trial by jury in any
action or proceeding between the parties arising out of or relating to this Agreement and the transactions contemplated
hereby.
SECTION 11.07          Exclusive Jurisdiction; Venue. In any action or proceeding between any of the parties arising out of
or relating to this Agreement or any of the transactions contemplated hereby, each of the parties: (a) irrevocably and
unconditionally consents and submits to the exclusive jurisdiction and venue of the Court of Chancery of the State of
Delaware or to the extent such court does not have subject matter jurisdiction, the Superior Court of the State of
Delaware or the United States District Court for the District of Delaware, (b) agrees that all claims in respect of such
action or proceeding shall be heard and determined exclusively in accordance with clause (a) of this Section 11.07, (c)
waives any objection to laying venue in any such action or proceeding in such courts, (d) waives any objection that
such courts are an inconvenient forum or do not have jurisdiction over any party, and (e) agrees that service of process
upon such party in any such action or proceeding shall be effective if such process is given as a notice in accordance
with Section 11.02 of this Agreement.
SECTION 11.08          No Third-Party Rights. Nothing in this Agreement, express or implied, is intended to or shall confer
upon any person (other than the parties) any right, benefit, or remedy of any nature whatsoever under or by reason of
this Agreement; provided, however, that after the Merger Effective Time, the Company Indemnified Parties and the
Pyramid Indemnified Parties shall be third-party beneficiaries of, and entitled to enforce, Sections 7.16 and 7.17, as
applicable, and provided further, that no consent of the Company Indemnified Parties and the Pyramid Indemnified
Parties shall be required to amend any provision of the Agreement prior to the Merger Effective Time.
SECTION 11.09          Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of which shall
be deemed to be an original, but all of which shall constitute one and the same agreement.
SECTION 11.10          Amendments; No Waivers.
(a)          Any provision of this Agreement may be amended or waived prior to the Merger Effective Time if, and only if,
such amendment or waiver is in writing and signed, in the case of an amendment, by the Company, Pyramid and Merger
Subsidiary or, in the case of a waiver, by the party against whom the waiver is to be effective; provided that any waiver or
amendment shall be effective against a party only if the Board of Directors of such party approves such waiver or
amendment.
(b)          No failure or delay by any party in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a waiver
thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise thereof preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of
any other right, power or privilege. The rights and remedies herein provided shall be cumulative and not exclusive of
any rights or remedies provided by law.
SECTION 11.11          Entire Agreement. This Agreement, including the schedules, exhibits and amendments hereto, and
the Confidentiality Agreements constitute the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter
hereof and supersede all prior agreements, specifically including the February 6, 2014 Agreement, understandings and
negotiations, both written and oral, between the parties with respect to the subject matter of this Agreement. No
representation, inducement, promise, understanding, condition or warranty not set forth herein has been made or relied
upon by any party hereto. Neither this Agreement nor any provision hereof is intended to confer upon any person other
than the parties hereto any rights or remedies hereunder except for the provisions of Article III, which is intended for the
benefit of the stockholders of the Company.
A-47
SECTION 11.12          Severability. If any term or other provision of this Agreement is invalid, illegal or unenforceable, all
other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect so long as the economic or legal substance of the
transactions contemplated hereby is not affected in any manner materially adverse to any party.
SECTION 11.13          Specific Performance. The parties hereto agree that irreparable damage would occur in the event
any of the provisions of this Agreement were not to be performed in accordance with their specific terms hereof and that
the parties shall be entitled to specific performance of the terms hereof in addition to any other rights or remedies at law
or in equity.
[Signature Page Follows]
A-48
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed by their respective
authorized officers as of the day and year first above written.
YUMA ENERGY, INC.
  
 /s/ Sam L. Banks          
 Name:  Sam L. Banks          
 Title: Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
  
 PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
  
 /s/ Michael D. Herman          
 Name:  Michael D. Herman
 Title: Chairman, Interim President and Chief Executive Officer          
  
 PYRAMID MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC.
  
 /s/ Michael D. Herman          
 Name:  Michael D. Herman
 Title: Chairman, Interim President and Chief Executive Officer          
  
 PYRAMID DELAWARE MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC.*
  
 /s/ Michael D. Herman          
 Name:   Michael D. Herman
 Title: Chairman, Interim President and Chief Executive Officer          
  
* Joined for the purpose of approving this Amendment to the February 6, 2014 Agreement, waiving all rights thereunder and
 
releasing all parties therefrom.
Signature Page to the Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization
EXHIBIT A
FORM OF COMPANY VOTING AGREEMENT
(See Annex C)
EXHIBIT B
FORM OF PYRAMID VOTING AGREEMENT
(See Annex B)
EXHIBIT C
FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MERGER
CERTIFICATE OF MERGER
of
PYRAMID MERGER SUBSIDIARY, INC.
(a Delaware corporation)
with and into
YUMA ENERGY, INC.
(a Delaware corporation)
Pursuant to Title 8, Section 251(c) of the Delaware General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”), the undersigned corporation
executed the following Certificate of Merger:
FIRST: The name, jurisdiction of incorporation and type of entity of each of the constituent corporations which is to
merge are as follows:
Name
Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc. Delaware
 Delaware
Yuma Energy, Inc.
Jurisdiction of Incorporation Entity Type
 Corporation
 Corporation
SECOND: The Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization (the “Merger Agreement”)
has been approved, adopted, certified, executed and acknowledged by each of the constituent corporations pursuant to
Title 8, Section 251(c) of the DGCL.
THIRD: The name of the surviving Delaware corporation is Yuma Energy, Inc. (the “Surviving Corporation”).
FOURTH: The Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended, of Yuma Energy, Inc., as in
effect immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, shall be the Certificate of Incorporation of the Surviving
Corporation, except that the Article numbered “FIRST” of the Second Amended and Restated Certificate of
Incorporation, as amended, of Yuma Energy, Inc., shall be amended and restated in its entirety to read as follows:
“The name of this corporation is The Yuma Companies, Inc.”
FIFTH: This Certificate of Merger, and the merger referenced herein, shall become effective upon the filing of this
Certificate of Merger in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware.
SIXTH: The executed Merger Agreement is on file at the principal place of business of the Surviving Corporation, which
is located at 1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825, Houston, Texas 77027.
SEVENTH: Upon request, a copy of the Merger Agreement will be furnished by the Surviving Corporation, without cost,
to any stockholder of the constituent corporations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, said Surviving Corporation has caused this this Certificate of Merger to be signed by an
authorized officer, this ________ day of ____________________, 2014.
YUMA ENERGY, INC.
By:
  
Name:  
Title:
EXHIBIT D
FORM OF RESTATED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF PYRAMID
(See Annex F)
EXHIBIT E
OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS
Directors of Pyramid:
Sam L. Banks, Chairman
Richard K. Stoneburner
James W. Christmas
Frank A. Lodzinski
Richard W. Volk
Ben T. Morris
Officers of Pyramid:
Sam L. Banks, Chief Executive Officer
Michael F. Conlon, President and Chief Operating Officer
Kirk F. Sprunger, Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer and Secretary
Annex B
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
THIS AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT (this “Agreement”) is dated as of August 1, 2014 by and
among Yuma Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), and each of the persons listed on Schedule A
hereto (each a “Shareholder” and collectively, the “Shareholders”).
WHEREAS, each of the Shareholders is, as of the date hereof and has been since February 6, 2014, the record and
beneficial owner of that number of shares of Common Stock, no par value per share (the “Pyramid Common Stock”), of
Pyramid Oil Company, a California corporation (“Pyramid”), and set forth opposite such Shareholder’s name on
Schedule A hereto; and
WHEREAS, the Company and the Shareholders are parties to the Voting Agreement dated as of February 6, 2014 (the
“Original Voting Agreement”); and
WHEREAS, Pyramid, Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid
(the “Merger Subsidiary”), and the Company concurrently with the execution and delivery of this Agreement are
entering into an Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of the date hereof
(as the same may be amended or supplemented, the “Merger Agreement”), providing for, among other things, the
merger (the “Merger”) of Merger Subsidiary with and into the Company, and the Company as the surviving entity to the
Merger upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement (capitalized terms used and not
otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings attributed thereto in the Merger Agreement); and
WHEREAS, as a condition to the willingness of the Company to enter into the Merger Agreement, and in order to induce
the Company to enter into the Merger Agreement, the Shareholders and the Company have agreed to amend and
restate the Original Voting Agreement and enter into this Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the execution and delivery by the Company of the Merger Agreement and the
mutual representations, warranties, covenants and agreements contained herein, and other good and valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto agree as follows:
Section 1.       Representations and Warranties of the Shareholders. Each of the Shareholders hereby represents and
warrants to the Company, severally and not jointly, as follows:
(a)          Such Shareholder is the beneficial owner (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)) and unless otherwise indicated, the record owner of the shares of Pyramid
Common Stock (as may be adjusted from time to time pursuant to Section 5 hereof, the “Shares”) set forth opposite
such Shareholder’s name on Schedule A to this Agreement and such Shares represent all of the shares of Pyramid
Common Stock beneficially owned by such Shareholder as of the date hereof. For purposes of this Agreement, the term
“Shares” shall include any shares of Pyramid Common Stock issuable to such Shareholder upon exercise or
conversion of any existing right, contract, option, or warrant to purchase, or securities convertible into or exchangeable
for, Pyramid Common Stock (“Shareholder Rights”) that are currently exercisable or convertible or become exercisable
or convertible and any other shares of Pyramid Common Stock such Shareholder may acquire or beneficially own
during the term of this Agreement.
(b)          Such Shareholder has all requisite power and authority and, if an individual, the legal capacity, to execute and
deliver this Agreement and to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby. This Agreement has been validly
executed and delivered by such Shareholder and, assuming that this Agreement constitutes the legal, valid and binding
obligation of the Company, constitutes the legal, valid and binding obligation of such Shareholder, enforceable against
such Shareholder in accordance with its terms (except insofar as enforceability may be limited by applicable
bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors’ rights generally, or by principles
governing the availability of equitable remedies).
B-1
(c)          The execution and delivery of this Agreement by such Shareholder does not, and the performance of this
Agreement by such Shareholder will not, (i) if such Shareholder is a corporation or limited liability company, conflict with
the certificate or articles of incorporation, certificate of formation or limited liability company agreement or bylaws, or
similar organizational documents of such Shareholder as presently in effect (in the case of a Shareholder that is a legal
entity), (ii) conflict with or violate any judgment, order, decree, statute, law, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to
such Shareholder or by which it is bound or affected, (iii)(A) result in any breach of or constitute a default (or an event
that with notice or lapse of time or both would become a default) under, (B) give to any other person any rights of
termination, amendment, acceleration or cancellation of, or (C) result in the creation of any pledge, claim, lien, charge,
encumbrance or security interest of any kind or nature whatsoever upon any of the properties or assets of the
Shareholder under, any agreement, contract, indenture, note or instrument to which such Shareholder is a party or by
which it is bound or affected, except for such breaches, defaults or other occurrences that would not prevent or
materially delay the performance by such Shareholder of any of such Shareholder’s obligations under this Agreement,
or (iv) except for applicable requirements, if any, of the Exchange Act, the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), the New York Stock Exchange Market (the “NYSE”) or the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements
Act of 1976, as amended (the “HSR Act”), require any filing by such Shareholder with, or any permit, authorization,
consent or approval of, any governmental or regulatory authority, except where the failure to make such filing or obtain
such permit, authorization, consent or approval would not prevent or materially delay the performance by the
Shareholder of any of such Shareholder’s obligations under this Agreement.
(d)          The Shares and the certificates representing the Shares owned by such Shareholder are now and at all times
during the term hereof will be held by such Shareholder, or by a nominee or custodian for the benefit of such
Shareholder, free and clear of all pledges, liens, charges, claims, security interests, proxies, voting trusts or agreements,
understandings or arrangements or any other encumbrances whatsoever, except for any such encumbrances or
proxies arising hereunder or under applicable federal and state securities laws or under the agreements set forth on
Schedule B hereto. Such Shareholder owns of record or beneficially no shares of Pyramid Common Stock other than
such Shareholder’s Shares.
(e)          As of the date hereof, neither such Shareholder, nor any of its respective properties or assets is subject to any
order, writ, judgment, injunction, decree, determination or award that would prevent or delay the consummation of the
transactions contemplated hereby.
(f)          Such Shareholder understands and acknowledges that the Company is entering into, the Merger Agreement in
reliance upon such Shareholder’s execution and delivery of this Agreement.
Section 2.        Representations and Warranties of the Company. The Company hereby represents and warrants to the
Shareholders as follows:
(a)          The Company is a corporation duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the laws of the
jurisdiction of its incorporation. The Company has all requisite power and authority to execute and deliver this
Agreement, to perform its obligations hereunder and to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby, and has
taken all necessary corporate action to authorize the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement. This
Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by the Company and, assuming that this Agreement constitutes the
legal, valid and binding obligation of the other parties hereto, constitutes the legal, valid and binding obligation of the
Company, enforceable against the Company in accordance with the terms of this Agreement (except insofar as
enforceability may be limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting
creditors’ rights generally, or by principles governing the availability of equitable remedies).
(b)          The execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Company does not, and the performance of this
Agreement by the Company will not, (i) conflict with the certificate of incorporation or bylaws of the Company as
presently in effect, (ii) conflict with or violate any judgment, order, decree, statute, law, ordinance, rule or regulation
applicable to the Company or by which it is bound or affected, (iii) (A) result in any breach of or constitute a default (or
an event that with notice or lapse of time or both would become a default) under, (B) give to any other person any rights
of termination, amendment, acceleration or cancellation of, or (C) result in the creation of any pledge, claim, lien, charge,
encumbrance or security interest of any kind or nature whatsoever upon any of the properties or assets of the Company
under, any agreement, contract, indenture, note or instrument to which the Company is a party or by which it is bound
or affected, except for such breaches, defaults or other occurrences that would not prevent or materially delay the
performance by the Company of its obligations under this Agreement, or (iv) except for applicable requirements, if any,
of the Exchange Act, the Securities Act, the NYSE or the HSR Act, require any filing by the Company with, or any permit,
authorization, consent or approval of, any governmental or regulatory authority, except where the failure to make such
filing or obtain such permit, authorization, consent or approval would not prevent or materially delay the performance by
the Company of its obligations under this Agreement.
B-2
(c)          As of the date hereof, neither the Company nor any of its properties or assets is subject to any order, writ,
judgment, injunction, decree, determination or award that would prevent or delay the consummation of the transactions
contemplated hereby.
Section 3.        Covenants of the Shareholders. Each of the Shareholders, severally and not jointly, agrees as follows:
(a)          Such Shareholder shall not, except as contemplated by the terms of this Agreement, sell, transfer, pledge,
assign or otherwise dispose of, or enter into any contract, option or other arrangement (including any profit-sharing
arrangement) or understanding with respect to the sale, transfer, pledge, assignment or other disposition of, the Shares
(including any options or warrants to purchase Pyramid Common Stock) to any person (any such action, a “Transfer”).
For purposes of clarification, the term “Transfer” shall include, without limitation, any short sale (including any “short
sale against the box”), pledge, transfer, and the establishment of any open “put equivalent position” within the meaning
of Rule 16a-1(h) under the Exchange Act. Notwithstanding the foregoing, (i) Transfers of Shares as bona fide gifts, (ii)
distributions of Shares to partners, members, shareholders, subsidiaries, affiliates, affiliated partnerships or other
affiliated entities of the undersigned, (iii) Transfers of Shares by will or intestacy, and (iv) Transfers of Shares to (A)
members of the undersigned’s immediate family or (B) a trust, the beneficiaries of which are the undersigned and/or
members of the undersigned’s immediate family, shall not be prohibited by this Agreement; provided that in the case of
any such transfer or distribution pursuant to clause (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), each donee or distributee shall execute and deliver
to the Company a valid and binding counterpart to this Agreement.
(b)          Such Shareholder shall not, except as contemplated by the terms of this Agreement (i) enter into any voting
arrangement, whether by proxy, voting agreement, voting trust, power-of-attorney or otherwise, with respect to the
Shares or (ii) take any other action that would in any way restrict, limit or interfere with the performance of his, her or its
obligations hereunder or the transactions contemplated hereby or make any representation or warranty of such
Shareholder herein untrue or incorrect in any material respect.
(c)          At any meeting of the shareholders of Pyramid called to vote upon the Merger or in connection with any
shareholder consent in respect of a vote on the Merger, the Merger Agreement or any other transaction contemplated
by the Merger Agreement or at any adjournment thereof or in any other circumstances upon which a vote, consent or
other approval (including by written consent) with respect to such matters is sought, each Shareholder shall vote (or
cause to be voted), or shall consent, execute a consent or cause to be executed a consent in respect of, such
Shareholder’s Shares in favor of the Merger, the adoption by Pyramid of the Merger Agreement and the approval of any
other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
(d)          Such Shareholder agrees to permit Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to publish and disclose in the Proxy
Statement and related filings under the securities laws such Shareholder’s identity and ownership of Shares and the
nature of its commitments, arrangements and understandings under this Agreement and any other information required
by applicable law.
B-3
Section 4.        Grant of Irrevocable Proxy; Appointment of Proxy.
(a)          Each Shareholder hereby irrevocably grants to, and appoints, Sam L. Banks, and any other individual who shall
hereafter be designated by the Company, such Shareholder’s proxy and attorney-in-fact (with full power of substitution),
for and in the name, place and stead of such Shareholder, to vote such Shareholder’s Shares, or grant a consent or
approval in respect of such Shares, at any meeting of shareholders of Pyramid or at any adjournment thereof or in any
other circumstances upon which their vote, consent or other approval is sought, in favor of the Merger, the adoption by
Pyramid of the Merger Agreement and the approval of the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
(b)          Each Shareholder represents that any existing proxies given in respect of such Shareholder’s Shares are not
irrevocable, and that any such proxies are hereby revoked.
(c)          Each Shareholder hereby affirms that the irrevocable proxy set forth in this Section 4 is given in connection with
the execution of the Merger Agreement, and that such irrevocable proxy is given to secure the performance of the
duties of such Shareholder under this Agreement. Such Shareholder hereby further affirms that the irrevocable proxy is
coupled with an interest and may under no circumstances be revoked, subject to Section 7 herein. Such Shareholder
hereby ratifies and confirms all that such irrevocable proxy may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof. Such
irrevocable proxy is executed and intended to be irrevocable in accordance with applicable law. Such irrevocable proxy
shall be valid until the termination of this Agreement pursuant to Section 7 herein.
Section 5.       Adjustments Upon Share Issuances, Changes in Capitalization. In the event of any change in Pyramid
Common Stock or in the number of outstanding shares of Pyramid Common Stock by reason of a stock dividend,
subdivision, reclassification, recapitalization, split, combination, exchange of shares or other similar event or
transaction or any other change in the corporate or capital structure of Pyramid (including, without limitation, the
declaration or payment of an extraordinary dividend of cash, securities or other property), and consequently the
number of Shares changes or is otherwise adjusted, this Agreement and the obligations hereunder shall attach to any
additional shares of Pyramid Common Stock, Shareholder Rights or other securities or rights of Pyramid issued to or
acquired by each of the Shareholders.
Section 6.          Further Assurances. Each Shareholder will, from time to time, execute and deliver, or cause to be
executed and delivered, such additional or further transfers, assignments, endorsements, consents and other
instruments as the Company may reasonably request for the purpose of effectively carrying out the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement and to vest the power to vote such Shareholder’s Shares as contemplated by Section
3 herein.
Section 7.          Termination. This Agreement, and all rights and obligations of the parties hereunder, shall terminate
upon the earlier of (a) the Effective Time and (b) the date upon which the Merger Agreement is terminated pursuant to
Section 7.01 thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Sections 7, 8 and 9 hereof shall survive any termination of this
Agreement.
Section 8.          Action in Shareholder Capacity Only. No Shareholder executing this Agreement who is or becomes
during the term hereof a director or officer of Pyramid makes any agreement or understanding herein in his or her
capacity as such director or officer. Each Shareholder signs solely in his or her capacity as the record holder and
beneficial owner of, or the trustee of a trust whose beneficiaries are the beneficial owners of, such Shareholder’s Shares
and nothing herein shall limit or affect any actions or omissions taken by or fiduciary duties of, a Shareholder or any of
its affiliates, in his or her capacity as an officer or director of Pyramid to the extent permitted by the Merger Agreement
and applicable law.
Section 9.        Miscellaneous.
(a)          Assignment. Neither this Agreement nor any of the rights, interests or obligations hereunder shall be assigned
by any of the parties without the prior written consent of the other parties. Subject to the preceding sentence, this
Agreement will be binding upon, inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the parties and their respective
successors and assigns. Each Shareholder agrees that this Agreement and the obligations of such Shareholder
hereunder shall attach to such Shareholder’s Shares and shall be binding upon any person or entity to which legal or
beneficial ownership of such Shares shall pass, whether by operation of law or otherwise, including without limitation
such Shareholder’s heirs, guardians, administrators or successors.
B-4
(b)          Expenses. All costs and expenses incurred in connection with this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby shall be paid by the party incurring such expenses.
(c)          Amendments. This Agreement may not be amended except vis-à-vis the Company and a Shareholder by an
instrument in writing signed by the Company and the applicable Shareholder and in compliance with applicable law.
(d)          Notice. All notices and other communications hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed duly given if
delivered personally, mailed by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested), delivered by Federal Express or
other nationally recognized overnight courier service or sent via facsimile to the parties at the following addresses (or at
such other address for a party as shall be specified by like notice):
(i)        if to a Shareholder, to the address set forth under the name of such Shareholder on Schedule A hereto
with a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
TroyGould PC
1801 Century Park East, 16th Floor
Los Angeles, CA 90067
Attention:       William D. Gould
Facsimile:       (310) 201-4746
and
(ii)         if to the Company:
Yuma Energy, Inc.
1177 West Loop South, Suite 1825
Houston, TX 77027
Attention:       Sam L. Banks
Facsimile:       (713) 968-7016
with a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
Jones & Keller, P.C.
1999 Broadway, Suite 3150
Denver, CO 80202
Attention:       Reid A. Godbolt
Facsimile:       (303) 573-8133
(e)          Interpretation. The headings contained in this Agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not affect in
any way the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement. In this Agreement, unless a contrary intention appears, (i) the
words “herein,” “hereof” and “hereunder” and other words of similar import refer to this Agreement as a whole and not
to any particular Section or other subdivision and (ii) reference to any Section means such Section hereof. No provision
of this Agreement shall be interpreted or construed against any party hereto solely because such party or its legal
representative drafted such provision.
B-5
(f)          Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an
original but all of which shall be considered one and the same agreement. Delivery of an executed counterpart signature
page of this Agreement by facsimile or by e-mail of a PDF document is as effective as executing and delivering this
Agreement in the presence of the other parties.
(g)          Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement of the parties and supersedes all prior
agreements and undertakings, both written and oral, between the parties, or any of them, with respect to the subject
matter hereof, specifically including the Original Voting Agreement, and except as otherwise expressly provided herein,
is not intended to confer upon any other person any rights or remedies hereunder.
(h)          Governing Law; Consent to Jurisdiction; Waiver of Trial by Jury. This Agreement shall be governed by, and
construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of Delaware, without regard to laws that may be applicable under
conflicts of laws principles. Each of the parties hereto irrevocably and unconditionally (i) agrees that any suit, action or
other legal proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement or any of the agreements delivered in connection
herewith or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby shall be brought in the state courts of the State of
Delaware (or, if such courts do not have jurisdiction or do not accept jurisdiction, in the United States District Court
located in the State of Delaware), (ii) consents to the jurisdiction of any such court in any such suit, action or
proceeding, and (iii) waives any objection that such party may have to the laying of venue of any such suit, action or
proceeding in any such court. Each of the parties hereto agrees that a final judgment in any such action or proceeding
shall be conclusive and may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other manner provided
by law. Each party to this Agreement irrevocably consents to service of process in the manner provided for notices in
Section 9(d). Nothing in this Agreement will affect the right of any party to this Agreement to serve process in any other
manner permitted by law.
EACH PARTY ACKNOWLEDGES AND AGREES THAT ANY CONTROVERSY WHICH MAY ARISE UNDER THIS
AGREEMENT IS LIKELY TO INVOLVE COMPLICATED AND DIFFICULT ISSUES, AND THEREFORE IT HEREBY
IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY WAIVES ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY JURY IN RESPECT OF
ANY LITIGATION DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT AND ANY OF
THE AGREEMENTS DELIVERED IN CONNECTION HEREWITH OR THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY
OR THEREBY. EACH PARTY CERTIFIES AND ACKNOWLEDGES THAT (A) NO REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR
ATTORNEY OF ANY OTHER PARTY HAS REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY OR OTHERWISE, THAT SUCH OTHER PARTY
WOULD NOT, IN THE EVENT OF LITIGATION, SEEK TO ENFORCE EITHER OF SUCH WAIVERS, (B) IT UNDERSTANDS
AND HAS CONSIDERED THE IMPLICATIONS OF SUCH WAIVERS, (C) IT MAKES SUCH WAIVERS VOLUNTARILY, AND
(D) IT HAS BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT BY, AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVERS
AND CERTIFICATIONS IN THIS SECTION 9(h).
(i)          Specific Performance. The parties to this Agreement agree that irreparable damage would occur in the event that
any provision of this Agreement was not performed in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and that the
Company shall be entitled to specific performance of the terms of this Agreement in addition to any other remedy at law
or equity.
(j)          Severability. If any term, provision, covenant or restriction of this Agreement is held by a court of competent
jurisdiction or other authority to be invalid, void, unenforceable or against its regulatory policy, the remainder of the
terms, provisions, covenants and restrictions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way
be affected, impaired or invalidated.
(k)          Several Liability. Each party to this Agreement enters into this Agreement solely on its own behalf, each such
party shall solely be severally liable for any breaches of this Agreement by such party and in no event shall any party be
liable for breaches of this Agreement by any other party hereto.
B-6
(l)          Non-Recourse. No past, present or future director, officer, employee, incorporator, member, partner, shareholder,
agent, attorney, representative or affiliate of any Shareholder hereto or of any of their respective affiliates shall have any
liability (whether in contract or in tort) for any obligations or liabilities of such party arising under, in connection with or
related to this Agreement or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, the transactions contemplated
hereby; provided, however, that nothing in this Section 9(l) shall limit any liability of any Shareholder hereto for its
breaches of the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
(m)          Waiver. No failure or delay by any party in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a
waiver thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise thereof preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the
exercise of any other right, power or privilege. The rights and remedies herein provided shall be cumulative and not
exclusive of any rights or remedies provided by applicable law.
[Signature Page Follows]
B-7
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused this Agreement to be signed by its officer thereunto duly authorized
and each Shareholder has signed this Agreement, all as of the date first written above.
COMPANY:
  
YUMA ENERGY, INC.,
 
a Delaware corporation
  
 By:
 Name:Sam L. Banks
 Title: Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
/s/ Sam L. Banks
SIGNATURE PAGE TO THE
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
SHAREHOLDER SIGNATURE PAGE
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused this Agreement to be signed by its officer thereunto duly authorized
and each Shareholder has signed this Agreement, all as of the date first written above.
SHAREHOLDER:
  
 By:
 Name:Michael D. Herman
/s/ Michael D. Herman
SIGNATURE PAGE TO THE
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
SCHEDULE A
OWNERSHIP OF SHARES
Name and Address of
Shareholder
 
Michael D. Herman
Number of Shares of Pyramid
 
Common Stock Beneficially Owned
2008 Twenty-First
Street
2,002,580 shares, which includes 50,000 shares of Pyramid Common Stock issuable to Mr. Herman
 
upon exercise of a stock option granted as of October 8, 2013.
Bakersfield, CA 93301
SCHEDULE B
LIST OF AGREEMENTS
Refer to Michael Herman's Schedule 13D filed with the SEC on October 10, 2013.
Annex C
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
THIS AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT (this “Agreement”), is dated as of August 1, 2014 by and
among Pyramid Oil Company, a California corporation (“Pyramid”), Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware
corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid (the “Merger Subsidiary”), and each of the persons listed on
Schedule A hereto (each a “Stockholder” and collectively, the “Stockholders”).
WHEREAS, each of the Stockholders is, as of the date hereof, the record and beneficial owner of that number of shares
of (i) Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Company Common Stock”), of Yuma Energy, Inc., a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”), (ii) Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) of
the Company, or (iii) Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Series B Preferred Stock”) of the
Company, set forth opposite such Stockholder’s name on Schedule A hereto; and
WHEREAS, the Company and the Stockholders are parties to the Voting Agreement dated as of February 6, 2014 (the
“Original Voting Agreement”); and
WHEREAS, Pyramid, the Merger Subsidiary and the Company concurrently with the execution and delivery of this
Agreement are entering into an Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of
the date hereof (as the same may be amended or supplemented, the “Merger Agreement”), providing for, among other
things, the merger (the “Merger”) of Merger Subsidiary with and into the Company, and the Company as the surviving
entity to the Merger upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement (capitalized terms
used and not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings attributed thereto in the Merger Agreement); and
WHEREAS, as a condition to the willingness of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to enter into the Merger Agreement, and
in order to induce Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to enter into the Merger Agreement, the Stockholders, Pyramid and
Merger Subsidiary have agreed to amend and restate the Original Voting Agreement and enter into this Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the execution and delivery by Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary of the Merger
Agreement and the mutual representations, warranties, covenants and agreements contained herein, and other good
and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto agree as
follows:
Section 1.      Representations and Warranties of the Stockholders. Each of the Stockholders hereby represents and
warrants to Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary, severally and not jointly, as follows:
(a)          Such Stockholder is the beneficial owner (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)) and unless otherwise indicated, the record owner of the shares of Company
Common Stock, Series A Preferred Stock or Series B Preferred Stock (as may be adjusted from time to time pursuant to
Section 5 hereof, the “Shares”) set forth opposite such Stockholder’s name on Schedule A to this Agreement and such
Shares represent all of the shares of Company Common Stock, Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock
beneficially owned by such Stockholder as of the date hereof. For purposes of this Agreement, the term “Shares” shall
include any shares of Company Common Stock issuable to such Stockholder upon exercise or conversion of any
existing right, contract, option, or warrant to purchase, or securities convertible into or exchangeable for, Company
Common Stock (“Stockholder Rights”) that are currently exercisable or convertible or become exercisable or
convertible and any other shares of Company Common Stock such Stockholder may acquire or beneficially own during
the term of this Agreement.
(b)          Such Stockholder has all requisite power and authority and, if an individual, the legal capacity, to execute and
deliver this Agreement and to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby. This Agreement has been validly
executed and delivered by such Stockholder and, assuming that this Agreement constitutes the legal, valid and binding
obligation of the other parties hereto, constitutes the legal, valid and binding obligation of such Stockholder,
enforceable against such Stockholder in accordance with its terms (except insofar as enforceability may be limited by
applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors’ rights generally, or by
principles governing the availability of equitable remedies).
C-1
(c)          The execution and delivery of this Agreement by such Stockholder does not, and the performance of this
Agreement by such Stockholder will not, (i) if such Stockholder is a corporation or limited liability company, conflict with
the certificate or articles of incorporation, certificate of formation or limited liability company agreement or bylaws, or
similar organizational documents of such Stockholder as presently in effect (in the case of a Stockholder that is a legal
entity), (ii) conflict with or violate any judgment, order, decree, statute, law, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to
such Stockholder or by which it is bound or affected, (iii)(A) result in any breach of or constitute a default (or an event
that with notice or lapse of time or both would become a default) under, (B) give to any other person any rights of
termination, amendment, acceleration or cancellation of, or (C) result in the creation of any pledge, claim, lien, charge,
encumbrance or security interest of any kind or nature whatsoever upon any of the properties or assets of the
Stockholder under, any agreement, contract, indenture, note or instrument to which such Stockholder is a party or by
which it is bound or affected, except for such breaches, defaults or other occurrences that would not prevent or
materially delay the performance by such Stockholder of any of such Stockholder’s obligations under this Agreement,
or (iv) except for applicable requirements, if any, of the Exchange Act, the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), the New York Stock Exchange Market (the “NYSE”) or the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements
Act of 1976, as amended (the “HSR Act”), require any filing by such Stockholder with, or any permit, authorization,
consent or approval of, any governmental or regulatory authority, except where the failure to make such filing or obtain
such permit, authorization, consent or approval would not prevent or materially delay the performance by the
Stockholder of any of such Stockholder’s obligations under this Agreement.
(d)          The Shares and the certificates representing the Shares owned by such Stockholder are now and at all times
during the term hereof will be held by such Stockholder, or by a nominee or custodian for the benefit of such
Stockholder, free and clear of all pledges, liens, charges, claims, security interests, proxies, voting trusts or agreements,
understandings or arrangements or any other encumbrances whatsoever, except for any such encumbrances or
proxies arising hereunder or under applicable federal and state securities laws or under the agreements set forth on
Schedule B hereto. Such Stockholder owns of record or beneficially no shares of Company Common Stock other than
such Stockholder’s Shares.
(e)          As of the date hereof, neither such Stockholder, nor any of its respective properties or assets is subject to any
order, writ, judgment, injunction, decree, determination or award that would prevent or delay the consummation of the
transactions contemplated hereby.
(f)          Such Stockholder understands and acknowledges that Pyramid is entering into, and causing Merger Subsidiary
to enter into, the Merger Agreement in reliance upon such Stockholder’s execution and delivery of this Agreement.
Section 2.       Representations and Warranties of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary. Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary
hereby jointly and severally represent and warrant to the Stockholders as follows:
(a)          Each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary is a corporation duly organized, validly existing and in good standing
under the laws of the jurisdiction of its incorporation. Each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary has all requisite power
and authority to execute and deliver this Agreement, to perform its obligations hereunder and to consummate the
transactions contemplated hereby, and has taken all necessary corporate action to authorize the execution, delivery
and performance of this Agreement. This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by each of Pyramid and
Merger Subsidiary and, assuming that this Agreement constitutes the legal, valid and binding obligation of the other
parties hereto, constitutes the legal, valid and binding obligation of each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary, enforceable
against each of them in accordance with the terms of this Agreement (except insofar as enforceability may be limited by
applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors’ rights generally, or by
principles governing the availability of equitable remedies).
C-2
(b)          The execution and delivery of this Agreement by each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary does not, and the
performance of this Agreement by each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary will not, (i) conflict with the articles or
certificate of incorporation or bylaws or similar organizational documents of each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary as
presently in effect, (ii) conflict with or violate any judgment, order, decree, statute, law, ordinance, rule or regulation
applicable to Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary or by which either is bound or affected, (iii) (A) result in any breach of or
constitute a default (or an event that with notice or lapse of time or both would become a default) under, (B) give to any
other person any rights of termination, amendment, acceleration or cancellation of, or (C) result in the creation of any
pledge, claim, lien, charge, encumbrance or security interest of any kind or nature whatsoever upon any of the
properties or assets of Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary under, any agreement, contract, indenture, note or instrument to
which Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary is a party or by which it is bound or affected, except for such breaches, defaults or
other occurrences that would not prevent or materially delay the performance by Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary of their
obligations under this Agreement, or (iv) except for applicable requirements, if any, of the Exchange Act, the Securities
Act, the NYSE or the HSR Act, require any filing by Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary with, or any permit, authorization,
consent or approval of, any governmental or regulatory authority, except where the failure to make such filing or obtain
such permit, authorization, consent or approval would not prevent or materially delay the performance by Pyramid or
Merger Subsidiary of their obligations under this Agreement.
(c)          As of the date hereof, neither Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary, nor any of their respective properties or assets is
subject to any order, writ, judgment, injunction, decree, determination or award that would prevent or delay the
consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby.
Section 3.       Covenants of the Stockholders. Each of the Stockholders, severally and not jointly, agrees as follows:
(a)          Such Stockholder shall not, except as contemplated by the terms of this Agreement, and except for the pledge
set forth in Schedule B, sell, transfer, pledge, assign or otherwise dispose of, or enter into any contract, option or other
arrangement (including any profit-sharing arrangement) or understanding with respect to the sale, transfer, pledge,
assignment or other disposition of, the Shares (including any options or warrants to purchase Company Common
Stock) to any person (any such action, a “Transfer”). For purposes of clarification, the term “Transfer” shall include,
without limitation, any short sale (including any “short sale against the box”), pledge, transfer, and the establishment of
any open “put equivalent position” within the meaning of Rule 16a-1(h) under the Exchange Act. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, (i) Transfers of Shares as bona fide gifts, (ii) distributions of Shares to partners, members, stockholders,
subsidiaries, affiliates, affiliated partnerships or other affiliated entities of the undersigned, (iii) Transfers of Shares by
will or intestacy, and (iv) Transfers of Shares to (A) members of the undersigned’s immediate family or (B) a trust, the
beneficiaries of which are the undersigned and/or members of the undersigned’s immediate family, shall not be
prohibited by this Agreement; provided that in the case of any such transfer or distribution pursuant to clause (i), (ii), (iii)
or (iv), each donee or distributee shall execute and deliver to Pyramid a valid and binding counterpart to this Agreement.
(b)          Such Stockholder shall not, except as contemplated by the terms of this Agreement (i) enter into any voting
arrangement, whether by proxy, voting agreement, voting trust, power-of-attorney or otherwise, with respect to the
Shares or (ii) take any other action that would in any way restrict, limit or interfere with the performance of his, her or its
obligations hereunder or the transactions contemplated hereby or make any representation or warranty of such
Stockholder herein untrue or incorrect in any material respect.
(c)          At any meeting of the stockholders of the Company called to vote upon the Merger or in connection with any
stockholder consent in respect of a vote on the Merger, the Merger Agreement or any other transaction contemplated by
the Merger Agreement or at any adjournment thereof or in any other circumstances upon which a vote, consent or other
approval (including by written consent) with respect to such matters is sought, each Stockholder shall vote (or cause to
be voted), or shall consent, execute a consent or cause to be executed a consent in respect of, such Stockholder’s
Shares in favor of the Merger, the adoption by the Company of the Merger Agreement and the approval of any other
transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
C-3
(d)          Such Stockholder agrees to permit Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary to publish and disclose in the Proxy
Statement and related filings under the securities laws such Stockholder’s identity and ownership of Shares and the
nature of its commitments, arrangements and understandings under this Agreement and any other information required
by applicable law.
Section 4.       Grant of Irrevocable Proxy; Appointment of Proxy.
(a)          Each Stockholder hereby irrevocably grants to, and appoints, Michael D. Herman and any other individual who
shall hereafter be designated by Pyramid, such Stockholder’s proxy and attorney-in-fact (with full power of substitution),
for and in the name, place and stead of such Stockholder, to vote such Stockholder’s Shares, or grant a consent or
approval in respect of such Shares, at any meeting of stockholders of the Company or at any adjournment thereof or in
any other circumstances upon which their vote, consent or other approval is sought, in favor of the Merger, the
adoption by the Company of the Merger Agreement and the approval of the other transactions contemplated by the
Merger Agreement.
(b)          Each Stockholder represents that any proxies heretofore given in respect of such Stockholder’s Shares are not
irrevocable, and that any such proxies are hereby revoked.
(c)          Each Stockholder hereby affirms that the irrevocable proxy set forth in this Section 4 is given in connection with
the execution of the Merger Agreement, and that such irrevocable proxy is given to secure the performance of the
duties of such Stockholder under this Agreement. Such Stockholder hereby further affirms that the irrevocable proxy is
coupled with an interest and may under no circumstances be revoked, subject to Section 7 herein. Such Stockholder
hereby ratifies and confirms all that such irrevocable proxy may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof. Such
irrevocable proxy is executed and intended to be irrevocable in accordance with applicable law. Such irrevocable proxy
shall be valid until the termination of this Agreement pursuant to Section 7 herein.
Section 5.       Adjustments Upon Share Issuances, Changes in Capitalization. In the event of any change in Company
Common Stock or in the number of outstanding shares of Company Common Stock by reason of a stock dividend,
subdivision, reclassification, recapitalization, split, combination, exchange of shares or other similar event or
transaction or any other change in the corporate or capital structure of the Company (including, without limitation, the
declaration or payment of an extraordinary dividend of cash, securities or other property), and consequently the
number of Shares changes or is otherwise adjusted, this Agreement and the obligations hereunder shall attach to any
additional shares of Company Common Stock, Stockholder Rights or other securities or rights of the Company issued
to or acquired by each of the Stockholders.
Section 6.       Further Assurances. Each Stockholder will, from time to time, execute and deliver, or cause to be executed
and delivered, such additional or further transfers, assignments, endorsements, consents and other instruments as
Pyramid or Merger Subsidiary may reasonably request for the purpose of effectively carrying out the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement and to vest the power to vote such Stockholder’s Shares as contemplated by Section 3
herein.
Section 7.       Termination. This Agreement, and all rights and obligations of the parties hereunder, shall terminate upon
the earlier of (a) the Effective Time; (b) the date upon which the Merger Agreement is terminated pursuant to Section 7.01
thereof, or (c) with respect to any Stockholder, upon its delivery of written notice of termination to Pyramid following any
amendment to the Merger Agreement to decrease the Merger Consideration or otherwise alter the Merger Agreement in
a manner adverse to the Stockholder in any material respect unless such amendment has been consented to by
stockholder in writing prior to such amendment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Sections 7, 8 and 9 hereof shall survive
any termination of this Agreement.
Section 8.       Action in Stockholder Capacity Only. No Stockholder executing this Agreement who is or becomes during
the term hereof a director or officer of the Company makes any agreement or understanding herein in his or her
capacity as such director or officer. Each Stockholder signs solely in his or her capacity as the record holder and
beneficial owner of, or the trustee of a trust whose beneficiaries are the beneficial owners of, such Stockholder’s Shares
and nothing herein shall limit or affect any actions or omissions taken by or fiduciary duties of, a Stockholder or any of
its affiliates, in his or her capacity as an officer or director of the Company to the extent permitted by the Merger
Agreement and applicable law.
C-4
Section 9.       Miscellaneous.
(a)          Assignment. Neither this Agreement nor any of the rights, interests or obligations hereunder shall be assigned
by any of the parties without the prior written consent of the other parties, except that Merger Subsidiary may assign, in
its sole discretion, any or all of its rights, interests and obligations hereunder to Pyramid or to any direct or indirect
wholly owned subsidiary of Pyramid. Subject to the preceding sentence, this Agreement will be binding upon, inure to
the benefit of and be enforceable by the parties and their respective successors and assigns. Each Stockholder agrees
that this Agreement and the obligations of such Stockholder hereunder shall attach to such Stockholder’s Shares and
shall be binding upon any person or entity to which legal or beneficial ownership of such Shares shall pass, whether by
operation of law or otherwise, including without limitation such Stockholder’s heirs, guardians, administrators or
successors.
(b)          Expenses. All costs and expenses incurred in connection with this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby shall be paid by the party incurring such expenses.
(c)          Amendments. This Agreement may not be amended except vis-à-vis Pyramid and a Stockholder by an
instrument in writing signed by Pyramid and the applicable Stockholder and in compliance with applicable law.
(d)          Notice. All notices and other communications hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed duly given if
delivered personally, mailed by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested), delivered by Federal Express or
other nationally recognized overnight courier service or sent via facsimile to the parties at the following addresses (or at
such other address for a party as shall be specified by like notice):
(i)          if to Pyramid:
Pyramid Oil Company
2008 Twenty-First Street
Bakersfield, CA 93301
Attention:         Michael D. Herman
Facsimile:        (661) 325-0100
with a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
TroyGould PC
1801 Century Park East, 16th Floor
Los Angeles, CA 90067
Attention:         William D. Gould
Facsimile:        (310) 201-4746
and
(ii)         if to a Stockholder, to the address set forth under the name of such Stockholder on Schedule A hereto
with a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
C-5
Jones & Keller, P.C.
1999 Broadway, Suite 3150
Denver, CO 80202
Attention:         Reid A. Godbolt
Facsimile:        (303) 573-8133
(e)          Interpretation. The headings contained in this Agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not affect in
any way the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement. In this Agreement, unless a contrary intention appears, (i) the
words “herein,” “hereof” and “hereunder” and other words of similar import refer to this Agreement as a whole and not
to any particular Section or other subdivision and (ii) reference to any Section means such Section hereof. No provision
of this Agreement shall be interpreted or construed against any party hereto solely because such party or its legal
representative drafted such provision.
(f)          Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an
original but all of which shall be considered one and the same agreement. Delivery of an executed counterpart signature
page of this Agreement by facsimile or by e-mail of a PDF document is as effective as executing and delivering this
Agreement in the presence of the other parties.
(g)          Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement of the parties and supersedes all prior
agreements and undertakings, both written and oral, between the parties, or any of them, with respect to the subject
matter hereof, specifically including the Original Voting Agreement, and except as otherwise expressly provided herein,
is not intended to confer upon any other person any rights or remedies hereunder.
(h)          Governing Law; Consent to Jurisdiction; Waiver of Trial by Jury. This Agreement shall be governed by, and
construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of Delaware, without regard to laws that may be applicable under
conflicts of laws principles. Each of the parties hereto irrevocably and unconditionally (i) agrees that any suit, action or
other legal proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement or any of the agreements delivered in connection
herewith or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby shall be brought in the state courts of the State of
Delaware (or, if such courts do not have jurisdiction or do not accept jurisdiction, in the United States District Court
located in the State of Delaware), (ii) consents to the jurisdiction of any such court in any such suit, action or
proceeding, and (iii) waives any objection that such party may have to the laying of venue of any such suit, action or
proceeding in any such court. Each of the parties hereto agrees that a final judgment in any such action or proceeding
shall be conclusive and may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other manner provided
by law. Each party to this Agreement irrevocably consents to service of process in the manner provided for notices in
Section 9(d). Nothing in this Agreement will affect the right of any party to this Agreement to serve process in any other
manner permitted by law.
EACH PARTY ACKNOWLEDGES AND AGREES THAT ANY CONTROVERSY WHICH MAY ARISE UNDER THIS
AGREEMENT IS LIKELY TO INVOLVE COMPLICATED AND DIFFICULT ISSUES, AND THEREFORE IT HEREBY
IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY WAIVES ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY JURY IN RESPECT OF
ANY LITIGATION DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT AND ANY OF
THE AGREEMENTS DELIVERED IN CONNECTION HEREWITH OR THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY
OR THEREBY. EACH PARTY CERTIFIES AND ACKNOWLEDGES THAT (A) NO REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR
ATTORNEY OF ANY OTHER PARTY HAS REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY OR OTHERWISE, THAT SUCH OTHER PARTY
WOULD NOT, IN THE EVENT OF LITIGATION, SEEK TO ENFORCE EITHER OF SUCH WAIVERS, (B) IT UNDERSTANDS
AND HAS CONSIDERED THE IMPLICATIONS OF SUCH WAIVERS, (C) IT MAKES SUCH WAIVERS VOLUNTARILY, AND
(D) IT HAS BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT BY, AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVERS
AND CERTIFICATIONS IN THIS SECTION 9(h).
C-6
(i)          Specific Performance. The parties to this Agreement agree that irreparable damage would occur in the event that
any provision of this Agreement was not performed in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and that Pyramid
and Merger Subsidiary shall be entitled to specific performance of the terms of this Agreement in addition to any other
remedy at law or equity.
(j)          Severability. If any term, provision, covenant or restriction of this Agreement is held by a court of competent
jurisdiction or other authority to be invalid, void, unenforceable or against its regulatory policy, the remainder of the
terms, provisions, covenants and restrictions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way
be affected, impaired or invalidated.
(k)          Several Liability. Each party to this Agreement enters into this Agreement solely on its own behalf, each such
party shall solely be severally liable for any breaches of this Agreement by such party and in no event shall any party be
liable for breaches of this Agreement by any other party hereto.
(l)          Non-Recourse. No past, present or future director, officer, employee, incorporator, member, partner, stockholder,
agent, attorney, representative or affiliate of any Stockholder hereto or of any of their respective affiliates shall have any
liability (whether in contract or in tort) for any obligations or liabilities of such party arising under, in connection with or
related to this Agreement or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, the transactions contemplated
hereby; provided, however, that nothing in this Section 9(l) shall limit any liability of any Stockholder hereto for its
breaches of the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
(m)          Waiver. No failure or delay by any party in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a
waiver thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise thereof preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the
exercise of any other right, power or privilege. The rights and remedies herein provided shall be cumulative and not
exclusive of any rights or remedies provided by applicable law.
[Signature Page Follows]
C-7
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of Pyramid and Merger Subsidiary has caused this Agreement to be signed by its officer
thereunto duly authorized and each Stockholder has signed this Agreement, all as of the date first written above.
PYRAMID:
  
 Pyramid Oil Company,
 a California corporation
  
 By:
 Name:Michael D. Herman
 Title: Chairman, Interim President and
/s/ Michael D. Herman
Chief Executive Officer
MERGER SUBSIDIARY:
  
 Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc.,
 a Delaware corporation
  
 By:
 Name:Michael D. Herman
 Title: Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
/s/ Michael D. Herman
SIGNATURE PAGE TO THE
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
STOCKHOLDER SIGNATURE PAGE
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of Pyramid and Subsidiary has caused this Agreement to be signed by its officer
thereunto duly authorized and each Stockholder has signed this Agreement, all as of the date first written above.
/s/ Sam L. Banks
STOCKHOLDER:
  
 By:
 Name:Sam L. Banks
  
 STOCKHOLDER:
  
 By:
 Name:James W. Christmas
  
 STOCKHOLDER:
  
 By:
 Name:Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ James W. Christmas
STOCKHOLDER:
/s/ Richard K. Stoneburner
/s/ Ben T. Morris
By:
 Name:Ben T. Morris
  
 STOCKHOLDER:
  
 By:
 Name:Richard K. Stoneburner
  
 STOCKHOLDER:
  
 By:
 Name:Richard W. Volk
/s/ Richard W. Volk
SIGNATURE PAGE TO THE
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AGREEMENT
SCHEDULE A
OWNERSHIP OF SHARES
Name and Address of
Stockholder
Number of Company
 
Restricted Shares
Beneficially Owned
339
11
Sam L. Banks 
1177 West Loop South 
Suite 1825 
Houston, Texas 77027 
 
James W. Christmas 
1177 West Loop South 
Suite 1825 
Houston, Texas 77027 
 
Frank A. Lodzinski 
110 Cypress Station Drive Suite 220 
Houston, Texas 77090 
 
Ben T. Morris 
c/o Sanders Morris Harris 
600 Travis, Suite 5900 
Houston, Texas 77002-2909
11
11
Richard K. Stoneburner 
1177 West Loop South 
Suite 1825 
Houston, Texas 77027
11
Number of Shares of
Company
 
Common Stock
Beneficially Owned
Number of Shares of
Series A Preferred
  
Stock Beneficially
Owned
53,967
(1)
(1)
341
1,638
130
162
109
Number of Shares
of Series B
  
Preferred Stock
Beneficially
Owned
(2)
236
Richard W. Volk
1177 West Loop South 
Suite 1825 
Houston, Texas 77027
(1) Pending.
(2) Shares held by Azure Energy, LLC.
SCHEDULE B
LIST OF AGREEMENTS
None.
Annex D
February 5, 2014 (except for the second paragraph hereof)
Board of Directors
Pyramid Oil Company
2008 21st Street
Bakersfield, California 93301
RE: Pyramid Oil Company | Fairness Opinion
Members of the Board of Directors:
Roth Capital Partners, LLC (“Roth”) understands that Pyramid Oil Company, a California corporation (the “Parent”),
Pyramid Delaware Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Parent (“Delaware
Merger Sub”), Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Delaware
Merger Sub (“Merger Sub”), and Yuma Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Target”), intend to enter into an
Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization (the “Merger Agreement”) pursuant to which, among other things, (i)
Parent will be merged with and into the Delaware Merger Sub and Parent will cease to exist and Delaware Merger Sub will
be the surviving corporation of such merger (the “Surviving Corporation”) and (ii) Merger Sub will be merged with and
into the Target (the “Merger”), and (A) each outstanding share of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of Target
(“Target Common Stock”) will be converted into the right to receive 757.165 shares (the “Exchange Ratio”) of common
stock, par value $0.001 per share, of the Surviving Corporation (“Pyramid Delaware Common Stock”), (B) each
outstanding share of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, of Target will be converted into the right to
receive a number of shares of Pyramid Delaware Common Stock equal to the product obtained by multiplying (I) the
number of shares of Target Common Stock into which one share of Series A Preferred Stock is convertible immediately
prior to the Merger Effective Time (as defined in the Merger Agreement) by (II) the Exchange Ratio and (C) each
outstanding share of Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, of Target will be converted into the right to
receive a number of shares of Pyramid Delaware Common Stock equal to the product obtained by multiplying (III) the
number of shares of Target Common Stock into which one share of Series B Preferred Stock is convertible immediately
prior to the Merger Effective Time by (IV) the Exchange Ratio, and Merger Sub will cease to exist and Target will continue
as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Surviving Corporation.
We further understand that on August 1, 2014, the parties entered into an Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan
of Merger and Reorganization (the “Amendment”) for the sole purpose of eliminating the reincorporation of Pyramid
from California to Delaware (set forth in (i) in the immediately preceding paragraph and hence Parent will be the
“Surviving Corporation”). The Amendment did not change the economic terms or the Exchange Ratio as described
above.
You have asked us to render our opinion with respect to the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Parent and its
shareholders of the Exchange Ratio.
For purposes of the opinion set forth herein, we have, among other things, reviewed a draft of the Merger Agreement
received by us on February 4, 2014 and drafts of certain related documents, and also:
(i)reviewed certain publicly available business and financial information of Parent that we believe to be relevant to our inquiry;
(ii)
reviewed certain internal financial statements and other financial and operating data concerning Parent and Target,
respectively;
(iii)reviewed certain financial forecasts relating to Target prepared by the management of Target (the “Target Forecasts”);
ROTH Capital Partners, LLC
888 San Clemente Drive | Newport Beach, CA 92660   | 800.678.9147 | www.roth.com |
Member FINRA/SIPC
Pyramid Oil Company | Fairness Opinion
February 5, 2014
Page 2 of 3
(iv)
discussed the past and current operations, financial condition and prospects of each of Target and Parent with management
of Target and Parent, respectively, including the assessments of the management of Parent as to the liquidity needs of, and
financing alternatives and other capital resources available to, Parent;
(v)
participated in certain discussions among management of Parent and Target regarding their assessment of the strategic
rationale for, and the potential benefits of, the Merger;
(vi)reviewed the reported prices and trading activity for common stock, no par value, of Parent (the “Parent Common Stock”);
(vii)
compared the financial performance of Target and Parent, respectively, and the prices and trading activity of Parent Common
Stock with that of certain publicly traded companies we deemed relevant;
(viii)
compared certain financial terms of the Merger to financial terms, to the extent publicly available, of certain other business
combination transactions we deemed relevant;
(ix)participated in discussions and negotiations among representatives of Parent, Target and their respective advisors; and
(x) performed such other analyses and considered such other factors as we have deemed appropriate.
We have also considered such other information, financial studies, analyses and investigations, and financial, economic
and market criteria which we deemed relevant.
In conducting our review and arriving at our opinion, with your consent, we have not independently verified any of the
foregoing information and we have assumed and relied upon such information being accurate and complete in all
material respects, and we have further relied upon the assurances of management of Parent that they are not aware of
any facts that would make any of the information reviewed by us inaccurate, incomplete or misleading in any material
respect. With respect to the Target Forecasts, we have assumed, upon the advice of Target and at the direction of
Parent, that they have been reasonably prepared on bases reflecting the best currently available estimates and good
faith judgments of the management of Target as to the future financial performance of Target. We have not been
engaged to assess the achievability of any projections or the assumptions on which they were based, and we express
no view as to such projections or assumptions. In addition, we have not assumed any responsibility for any
independent valuation or appraisal of the assets or liabilities, including any ongoing litigation and administrative
investigations, of Target, nor have we been furnished with any such valuation or appraisal. In addition, we have not
assumed any obligation to conduct, nor have we conducted, any physical inspection of the properties or facilities of
Target.
We also have assumed, with your consent, that the Merger will be consummated in accordance with the terms set forth
in the Merger Agreement and in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended
(the “Securities Act”), the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and all other applicable federal, state and local
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances, that the representations and warranties of each party in the Agreement are
true and correct, that each party will perform on a timely basis all covenants and agreements required to be performed
by it under such agreement and that all conditions to the consummation of the Merger will be satisfied without waiver
thereof. We have further assumed that the Merger Agreement when signed will conform to the draft Merger Agreement
provided to us on February 4, 2014 in all respects material to our analysis, and that the Merger will be consummated in
all material respects as described in the draft Merger Agreement provided to us. We have also assumed that all
governmental, regulatory and other consents and approvals contemplated by the Merger Agreement will be obtained
and that, in the course of obtaining any of those consents and approvals, no modification, delay, limitation, restriction or
condition will be imposed or waivers made that would have an adverse effect on Parent or Target or on the
contemplated benefits of the Merger. Finally, we have assumed, with your consent, that the Merger will be treated as a
tax-free reorganization for federal income tax purposes.
Pyramid Oil Company | Fairness Opinion
February 5, 2014
Page 3 of 3
Our opinion addresses only the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Parent of the Exchange Ratio, and our opinion
does not in any manner address any other aspect or implication of the Merger or any agreement, arrangement or
understanding entered into in connection with the Merger or otherwise, including, without limitation, the fairness of the
amount or nature of, or any other aspect relating to, any compensation to any officers, directors or employees of any
party to the Merger, or class of such persons, relative to the Exchange Ratio or otherwise. Our opinion also does not
address the relative merits of the Merger as compared to any alternative business strategies that might exist for Parent,
the underlying business decision of Parent to proceed with the Merger, or the effects of any other transaction in which
Parent might engage. The issuance of this opinion was not approved by an internal committee. Our opinion is
necessarily based on economic, market and other conditions as they exist and can be evaluated on, and the information
made available to us on, the date hereof. We express no opinion as to the underlying valuation, future performance or
long-term viability of Parent. Further, we express no opinion as to what the value of the shares of Parent Common Stock
actually will be when issued to holders of Target Common Stock pursuant to the Merger or the prices at which shares of
Parent Common Stock will trade at any time. It should be understood that, although subsequent developments may
affect our opinion, we do not have any obligation to update, revise or reaffirm our opinion and we expressly disclaim any
responsibility to do so.
We have acted as financial advisor to Parent in connection with the Merger and will receive a fee for our services, a
significant portion of which is contingent upon the consummation of the Merger. We also became entitled to receive a
fee upon the rendering of our opinion. Parent has agreed to indemnify us for certain liabilities and other items arising
out our engagement.
Roth, as part of its investment banking business, is continually engaged in the valuation of businesses and their
securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions, negotiated underwritings, secondary distributions of listed and
unlisted securities, private placements and valuations for estate, corporate and other purposes. We and our affiliates are
currently providing and may in the future provide investment banking and other financial services to Parent and its
affiliates for which we and our affiliates have received and would expect to receive compensation. We are a full service
securities firm engaged in securities trading and brokerage activities, as well as providing investment banking and other
financial services. In the ordinary course of business, we and our affiliates may acquire, hold or sell, for our and our
affiliates’ own accounts and for the accounts of customers, equity, debt and other securities and financial instruments
(including bank loans and other obligations) of Parent, and, accordingly, may at any time hold a long or a short position
in such securities.
It is understood that this letter is provided for the information of the Board of Directors of Parent in connection with its
evaluation of the Merger and does not constitute a recommendation to any stockholder as to how such stockholder
should vote or act on any matter relating to the Merger. This opinion may not be reproduced without our prior written
consent. In furnishing this opinion, we do not admit that we are experts within the meaning of the term “experts” as used
in the Securities Act and the rules and regulations thereunder, nor do we admit that this opinion constitutes a report or
valuation within the meaning of Section 11 of the Securities Act. Parent may reproduce this written opinion in full in any
proxy statement or other filing required to be made by Parent or Delaware Merger Sub with the Securities and Exchange
Commission in connection with the Merger, and in materials required to be delivered to stockholders of Parent or
Delaware Merger Sub which are part of such filings.
On the basis of and subject to the foregoing, and such other factors as we deemed relevant, we are of the opinion as of
the date hereof that the Exchange Ratio is fair to Parent and its shareholders, from a financial point of view.
Very truly yours,
  
 Roth Capital Partners, LLC
Annex E
Section 262 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware
§ 262. Appraisal rights.
(a) Any stockholder of a corporation of this State who holds shares of stock on the date of the making of a demand
pursuant to subsection (d) of this section with respect to such shares, who continuously holds such shares through the
effective date of the merger or consolidation, who has otherwise complied with subsection (d) of this section and who
has neither voted in favor of the merger or consolidation nor consented thereto in writing pursuant to § 228 of this title
shall be entitled to an appraisal by the Court of Chancery of the fair value of the stockholder’s shares of stock under the
circumstances described in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. As used in this section, the word “stockholder”
means a holder of record of stock in a corporation; the words “stock” and “share” mean and include what is ordinarily
meant by those words; and the words “depository receipt” mean a receipt or other instrument issued by a depository
representing an interest in 1 or more shares, or fractions thereof, solely of stock of a corporation, which stock is
deposited with the depository.
(b) Appraisal rights shall be available for the shares of any class or series of stock of a constituent corporation in a
merger or consolidation to be effected pursuant to § 251 (other than a merger effected pursuant to § 251(g) of this title
and, subject to paragraph (b)(3) of this section, § 251(h) of this title), § 252, § 254, § 255, § 256, § 257, § 258, § 263 or § 264
of this title:
(1) Provided, however, that, except as expressly provided in § 363(b) of this title, no appraisal rights under this section
shall be available for the shares of any class or series of stock, which stock, or depository receipts in respect thereof, at
the record date fixed to determine the stockholders entitled to receive notice of the meeting of stockholders to act upon
the agreement of merger or consolidation, were either: (i) listed on a national securities exchange or (ii) held of record by
more than 2,000 holders; and further provided that no appraisal rights shall be available for any shares of stock of the
constituent corporation surviving a merger if the merger did not require for its approval the vote of the stockholders of
the surviving corporation as provided in § 251(f) of this title.
(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (b)(1) of this section, appraisal rights under this section shall be available for the shares
of any class or series of stock of a constituent corporation if the holders thereof are required by the terms of an
agreement of merger or consolidation pursuant to §§ 251, 252, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 263 and 264 of this title to accept
for such stock anything except:
a. Shares of stock of the corporation surviving or resulting from such merger or consolidation, or depository receipts in
respect thereof;
b. Shares of stock of any other corporation, or depository receipts in respect thereof, which shares of stock (or
depository receipts in respect thereof) or depository receipts at the effective date of the merger or consolidation will be
either listed on a national securities exchange or held of record by more than 2,000 holders;
c. Cash in lieu of fractional shares or fractional depository receipts described in the foregoing paragraphs (b)(2)a. and b.
of this section; or
d. Any combination of the shares of stock, depository receipts and cash in lieu of fractional shares or fractional
depository receipts described in the foregoing paragraphs (b)(2)a., b. and c. of this section.
(3) In the event all of the stock of a subsidiary Delaware corporation party to a merger effected under § 251(h), § 253 or §
267 of this title is not owned by the parent immediately prior to the merger, appraisal rights shall be available for the
shares of the subsidiary Delaware corporation.
(4) In the event of an amendment to a corporation’s certificate of incorporation contemplated by § 363(a) of this title,
appraisal rights shall be available as contemplated by § 363(b) of this title, and the procedures of this section, including
those set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, shall apply as nearly as practicable, with the word
“amendment” substituted for the words “merger or consolidation,” and the word “corporation” substituted for the
words “constituent corporation” and/or “surviving or resulting corporation.”
(c) Any corporation may provide in its certificate of incorporation that appraisal rights under this section shall be
available for the shares of any class or series of its stock as a result of an amendment to its certificate of incorporation,
any merger or consolidation in which the corporation is a constituent corporation or the sale of all or substantially all of
the assets of the corporation. If the certificate of incorporation contains such a provision, the procedures of this section,
including those set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, shall apply as nearly as is practicable.
E-1
(d) Appraisal rights shall be perfected as follows:
(1) If a proposed merger or consolidation for which appraisal rights are provided under this section is to be submitted
for approval at a meeting of stockholders, the corporation, not less than 20 days prior to the meeting, shall notify each of
its stockholders who was such on the record date for notice of such meeting (or such members who received notice in
accordance with § 255(c) of this title) with respect to shares for which appraisal rights are available pursuant to
subsection (b) or (c) of this section that appraisal rights are available for any or all of the shares of the constituent
corporations, and shall include in such notice a copy of this section and, if 1 of the constituent corporations is a
nonstock corporation, a copy of § 114 of this title. Each stockholder electing to demand the appraisal of such
stockholder’s shares shall deliver to the corporation, before the taking of the vote on the merger or consolidation, a
written demand for appraisal of such stockholder’s shares. Such demand will be sufficient if it reasonably informs the
corporation of the identity of the stockholder and that the stockholder intends thereby to demand the appraisal of such
stockholder’s shares. A proxy or vote against the merger or consolidation shall not constitute such a demand. A
stockholder electing to take such action must do so by a separate written demand as herein provided. Within 10 days
after the effective date of such merger or consolidation, the surviving or resulting corporation shall notify each
stockholder of each constituent corporation who has complied with this subsection and has not voted in favor of or
consented to the merger or consolidation of the date that the merger or consolidation has become effective; or
(2) If the merger or consolidation was approved pursuant to § 228, § 251(h), § 253, or § 267 of this title, then either a
constituent corporation before the effective date of the merger or consolidation or the surviving or resulting corporation
within 10 days thereafter shall notify each of the holders of any class or series of stock of such constituent corporation
who are entitled to appraisal rights of the approval of the merger or consolidation and that appraisal rights are available
for any or all shares of such class or series of stock of such constituent corporation, and shall include in such notice a
copy of this section and, if 1 of the constituent corporations is a nonstock corporation, a copy of § 114 of this title. Such
notice may, and, if given on or after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, shall, also notify such stockholders
of the effective date of the merger or consolidation. Any stockholder entitled to appraisal rights may, within 20 days after
the date of mailing of such notice or, in the case of a merger approved pursuant to § 251(h) of this title, within the later of
the consummation of the tender or exchange offer contemplated by § 251(h) of this title and 20 days after the date of
mailing of such notice, demand in writing from the surviving or resulting corporation the appraisal of such holder’s
shares. Such demand will be sufficient if it reasonably informs the corporation of the identity of the stockholder and that
the stockholder intends thereby to demand the appraisal of such holder’s shares. If such notice did not notify
stockholders of the effective date of the merger or consolidation, either (i) each such constituent corporation shall send
a second notice before the effective date of the merger or consolidation notifying each of the holders of any class or
series of stock of such constituent corporation that are entitled to appraisal rights of the effective date of the merger or
consolidation or (ii) the surviving or resulting corporation shall send such a second notice to all such holders on or
within 10 days after such effective date; provided, however, that if such second notice is sent more than 20 days
following the sending of the first notice or, in the case of a merger approved pursuant to § 251(h) of this title, later than
the later of the consummation of the tender or exchange offer contemplated by § 251(h) of this title and 20 days
following the sending of the first notice, such second notice need only be sent to each stockholder who is entitled to
appraisal rights and who has demanded appraisal of such holder’s shares in accordance with this subsection. An
affidavit of the secretary or assistant secretary or of the transfer agent of the corporation that is required to give either
notice that such notice has been given shall, in the absence of fraud, be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein.
For purposes of determining the stockholders entitled to receive either notice, each constituent corporation may fix, in
advance, a record date that shall be not more than 10 days prior to the date the notice is given, provided, that if the
notice is given on or after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, the record date shall be such effective date. If
no record date is fixed and the notice is given prior to the effective date, the record date shall be the close of business
on the day next preceding the day on which the notice is given.
(e) Within 120 days after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, the surviving or resulting corporation or any
stockholder who has complied with subsections (a) and (d) of this section hereof and who is otherwise entitled to
appraisal rights, may commence an appraisal proceeding by filing a petition in the Court of Chancery demanding a
determination of the value of the stock of all such stockholders. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at any time within 60
days after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, any stockholder who has not commenced an appraisal
proceeding or joined that proceeding as a named party shall have the right to withdraw such stockholder’s demand for
appraisal and to accept the terms offered upon the merger or consolidation. Within 120 days after the effective date of
the merger or consolidation, any stockholder who has complied with the requirements of subsections (a) and (d) of this
section hereof, upon written request, shall be entitled to receive from the corporation surviving the merger or resulting
from the consolidation a statement setting forth the aggregate number of shares not voted in favor of the merger or
consolidation and with respect to which demands for appraisal have been received and the aggregate number of
holders of such shares. Such written statement shall be mailed to the stockholder within 10 days after such
stockholder’s written request for such a statement is received by the surviving or resulting corporation or within 10 days
after expiration of the period for delivery of demands for appraisal under subsection (d) of this section hereof, whichever
is later. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a person who is the beneficial owner of shares of such stock
held either in a voting trust or by a nominee on behalf of such person may, in such person’s own name, file a petition or
request from the corporation the statement described in this subsection.
E-2
(f) Upon the filing of any such petition by a stockholder, service of a copy thereof shall be made upon the surviving or
resulting corporation, which shall within 20 days after such service file in the office of the Register in Chancery in which
the petition was filed a duly verified list containing the names and addresses of all stockholders who have demanded
payment for their shares and with whom agreements as to the value of their shares have not been reached by the
surviving or resulting corporation. If the petition shall be filed by the surviving or resulting corporation, the petition shall
be accompanied by such a duly verified list. The Register in Chancery, if so ordered by the Court, shall give notice of the
time and place fixed for the hearing of such petition by registered or certified mail to the surviving or resulting
corporation and to the stockholders shown on the list at the addresses therein stated. Such notice shall also be given
by 1 or more publications at least 1 week before the day of the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation published
in the City of Wilmington, Delaware or such publication as the Court deems advisable. The forms of the notices by mail
and by publication shall be approved by the Court, and the costs thereof shall be borne by the surviving or resulting
corporation.
(g) At the hearing on such petition, the Court shall determine the stockholders who have complied with this section and
who have become entitled to appraisal rights. The Court may require the stockholders who have demanded an appraisal
for their shares and who hold stock represented by certificates to submit their certificates of stock to the Register in
Chancery for notation thereon of the pendency of the appraisal proceedings; and if any stockholder fails to comply with
such direction, the Court may dismiss the proceedings as to such stockholder.
(h) After the Court determines the stockholders entitled to an appraisal, the appraisal proceeding shall be conducted in
accordance with the rules of the Court of Chancery, including any rules specifically governing appraisal proceedings.
Through such proceeding the Court shall determine the fair value of the shares exclusive of any element of value
arising from the accomplishment or expectation of the merger or consolidation, together with interest, if any, to be paid
upon the amount determined to be the fair value. In determining such fair value, the Court shall take into account all
relevant factors. Unless the Court in its discretion determines otherwise for good cause shown, interest from the
effective date of the merger through the date of payment of the judgment shall be compounded quarterly and shall
accrue at 5% over the Federal Reserve discount rate (including any surcharge) as established from time to time during
the period between the effective date of the merger and the date of payment of the judgment. Upon application by the
surviving or resulting corporation or by any stockholder entitled to participate in the appraisal proceeding, the Court
may, in its discretion, proceed to trial upon the appraisal prior to the final determination of the stockholders entitled to
an appraisal. Any stockholder whose name appears on the list filed by the surviving or resulting corporation pursuant
to subsection (f) of this section and who has submitted such stockholder’s certificates of stock to the Register in
Chancery, if such is required, may participate fully in all proceedings until it is finally determined that such stockholder
is not entitled to appraisal rights under this section.
(i) The Court shall direct the payment of the fair value of the shares, together with interest, if any, by the surviving or
resulting corporation to the stockholders entitled thereto. Payment shall be so made to each such stockholder, in the
case of holders of uncertificated stock forthwith, and the case of holders of shares represented by certificates upon the
surrender to the corporation of the certificates representing such stock. The Court’s decree may be enforced as other
decrees in the Court of Chancery may be enforced, whether such surviving or resulting corporation be a corporation of
this State or of any state.
(j) The costs of the proceeding may be determined by the Court and taxed upon the parties as the Court deems
equitable in the circumstances. Upon application of a stockholder, the Court may order all or a portion of the expenses
incurred by any stockholder in connection with the appraisal proceeding, including, without limitation, reasonable
attorney’s fees and the fees and expenses of experts, to be charged pro rata against the value of all the shares entitled
to an appraisal.
(k) From and after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, no stockholder who has demanded appraisal rights
as provided in subsection (d) of this section shall be entitled to vote such stock for any purpose or to receive payment
of dividends or other distributions on the stock (except dividends or other distributions payable to stockholders of
record at a date which is prior to the effective date of the merger or consolidation); provided, however, that if no petition
for an appraisal shall be filed within the time provided in subsection (e) of this section, or if such stockholder shall
deliver to the surviving or resulting corporation a written withdrawal of such stockholder’s demand for an appraisal and
an acceptance of the merger or consolidation, either within 60 days after the effective date of the merger or
consolidation as provided in subsection (e) of this section or thereafter with the written approval of the corporation, then
the right of such stockholder to an appraisal shall cease. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no appraisal proceeding in the
Court of Chancery shall be dismissed as to any stockholder without the approval of the Court, and such approval may
be conditioned upon such terms as the Court deems just; provided, however that this provision shall not affect the right
of any stockholder who has not commenced an appraisal proceeding or joined that proceeding as a named party to
withdraw such stockholder’s demand for appraisal and to accept the terms offered upon the merger or consolidation
within 60 days after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, as set forth in subsection (e) of this section.
(l) The shares of the surviving or resulting corporation to which the shares of such objecting stockholders would have
been converted had they assented to the merger or consolidation shall have the status of authorized and unissued
shares of the surviving or resulting corporation.
E-3
Annex F
RESTATED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
OF
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
[-] and [-] hereby certify that:
1.     They are the duly elected and acting President and Corporate Secretary, respectively, of Pyramid Oil Company, a
California corporation (the “Corporation”).
2.     The Restated Articles of Incorporation of the Corporation, as amended to date, are hereby amended and restated to
read in their entirety as follows:
FIRST: The name of the Corporation is Yuma Energy, Inc.
SECOND: The purpose of the Corporation is to engage in any lawful act or activity for which a corporation may be
organized under the General Corporation Law of California other than the banking business, the trust company
business or the practice of a profession permitted to be incorporated by the California Corporations Code.
THIRD: The Corporation shall have perpetual existence.
FOURTH: The authorized number of directors of the Corporation shall be not less than four (4) nor more than seven (7),
and the exact number of directors within those limits shall be determined from time to time by a resolution which is duly
adopted by the Board of Directors of the Corporation in the manner provided in the Bylaws.
FIFTH: There shall be no right with respect to shares of stock of the Corporation to cumulate votes in the election of
directors.
SIXTH: The Corporation is authorized to issue two classes of stock, with no par value, designated Common Stock and
Preferred Stock. The total number of shares that the Corporation is authorized to issue is 310,000,000. The number of
shares of Common Stock that the Corporation is authorized to issue is 300,000,000, and the number of shares of
Preferred Stock that the Corporation is authorized to issue is 10,000,000. The holders of the Common Stock or Preferred
Stock shall have no preemptive rights to subscribe for or purchase any shares of any class of stock of the Corporation,
whether now or hereafter authorized. The Board of Directors of the Corporation is authorized to: (i) determine the
number of series into which shares of Preferred Stock may be divided; (ii) determine or alter the designations, rights,
preferences, privileges, qualifications, limitations and restrictions granted to or imposed upon any unissued Preferred
Stock or any wholly unissued series of Preferred Stock or any holders thereof; and (iii) fix the number of shares of each
such series and increase or decrease, within the limits stated in any resolution of the Board of Directors of the
Corporation originally fixing the number of shares constituting any series (but not below the number of such shares
then outstanding), the number of shares of any such series subsequent to the issuance of shares of that series.
SEVENTH: Effective upon the acceptance of this Restated Articles of Incorporation for filing by the Secretary of State of
the State of California (the “Effective Date”), and subject to the rights of holders of any series of Preferred Stock with
respect to the election of directors, the directors of the Corporation shall be divided into two classes as nearly equal in
size as is practicable, hereby designated Class I and Class II. The Board of Directors may assign members of the Board
of Directors already in office to such classes at the time such classification becomes effective. The term of office of the
initial Class I directors shall expire at the first regularly-scheduled annual meeting of shareholders following the
Effective Date and the term of office of the initial Class II directors shall expire at the second annual meeting of
shareholders following the Effective Date. At each annual meeting of shareholders, commencing with the first regularly-
scheduled annual meeting of shareholders following the Effective Date, each of the successors elected to replace the
directors of a Class whose term shall have expired at such annual meeting shall be elected to hold office until the
second annual meeting next succeeding his or her election and until his or her respective successor shall have been
duly elected and qualified.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this SEVENTH ARTICLE, and subject to the rights of holders of any series
of Preferred Stock with respect to the election of directors, each director shall serve until his or her successor is duly
elected and qualified or until his or her death, resignation, or removal. Subject to the rights of holders of any series of
Preferred Stock with respect to the election of directors, if the number of directors is hereafter changed, any newly
created directorships or decrease in directorships shall be so apportioned among the classes as to make all classes as
nearly equal in number as is practicable, provided that no decrease in the number of directors constituting the Board of
Directors shall shorten the term of any incumbent director.
EIGHTH: Vacancies occurring on the Board of Directors for any reason and newly created directorships resulting from
an increase in the authorized number of directors may be filled only by vote of a majority of the remaining members of
the Board of Directors, although less than a quorum, or by a sole remaining director, at any meeting of the Board of
Directors. A person so elected by the Board of Directors to fill a vacancy or newly created directorship shall hold office
until the next election of the class for which such director shall have been chosen and until his or her successor shall
be duly elected and qualified.
NINTH: The Corporation elects to be governed by all of the provisions of Division 1 of Title 1 of the California
Corporations Code (as amended by act of the California Legislature, 1975-976 Regular Session, effective January 1,
1977, as defined in Section 2300 of the California General Corporation Law) not otherwise applicable to this Corporation
under Chapter 23 of said Division 1.
TENTH: The liability of directors of the Corporation for monetary damages shall be eliminated to the fullest extent
permissible under California law. The Corporation is authorized to provide indemnification of agents (as defined in
Section 317 of the California Corporations Code) through bylaw provisions, agreements with agents, vote of
shareholders or disinterested directors, or otherwise, in excess of the indemnification otherwise permitted by Section
317 of the California Corporations Code, subject only to the applicable limits set forth in Section 204 of the California
Corporations Code with respect to actions for breach of duty to the Corporation and its shareholders.
3.     The foregoing Restated Articles of Incorporation has been duly approved by the Board of Directors of the
Corporation.
4.     The foregoing Restated Articles of Incorporation has been duly approved by the required vote of the Corporation’s
shareholders in accordance with Section 902 of the California Corporations Code. The total number of outstanding
shares of the Corporation entitled to vote on such Restated Articles of Incorporation was [-]. The number of shares
voting in favor of the Restated Articles of Incorporation equaled or exceeded the vote required. The percentage vote
required was more than 50% of such total number of outstanding shares.
We further declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the matters set forth in this
certificate are true and correct of our own knowledge on this [-] day of [-], 2014.
By:
 
Name:
 
Title: President
 
 
 
By:
Name:
 
Title: Corporate Secretary
Annex G
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE
1.1          Purpose. The purposes of this Plan are to create incentives which are designed to motivate Participants to put
forth maximum effort toward the success and growth of the Company and to enable the Company to attract and retain
experienced individuals who by their position, ability and diligence are able to make important contributions to the
Company’s success. Toward these objectives, this Plan provides for the grant of Options, Restricted Stock Awards,
Restricted Stock Units, SARs, Performance Units, Performance Bonuses, Stock Awards and Other Incentive Awards to
Eligible Employees and the grant of Nonqualified Stock Options, Restricted Stock Awards, Restricted Stock Units,
SARs, Performance Units, Stock Awards and Other Incentive Awards to Consultants and Eligible Directors, subject to
the conditions set forth in this Plan.
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
2.1          “Affiliated Entity” means any corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity in
which a majority of the partnership or other similar interest thereof is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the
Company or one or more of its Subsidiaries or Affiliated Entities or a combination thereof. For purposes hereof, the
Company, a Subsidiary or an Affiliated Entity shall be deemed to have a majority ownership interest in a partnership or
limited liability company if the Company, such Subsidiary or Affiliated Entity shall be allocated a majority of partnership
or limited liability company gains or losses or shall be or control a managing director or a general partner of such
partnership or limited liability company.
2.2          “Award” means, individually or collectively, any Option, Restricted Stock Award, Restricted Stock Unit, SAR,
Performance Unit, Performance Bonus, Stock Award or Other Incentive Award granted under this Plan to an Eligible
Employee by the Board or any Nonqualified Stock Option, Performance Unit, SAR, Restricted Stock Award, Restricted
Stock Unit, Stock Award or Other Incentive Award granted under this Plan to a Consultant or an Eligible Director by the
Board, in either case pursuant to such terms, conditions, restrictions, and/or limitations, if any, as the Board may
establish by the Award Agreement or otherwise.
2.3          “Award Agreement” means any written or electronic instrument that establishes the terms, conditions,
restrictions, and/or limitations applicable to an Award in addition to those established by this Plan and by the Board’s
exercise of its administrative powers.
2.4          “Board” means the Board of Directors of the Company and, if the Board has appointed a Committee as
provided in Section 3.2, the term “Board” shall include such Committee.
2.5          “Cash Dividend Right” means a contingent right, granted in tandem with a specific Restricted Stock Unit Award,
to receive an amount in cash equal to the cash distributions made by the Company with respect to a share of Common
Stock during the period such Award is outstanding.
2.6          “Change of Control Event” means each of the following:
(a)          Any transaction in which shares of voting securities of the Company representing more than 50% of the total
combined voting power of all outstanding voting securities of the Company are issued by the Company, or sold or
transferred by the stockholders of the Company, in either case resulting in those persons and entities who beneficially
owned voting securities of the Company representing more than 50% of the total combined voting power of all
outstanding voting securities of the Company immediately prior to such transaction ceasing to beneficially own voting
securities of the Company representing more than 50% of the total combined voting power of all outstanding voting
securities of the Company immediately after such transaction;
G-1
(b)          The merger or consolidation of the Company with or into another entity resulting in those persons and entities
who beneficially owned voting securities of the Company representing more than 50% of the total combined voting
power of all outstanding voting securities of the Company immediately prior to such merger or consolidation ceasing to
beneficially own voting securities representing more than 50% of the total combined voting power of all outstanding
voting securities of the surviving corporation or resulting entity immediately after such merger of consolidation; or
(c)          The sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets unless those persons and entities who beneficially
owned voting securities of the Company representing more than 50% of the total combined voting power of all
outstanding voting securities of the Company immediately prior to such asset sale beneficially own voting securities of
the purchasing entity representing more than 50% of the total combined voting power of all outstanding voting
securities of the purchasing entity immediately after such asset sale.
2.7          “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. References in this Plan to any section of the
Code shall be deemed to include any amendments or successor provisions to such section and any regulations under
such section.
2.8          “Committee” means the Committee appointed by the Board as provided in Section 3.2.
2.9          “Common Stock” means the common stock, no par value per share, of the Company, and after substitution,
such other stock as shall be substituted therefore as provided in Article XII.
2.10        “Company” means Pyramid Oil Company, a California corporation.
2.11        “Consultant” means any person who is engaged by the Company, a Subsidiary or an Affiliated Entity to render
consulting or advisory services.
2.12        “Date of Grant” means the date on which the grant of an Award is authorized by the Board or such later date as
may be specified by the Board as the Date of Grant in such authorization.
2.13        “Disability” means the Participant is unable to continue providing services by reason of any medically
determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a
continuous period of not less than 12 months. For purposes of this Plan, the determination of Disability shall be made in
the sole and absolute discretion of the Board.
2.14        “Dividend Unit Right” means a contingent right, granted in tandem with a specific Restricted Stock Unit Award,
to have an additional number of Restricted Stock Units credited to a Participant in respect of the Award equal to the
number of whole shares of Common Stock that could be purchased at Fair Market Value upon, and with the amount of,
each cash distribution made by the Company during the period such Award is outstanding with respect to a number of
shares of Common Stock equal to the number of Restricted Stock Units subject to the Award at the time of each such
distribution.
2.15        “Eligible Employee” means any employee of the Company, a Subsidiary, or an Affiliated Entity as approved by
the Board.
2.16        “Eligible Director” means any member of the Board who is not an employee of the Company, a Subsidiary or an
Affiliated Entity or a Consultant.
2.17        “Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
G-2
2.18        “Fair Market Value” means (a) during such time as the Common Stock is registered under Section 12 of the
Exchange Act, the closing sales price of the Common Stock (or the closing bid, if no sales were reported) as quoted by
an established stock exchange or automated quotation system on the day for which such value is to be determined, or,
if there was no quoted price for such day, then for the last preceding business day on which there was a quoted price as
reported in The Wall Street Journal or such other sources as the Board deems reliable, or (b) during any such time as
the Common Stock is not listed upon an established stock exchange or automated quotation system, the mean between
dealer “bid” and “ask” prices of the Common Stock in the over-the-counter market on the day for which such value is to
be determined, as reported in The Wall Street Journal or such other source as the Board deems reliable, or (c) during
any such time as the Common Stock cannot be valued pursuant to (a) or (b) above, (i) with respect to Incentive Stock
Options, the fair market value of the Common Stock as determined in good faith by the Board within the meaning of
Section 422 of the Code or (ii) the fair market value of the Common Stock as determined in good faith by the Board
using a “reasonable application of a reasonable valuation method” within the meaning of Treasury Regulation
Section 1.409A-1(b)(5)(iv)(B) or any successor provision.
2.19        “Incentive Stock Option” means an Option that is intended to be an “incentive stock option” within the meaning
of Section 422 of the Code.
2.20        “Nonqualified Stock Option” means an Option which is not an Incentive Stock Option.
2.21        “Other Incentive Award” means an incentive award granted to an Eligible Employee, Consultant or Eligible
Director under Article XI of this Plan.
2.22        “Option” means an Award granted under Article V of this Plan and includes both Nonqualified Stock Options
and Incentive Stock Options to purchase shares of Common Stock.
2.23        “Participant” means an Eligible Employee, a Consultant or an Eligible Director to whom an Award has been
granted by the Board under this Plan.
2.24        “Performance Bonus” means the bonus which may be granted to Eligible Employees under Article X of this
Plan.
2.25        “Performance Units” means those monetary units and/or units representing fictional shares of Common Stock
that may be granted to Eligible Employees, Consultants or Eligible Directors pursuant to Article IX hereof.
2.26        “Plan” means the Pyramid Oil Company 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan.
2.27        “Restricted Stock Award” means an Award granted to an Eligible Employee, Consultant or Eligible Director
under Article VI of this Plan.
2.28        “Restricted Stock Unit” means an Award granted to an Eligible Employee, Consultant or Eligible Director under
Article VII of this Plan.
2.29        “SAR” means a stock appreciation right granted to an Eligible Employee, Consultant or Eligible Director under
Article VIII of this Plan.
2.30        “Stock Award” means an Award granted to an Eligible Employee, Consultant or Eligible Director under Article
XI of this Plan.
2.31        “Subsidiary” means a “subsidiary corporation” of the Company, as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code.
G-3
ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATION
3.1          Shares Subject to this Plan. Subject to the limitations set forth herein, Awards may be made under this Plan for
a total of 8,900,000 shares of Common Stock. The limitations of this Section 3.1 shall be subject to the adjustment
provisions of Article XII.
3.2          Administration of this Plan by the Board. The Board shall administer this Plan. The Board may, by resolution,
appoint a committee to administer this Plan and delegate its powers described under this Section 3.2 for purposes of
Awards granted to Eligible Employees and Consultants. Subject to the provisions of this Plan, the Board shall have
exclusive power to:
(a)          Select Eligible Employees and Consultants to participate in this Plan.
(b)          Determine the time or times when Awards will be made to Eligible Employees or Consultants.
(c)          Determine the form of an Award, whether an Incentive Stock Option, Nonqualified Stock Option, Restricted
Stock Award, Restricted Stock Unit, SAR, Performance Unit, Performance Bonus, Stock Award or Other Incentive
Award, the number of shares of Common Stock, Performance Units or Restricted Stock Units subject to the Award, the
amount and all the terms, conditions (including performance requirements), restrictions and/or limitations, if any, of an
Award, including the time and conditions of exercise or vesting, and the terms of any Award Agreement, which may
include the waiver or amendment of prior terms and conditions or acceleration or early vesting or payment of an Award
under certain circumstances determined by the Board.
(d)          Determine whether Awards will be granted singly or in combination.
(e)          Accelerate the vesting, exercise or payment of an Award or the performance period of an Award.
(f)           Take any and all other action it deems necessary or advisable for the proper operation or administration of this
Plan.
3.3          Administration of Grants to Eligible Directors. The Board shall have the exclusive power to select Eligible
Directors to participate in this Plan and to determine the number of Nonqualified Stock Options, Performance Units,
Restricted Stock Units, SARs, Stock Awards, Other Incentive Awards or the number of shares of Common Stock subject
to a Restricted Stock Award awarded to Eligible Directors selected for participation. If the Board appoints a committee to
administer this Plan, it may delegate to the committee administration of all other aspects of the Awards made to Eligible
Directors.
3.4          The Board to Make Rules and Interpret Plan. The Board in its sole discretion shall have the authority, subject to
the provisions of this Plan, to establish, adopt, or revise such rules and regulations and to make all such determinations
relating to this Plan, as it may deem necessary or advisable for the administration of this Plan. The Board’s
interpretation of this Plan or any Awards and all decisions and determinations by the Board with respect to this Plan
shall be final, binding, and conclusive on all parties.
3.5          Section 162(m) Provisions. The Company intends for this Plan to permit, but not require, the grant of Awards
that qualify for the exception from Section 162(m) of the Code for “qualified performance based compensation.” In the
event Awards granted hereunder are intended to be “qualified performance based compensation,” a Committee
composed of two or more “outside directors” within the meaning of Section 162(m) of the Code shall make such Awards
and shall exercise all administrative authority with respect to such Awards. Nothing herein shall require that the Board
or the Committee grant awards that satisfy the “qualified performance based compensation” requirements of
Section 162(m) of the Code, and neither the Board, nor the Committee, nor the Company shall be liable for any failure to
satisfy such requirements.
G-4
3.6          Indemnification. In addition to such other rights of indemnification as they may have as members of the Board,
and to the extent allowed by applicable laws, the Board shall be indemnified by the Company against the reasonable
expenses, including attorneys’ fees, actually incurred in connection with any action, suit or proceeding or in connection
with any appeal therein, to which the Board may be party by reason of any action taken or failure to act under or in
connection with this Plan or any Award granted under this Plan, and against all amounts paid by the Board in settlement
thereof (provided, however, that the settlement has been approved by the Company, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld) or paid by the Board in satisfaction of a judgment in any such action, suit or proceeding, except
in relation to matters as to which it shall be adjudged in such action, suit or proceeding that such Board did not act in
good faith and in a manner which such person reasonably believed to be in the best interests of the Company, or in the
case of a criminal proceeding, had no reason to believe that the conduct complained of was unlawful; provided,
however, that within 60 days after institution of any such action, suit or proceeding, the Board shall, in writing, offer the
Company the opportunity at its own expense to handle and defend such action, suit or proceeding.
ARTICLE IV
GRANT OF AWARDS
4.1          Grant of Awards. Awards granted under this Plan shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a)          Subject to Article XII, (i) the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock made subject to the grant of Options
and/or SARs to any Eligible Employee in any calendar year may not exceed 1,500,000 and (ii) the maximum aggregate
number of shares that may be issued under this Plan through Incentive Stock Options is 1,000,000.
(b)          Subject to Article XII, the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock made subject to the grant of Restricted
Stock Awards, Restricted Stock Unit Awards, Performance Unit Awards, Performance Bonus Awards, Stock Awards
and Other Incentive Awards to any Eligible Employee in any calendar year may not exceed 700,000.
(c)          The maximum amount made subject to the grant of Performance Bonuses to any Eligible Employee in any
calendar year may not exceed $1,500,000.
(d)          Any shares of Common Stock related to Awards which terminate by expiration, forfeiture, cancellation or
otherwise without the issuance of shares of Common Stock or are exchanged in the Board’s discretion for Awards not
involving the issuance of shares of Common Stock, shall be available again for grant under this Plan and shall not be
counted against the shares authorized under Section 3.1. Any shares of Common Stock issued as Restricted Stock
Awards that subsequently are forfeited without vesting shall again be available for grant under this Plan and shall not be
counted against the shares authorized under Section 3.1. Any Awards that, pursuant to the terms of the applicable
Award Agreement, are to be settled in cash, whether or not denominated in or determined with reference to shares of
Common Stock (for example, SARs, Performance Units or Restricted Stock Units to be settled in cash), shall not be
counted against the shares authorized under Section 3.1.
(e)          Common Stock delivered by the Company in payment of an Award authorized under Articles V and VI of this
Plan may be authorized and unissued Common Stock or Common Stock held in the treasury of the Company.
(f)          The Board shall, in its sole discretion, determine the manner in which fractional shares arising under this Plan
shall be treated.
(g)         Shares of Common Stock issued hereunder may be evidenced in any manner determined by the Board,
including, but not limited to, separate certificates or book-entry registration.
(h)         The Board shall be prohibited from canceling, reissuing or modifying Awards if such action will have the effect of
repricing the Participant’s Award.
(i)          Eligible Directors and Consultants may only be granted Nonqualified Stock Options, Performance Units,
Restricted Stock Awards, Restricted Stock Units, SARs, Stock Awards or Other Incentive Awards under this Plan.
(j)           The maximum term of any Award shall be ten years.
G-5
ARTICLE V
STOCK OPTIONS
5.1          Grant of Options. The Board may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and such other terms
and conditions as it may determine, grant Options to Eligible Employees. These Options may be Incentive Stock Options
or Nonqualified Stock Options, or a combination of both. The Board may, subject to the provisions of this Plan and such
other terms and conditions as it may determine, grant Nonqualified Stock Options to Eligible Directors and Consultants.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Nonqualified Stock Options may be granted only to Eligible Employees, Eligible
Directors and Consultants performing services for the Company or a corporation or other type of entity in a chain of
corporations or other entities in which each corporation or other entity has a “controlling interest” in another
corporation or entity in the chain, starting with the Company and ending with the corporation or other entity for which
the Eligible Employee, Eligible Director or Consultant performs services. For purposes of this Section 5.1, the term
“controlling interest” means (a) in the case of a corporation, ownership of stock possessing at least 50% of total
combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of such corporation or at least 50% of the total value of
shares of all classes of stock of such corporation; (b) in the case of a partnership, ownership of at least 50% of the
profits interest or capital interest of such partnership; (c) in the case of a sole proprietorship, ownership of the sole
proprietorship; or (d) in the case of a trust or estate, ownership of an actuarial interest (as defined in Treasury
Regulation Section 1.414(c)-2(b)(2)(ii)) of at least 50% of such trust or estate. Each grant of an Option shall be evidenced
by an Award Agreement executed by the Company and the Participant, and shall contain such terms and conditions
and be in such form as the Board may from time to time approve, subject to the requirements of Section 5.2.
5.2          Conditions of Options. Each Option so granted shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a)          Exercise Price. As limited by Section 5.2(e) below, each Option shall state the exercise price which shall be set
by the Board at the Date of Grant; provided, however, no Option shall be granted at an exercise price which is less than
the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock on the Date of Grant unless the Option is granted through the assumption
of, or in substitution for, outstanding awards previously granted to individuals who became Eligible Employees (or other
service providers) as a result of a merger, consolidation, acquisition or other corporate transaction involving the
Company which complies with Treasury Regulation Section 1.409A-1(b)(5)(v)(D).
(b)          Form of Payment. The exercise price of an Option may be paid (i) in cash or by check, bank draft or money order
payable to the order of the Company; (ii) subject to prior approval by the Board in its discretion, by delivering previously
acquired shares of Common Stock having an aggregate Fair Market Value on the date of payment equal to the amount
of the exercise price, but only to the extent such exercise of an Option would not result in an adverse accounting charge
to the Company for financial accounting purposes with respect to the shares used to pay the exercise price unless
otherwise determined by the Board; (iii) subject to prior approval by the Board in its discretion, by withholding shares of
Common Stock which otherwise would be acquired on exercise having an aggregate Fair Market Value at on the date of
payment equal to the amount of the exercise price; or (iv) subject to prior approval by the Board in its discretion, by a
combination of the foregoing. In addition to the foregoing, the Board may permit an Option granted under this Plan to be
exercised by a broker-dealer acting on behalf of a Participant through procedures approved by the Board. Such
procedures may include a broker either (x) selling all of the shares of Common Stock received when an Option is
exercised and paying the Participant the proceeds of the sale (minus the exercise price, withholding taxes and any fees
due to the broker) or (y) selling enough of the shares of Common Stock received upon exercise of the Option to cover
the exercise price, withholding taxes and any fees due to the broker and delivering to the Participant (either directly or
through the Company) a stock certificate for the remaining shares of Common Stock.
(c)          Exercise of Options.
(i)          Options granted under this Plan shall be exercisable, in whole or in such installments and at such times, and
shall expire at such time, as shall be provided by the Board in the Award Agreement. Exercise of an Option shall be by
written notice to the Secretary of the Company (or such other officer as may be designated by the Board) at least two
business days in advance of such exercise stating the election to exercise (or such lesser period of time as the Board
may require) in the form and manner determined by the Board. Every share of Common Stock acquired through the
exercise of an Option shall be deemed to be fully paid at the time of exercise and payment of the exercise price.
G-6
(ii)         Unless otherwise provided in an Award Agreement, the following provisions will apply to the exercisability of
Options following the termination of a Participant’s employment or service with the Company, a Subsidiary or an
Affiliated Entity:
(A)         If an Eligible Employee’s employment with the Company, a Subsidiary or an Affiliated Entity terminates as a
result of death or Disability, the Eligible Employee (or personal representative in the case of death) shall be entitled to
purchase all or any part of the shares subject to any (i) vested Incentive Stock Option for a period of up to three months
from such date of termination (one year in the case of death or Disability in lieu of the three-month period) and (ii) vested
Nonqualified Stock Option during the remaining term of the Option. If an Eligible Employee’s employment terminates for
any other reason, the Eligible Employee shall be entitled to purchase all or any part of the shares subject to any vested
Option for a period of up to three months from such date of termination. In no event shall any Option be exercisable past
the term of the Option. The unvested portion of any Option shall be forfeited immediately upon termination; provided,
however, that the Board may, in its sole discretion, accelerate the vesting of unvested Options in the event of
termination of employment of any Participant.
(B)         In the event a Consultant ceases to provide services to the Company or an Eligible Director terminates service
as a director of the Company, the unvested portion of any Award shall be forfeited unless otherwise accelerated
pursuant to the terms of the Eligible Director’s Award Agreement or by the Board. Unless otherwise provided in the
applicable Award Agreement, the Consultant or Eligible Director shall have a period of three years following the date he
ceases to provide consulting services or ceases to be a director, as applicable, to exercise any Nonqualified Stock
Options which are otherwise exercisable on his date of termination of service. In no event shall any Option be
exercisable past the term of the Option.
(d)         Other Terms and Conditions. Among other conditions that may be imposed by the Board, if deemed appropriate,
are those relating to (i) the period or periods and the conditions of exercisability of any Option; (ii) the minimum periods
during which Participants must be employed by the Company, its Subsidiaries, or an Affiliated Entity, or must hold
Options before they may be exercised; (iii) the minimum periods during which shares acquired upon exercise must be
held before sale or transfer shall be permitted; (iv) conditions under which such Options or shares may be subject to
forfeiture; (v) the frequency of exercise or the minimum or maximum number of shares that may be acquired at any one
time; (vi) the achievement by the Company of specified performance criteria; and (vii) non-compete and protection of
business matters.
(e)          Special Restrictions Relating to Incentive Stock Options.
(i)          Options issued in the form of Incentive Stock Options shall only be granted to Eligible Employees of the
Company or a Subsidiary, and not to Eligible Employees of an Affiliated Entity unless such entity shall be considered as
a “disregarded entity” under the Code and shall not be distinguished for federal tax purposes from the Company or the
applicable Subsidiary.
(ii)         No Incentive Stock Option shall be granted to an Eligible Employee who owns or who would own immediately
before the grant of such Incentive Stock Option more than 10% of the combined voting power of the Company or its
Subsidiaries or a “parent corporation”, unless (A) at the time such Option is granted the exercise price is at least 110%
of the Fair Market Value of a share of Common Stock on the date of grant and (B) such Option by its terms is not
exercisable after the expiration of five years from the date of grant. For purposes of this Section 5.2(e), “parent
corporation” means a “parent corporation” of the Company, as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code.
G-7
(iii)        To the extent that the aggregate Fair Market Value (determined at the time an Incentive Stock Option is granted)
of shares of Common Stock with respect to which Incentive Stock Options are exercisable for the first time by an
individual during any calendar year under all incentive stock option plans of the Company and its Subsidiaries and
parent corporations exceeds $100,000, such excess Incentive Stock Options shall be treated as Nonqualified Stock
Options. The Board shall determine, in accordance with applicable provisions of the Code, Treasury Regulations and
other administrative pronouncements, which of a Participant’s Options will not constitute Incentive Stock Options
because of such limitation and shall notify the Participant of such determination as soon as practicable after such
determination.
(iv)        Each Participant awarded an Incentive Stock Option shall notify the Company in writing immediately after the
date he or she makes a disqualifying disposition of any shares of Common Stock acquired pursuant to the exercise of
such Incentive Stock Option. A disqualifying disposition is any disposition (including any sale) of such Common Stock
before the later of (i) two years after the Date of Grant of the Incentive Stock Option or (ii) one year after the date of
exercise of the Incentive Stock Option.
(v)         Except in the case of death, an Option will not be treated as an Incentive Stock Option unless at all times
beginning on the Date of Grant and ending on the day three months (one year in the case of a Participant who is
“disabled” within the meaning of Section 22(e)(3) of the Code) before the date of exercise of the Option, the Participant is
an employee of the Company or a parent corporation of the Company or a Subsidiary (or a corporation or a parent
corporation or subsidiary corporation of such corporation issuing or assuming an Option in a transaction to which
Section 424(a) of the Code applies).
(f)          Application of Funds. The proceeds received by the Company from the sale of Common Stock pursuant to
Options will be used for general corporate purposes.
(g)          Stockholder Rights. No Participant shall have a right as a stockholder with respect to any share of Common
Stock subject to an Option prior to purchase of such shares of Common Stock by exercise of the Option.
ARTICLE VI
RESTRICTED STOCK AWARDS
6.1          Grant of Restricted Stock Awards. The Board may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and
such other terms and conditions as it may determine, grant a Restricted Stock Award to Eligible Employees,
Consultants or Eligible Directors. Restricted Stock Awards shall be awarded in such number and at such times during
the term of this Plan as the Board shall determine. Each Restricted Stock Award shall be subject to an Award Agreement
setting forth the terms of such Restricted Stock Award and may be evidenced in such manner as the Board deems
appropriate, including without limitation, a book-entry registration or issuance of a stock certificate or certificates.
G-8
6.2          Conditions of Restricted Stock Awards. The grant of a Restricted Stock Award shall be subject to the following:
(a)          Restriction Period. Restricted Stock Awards granted to an Eligible Employee shall require the holder to remain
in the employment of the Company, a Subsidiary, or an Affiliated Entity for a prescribed period. Restricted Stock Awards
granted to Consultants or Eligible Directors shall require the holder to provide continued services to the Company for a
period of time. These employment and service requirements are collectively referred to as a “Restriction Period.” The
Board shall determine the Restriction Period or Periods which shall apply to the shares of Common Stock covered by
each Restricted Stock Award or portion thereof. In addition to any time vesting conditions determined by the Board
vesting and/or the grant of Restricted Stock Awards may be subject to the achievement by the Company of specified
performance criteria as may from time to time be established by the Board. The Board also will determine whether the
Award is intended to satisfy the Section 162(m) Requirements, as described in Exhibit A attached hereto, in which case
the performance criteria shall be based upon the Company’s achievement of all or any of the operational, financial or
stock performance criteria set forth on Exhibit A. At the end of the Restriction Period, or upon the later fulfillment of any
other specified vesting conditions, the restrictions imposed by the Board shall lapse with respect to the shares of
Common Stock covered by the Restricted Stock Award or portion thereof. In addition to acceleration of vesting upon
the occurrence of a Change of Control Event as provided in Section 13.4, the Board may, in its discretion, accelerate the
vesting of a Restricted Stock Award in the case of the death or Disability of the Participant who is an Eligible Employee
or resignation of a Participant who is a Consultant or an Eligible Director.
(b)          Restrictions. The holder of a Restricted Stock Award may not sell, transfer, pledge, exchange, hypothecate, or
otherwise dispose of the shares of Common Stock represented by the Restricted Stock Award during the applicable
Restriction Period or prior to the fulfillment of any other specified vesting conditions. The Board shall impose such
other restrictions and conditions on any shares of Common Stock covered by a Restricted Stock Award as it may deem
advisable including, without limitation, restrictions under applicable federal or state securities laws, and may legend the
certificates representing shares of Common Stock covered by a Restricted Stock Award to give appropriate notice of
such restrictions.
(c)          Rights as Stockholders. Unless otherwise provided in the Award Agreement, during any Restriction Period (and
prior to the fulfillment of any other specified vesting conditions), the Participant shall have all of the rights of a
stockholder with respect to the shares, including, but not by way of limitation, the right to vote such shares and to
receive dividends. If any dividends or other distributions are paid in shares of Common Stock, all such shares shall be
subject to the same risk of forfeiture and same restrictions on transferability as the shares of Common Stock covered by
the Restricted Stock Award with respect to which they were paid.
ARTICLE VII
RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS
7.1          Grant of Restricted Stock Units. The Board may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and
such other terms and conditions as it may determine, grant Restricted Stock Units to Eligible Employees, Consultants
or Eligible Directors. Restricted Stock Units shall be awarded in such number and at such times during the term of this
Plan as the Board shall determine. Each Award of Restricted Stock Units shall be subject to an Award Agreement
setting forth the terms of such Award of Restricted Stock Units. A Participant shall not be required to make any payment
for Restricted Stock Units.
7.2          Conditions of Restricted Stock Units. The grant of Restricted Stock Units shall be subject to the following:
(a)          Restriction Period. Restricted Stock Units granted to an Eligible Employee shall require the holder to remain in
the employment of the Company, a Subsidiary, or an Affiliated Entity for a prescribed period. Restricted Stock Units
granted to Consultants or Eligible Directors shall require the holder to provide continued services to the Company for a
period of time. These employment and service requirements are collectively referred to as a “Restriction Period.” The
Board shall determine the Restriction Period or Periods which shall apply to the Restricted Stock Units. In addition to
any time vesting conditions determined by the Board vesting and/or the grant of Restricted Stock Units may be subject
to the achievement by the Company of specified performance criteria as may from time to time be established by the
Board. The Board also will determine whether the Award is intended to satisfy the Section 162(m) Requirements, as
described in Exhibit A attached hereto, in which case the performance criteria shall be based upon the Company’s
achievement of all or any of the operational, financial or stock performance criteria set forth on Exhibit A. At the end of
the Restriction Period, or upon the later fulfillment of any other specified vesting conditions, the restrictions imposed by
the Board shall lapse with respect to the Restricted Stock Units. In addition to acceleration of vesting upon the
occurrence of a Change of Control Event as provided in Section 13.4, the Board may, in its discretion, accelerate the
vesting of an Award of Restricted Stock Units in the case of the death or Disability of the Participant who is an Eligible
Employee or resignation of a Participant who is a Consultant or an Eligible Director.
G-9
(b)          Lapse of Restrictions. Upon the lapse of restrictions with respect to each Restricted Stock Unit, the Participant
shall be entitled to receive one share of Common Stock or an amount of cash equal to the Fair Market Value of one
share of Common Stock, as provided in the Award Agreement.
(c)          Cash Dividend Rights and Dividend Unit Rights. The Board may, in its sole discretion, grant a tandem Cash
Dividend Right or Dividend Unit Right grant with respect to Restricted Stock Units. A grant of Cash Dividend Rights may
provide that such Cash Dividend Rights shall be paid directly to the Participant at the time of payment of related
dividend, be credited to a bookkeeping account subject to the same vesting and payment provisions as the tandem
Award (with or without interest in the sole discretion of the Board), or be subject to such other provisions or restrictions
as determined by the Board in its sole discretion. A grant of Dividend Unit Rights may provide that such Dividend Unit
Rights shall be subject to the same vesting and payment provisions as the tandem Award or be subject to such other
provisions and restrictions as determined by the Board in its sole discretion.
ARTICLE VIII
STOCK APPRECIATION RIGHTS
8.1          Grant of SARs. The Board may from time to time, in its sole discretion, subject to the provisions of this Plan and
subject to other terms and conditions as the Board may determine, grant a SAR to any Eligible Employee, Consultant or
Eligible Director. SARs may be granted in tandem with an Option, in which event, the Participant has the right to elect to
exercise either the SAR or the Option. Upon the Participant’s election to exercise one of these Awards, the other tandem
Award is automatically terminated. SARs may also be granted as an independent Award separate from an Option. Each
grant of a SAR shall be evidenced by an Award Agreement executed by the Company and the Participant and shall
contain such terms and conditions and be in such form as the Board may from time to time approve, subject to the
requirements of this Plan. The exercise price of the SAR shall not be less than the Fair Market Value of a share of
Common Stock on the Date of Grant of the SAR.
8.2          Exercise and Payment. SARs granted under this Plan shall be exercisable in whole or in installments and at
such times as shall be provided by the Board in the Award Agreement. Exercise of a SAR shall be by written notice to
the Secretary of the Company at least two business days in advance of such exercise (or such lesser period of time as
the Board may require). The amount payable with respect to each SAR shall be equal in value to the excess, if any, of
the Fair Market Value of a share of Common Stock on the exercise date over the exercise price of the SAR. Payment of
amounts attributable to a SAR shall be made in cash or in shares of Common Stock, as provided by the terms of the
applicable Award Agreement.
8.3          Restrictions. In the event a SAR is granted in tandem with an Incentive Stock Option, the Board shall use
commercially reasonable efforts subject the SAR to restrictions necessary to ensure satisfaction of the requirements
under Section 422 of the Code. In the case of a SAR granted in tandem with an Incentive Stock Option to an Eligible
Employee who owns more than 10% of the combined voting power of the Company or its Subsidiaries or a “parent
corporation” (as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code) on the date of such grant, the amount payable with respect to
each SAR shall be equal in value to the applicable percentage of the excess, if any, of the Fair Market Value of a share of
Common Stock on the exercise date over the exercise price of the SAR, which exercise price shall not be less than
110% of the Fair Market Value of a share of Common Stock on the date the SAR is granted.
G-10
ARTICLE IX
PERFORMANCE UNITS
9.1          Grant of Awards. The Board may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and such other terms
and conditions as it may determine, grant Performance Units to Eligible Employees, Consultants and Eligible Directors.
Each Award of Performance Units shall be evidenced by an Award Agreement executed by the Company and the
Participant, and shall contain such terms and conditions and be in such form as the Board may from time to time
approve, subject to the requirements of Section 9.2.
9.2          Conditions of Awards. Each Award of Performance Units shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a)          Establishment of Award Terms. Each Award shall state the target, maximum and minimum value of each
Performance Unit payable upon the achievement of performance goals.
(b)          Achievement of Performance Goals. The Board shall establish performance targets for each Award. If the Award
is intended to satisfy the Section 162(m) Requirements, as described in Exhibit A, the performance targets shall be
based on some or all of the operational, financial or stock performance criteria listed in Exhibit A. The Board shall also
establish such other terms and conditions as it deems appropriate to such Award. The Award may be paid out in cash
or Common Stock as determined in the sole discretion of the Board.
ARTICLE X
PERFORMANCE BONUS
10.1        Grant of Performance Bonus. The Board may from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and such
other terms and conditions as the Board may determine, grant a Performance Bonus to certain Eligible Employees
selected for participation. The Board will determine the amount that may be earned as a Performance Bonus in any
period of one year or more upon the achievement of a performance target established by the Board. The Board shall
select the applicable performance target(s) for each period in which a Performance Bonus is awarded. The performance
target shall be based upon all or some of the operational, financial or stock performance criteria more specifically listed
in Exhibit A attached hereto. The Board also will determine whether the Award is intended to satisfy the Section 162(m)
Requirements, as described in Exhibit A.
10.2        Payment of Performance Bonus. In order for any Participant to be entitled to payment of a Performance Bonus,
the applicable performance target(s) established by the Board must first be obtained or exceeded. Payment of a
Performance Bonus shall be made within 60 days of the Board’s certification that the performance target(s) has been
achieved. Payment of a Performance Bonus may be made in cash or shares of Common Stock, as provided by the
terms of the applicable Award Agreement.
ARTICLE XI
STOCK AWARDS AND OTHER INCENTIVE AWARDS
11.1        Grant of Stock Awards. The Board may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and such other
terms and conditions as it may determine, grant Stock Awards of shares of Common Stock not subject to vesting or
forfeiture restrictions to Eligible Employees, Consultants or Eligible Directors. Stock Awards shall be awarded with
respect to such number of shares of Common Stock and at such times during the term of this Plan as the Board shall
determine. Each Stock Award shall be subject to an Award Agreement setting forth the terms of such Stock Award. The
Board may in its sole discretion require a Participant to pay a stipulated purchase price for each share of Common
Stock covered by a Stock Award.
G-11
11.2        Grant of Other Incentive Awards. The Board may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of this Plan and
such other terms and conditions as it may determine, grant Other Incentive Awards to Eligible Employees, Consultants
or Eligible Directors. Other Incentive Awards may be granted based upon, payable in or otherwise related to, in whole or
in part, shares of Common Stock if the Board, in its sole discretion, determines that such Other Incentive Awards are
consistent with the purposes of this Plan. Such Awards may include, but are not limited to, Common Stock awarded as a
bonus, dividend equivalents, convertible or exchangeable debt securities, other rights convertible or exchangeable into
Common Stock, purchase rights for Common Stock, Awards with value and payment contingent upon the Company’s
performance or any other factors designated by the Board, and awards valued by reference to the book value of
Common Stock or the value of securities of or the performance of specified subsidiaries. Long-term cash Awards also
may be made under this Plan. Cash Awards also may be granted as an element of or a supplement to any Awards
permitted under this Plan. Awards may also be granted in lieu of obligations to pay cash or deliver other property under
this Plan or under other plans or compensation arrangements, subject to any applicable provision under Section 16 of
the Exchange Act. Each grant of an Other Incentive Award shall be evidenced by an Award Agreement that shall specify
the amount of the Other Incentive Award and the terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations applicable to such
Award. Payment of Other Incentive Awards shall be made at such times and in such form, which may be cash, shares of
Common Stock or other property (or a combination thereof), as established by the Board, subject to the terms of this
Plan.
ARTICLE XII
STOCK ADJUSTMENTS
12.1        Recapitalizations and Reorganizations. In the event that the shares of Common Stock, as constituted on the
effective date of this Plan, shall be changed into or exchanged for a different number or kind of shares of stock or other
securities of the Company or of another corporation (whether by reason of merger, consolidation, recapitalization,
reclassification, stock split, spin-off, combination of shares or otherwise), or if the number of such shares of Common
Stock shall be increased through the payment of a stock dividend, or a dividend on the shares of Common Stock, or if
rights or warrants to purchase securities of the Company shall be issued to holders of all outstanding Common Stock,
then the maximum number and kind of shares of Common Stock available for issuance under this Plan, the maximum
number and kind of shares of Common Stock for which any individual may receive Awards in any calendar year under
this Plan, the number and kind of shares of Common Stock covered by outstanding Awards, and the price per share or
the applicable market value or performance target of such Awards will be appropriately adjusted by the Board to reflect
any increase or decrease in the number of, or change in the kind or value of, issued shares of Common Stock to
preclude, to the extent practicable, the enlargement or dilution of rights under such Awards. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this Section 12.1, (i) the number and kind of shares of Common Stock available for issuance as Incentive
Stock Options under this Plan shall be adjusted only in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 422 and
424 of the Code and the regulations thereunder, and (ii) outstanding Awards and Award Agreements shall be adjusted
in accordance with (A) Sections 422 and 424 of the Code and the regulations thereunder with respect to Incentive Stock
Options and (B) Section 409A of the Code with respect to Nonqualified Stock Options, SARs and, to the extent
applicable, other Awards. In the event there shall be any other change in the number or kind of the outstanding shares
of Common Stock, or any stock or other securities into which the Common Stock shall have been changed or for which
it shall have been exchanged, then if the Board shall, in its sole discretion, determine that such change equitably
requires an adjustment in the shares available under and subject to this Plan, or in any Award, theretofore granted, such
adjustments shall be made in accordance with such determination. No fractional shares of Common Stock or units of
other securities shall be issued pursuant to any such adjustment, and any fractions resulting from any such adjustment
shall be eliminated in each case by rounding downward to the nearest whole share.
12.2        Adjustments Upon Change of Control Event. Upon the occurrence of a Change of Control Event, the Board, in
its sole discretion, without the consent of any Participant or holder of the Award, and on such terms and conditions as it
deems appropriate, may take any one or more of the following actions in connection with such Change in Control Event:
(a)          provide for either (i) the termination of any Award in exchange for an amount of cash, if any, equal to the amount
that would have been attained upon the realization of the Participant’s rights (and, for the avoidance of doubt, if as of the
date of the occurrence of such transaction or event the Board determines in good faith that no amount would have been
attained upon the realization of the Participant’s rights, then such Award may be terminated by the Board without
payment) or (ii) the replacement of such Award with other rights or property selected by the Board in its sole discretion;
(b)          provide that such Award be assumed by a successor or survivor entity, or a parent or subsidiary thereof, or be
exchanged for similar rights or awards covering the equity of the successor or survivor, or a parent or subsidiary
thereof, with appropriate adjustments as to the number and kind of equity interests and prices;
G-12
(c)          make adjustments in the number and type of Common Stock (or other securities or property) subject to
outstanding Awards, and in the number and kind of outstanding Awards or in the terms and conditions of, and the
vesting criteria included in, outstanding Awards, or both;
(d)          accelerate any vesting schedule to which an Award is subject;
(e)          provide that such Award shall be payable, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Plan or the applicable
Award Agreement; and/or
(f)          provide that the Award cannot become payable after such event, i.e., shall terminate upon such event.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such action contemplated under this Section 12.2 shall be effective only to the
extent that such action will not cause any Award that is designed to satisfy Section 409A of the Code to fail to satisfy
such section.
ARTICLE XIII
GENERAL
13.1        Amendment or Termination of this Plan. The Board may alter, suspend or terminate this Plan at any time. In
addition, the Board may, from time to time, amend this Plan in any manner, but may not without stockholder approval
adopt any amendment which would (i) increase the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock available under this
Plan (except by operation of Article XII), (ii) materially modify the requirements as to eligibility for participation in this
Plan, or (iii) materially increase the benefits to Participants provided by this Plan. Unless terminated earlier by the Board
pursuant to this Section 13.1, this Plan shall terminate on [-], 2024, which is the day prior to the tenth anniversary of the
date of this Plan was initially approved by the stockholders of the Company. This Plan shall continue in effect until all
matters relating to the payment of Awards and administration of this Plan have been settled.
13.2        Transferability. The Board may, in its discretion, authorize all or a portion of the Nonqualified Stock Options
granted under this Plan to be on terms which permit transfer by the Participant to (i) the ex-spouse of the Participant
pursuant to the terms of a domestic relations order, (ii) the spouse, children or grandchildren of the Participant
(“Immediate Family Members”), (iii) a trust or trusts for the exclusive benefit of such Immediate Family Members, or (iv) a
partnership or limited liability company in which such Immediate Family Members are the only partners or members. In
addition there may be no consideration for any such transfer. The Award Agreement pursuant to which such
Nonqualified Stock Options are granted expressly provides for transferability in a manner consistent with this Section
13.2. Subsequent transfers of transferred Nonqualified Stock Options shall be prohibited except as set forth below in
this Section 13.2. Following transfer, any such Nonqualified Stock Options shall continue to be subject to the same
terms and conditions as were applicable immediately prior to transfer, provided that for purposes of Section 5.2(c)(ii) or
similar provisions of an Award Agreement the term “Participant” shall be deemed to refer to the transferee. The events
of termination of employment of Section 5.2(c)(ii) or similar provisions of an Award Agreement shall continue to be
applied with respect to the original Participant, following which the Nonqualified Stock Options shall be exercisable by
the transferee only to the extent, and for the periods specified in Section 5.2(c)(ii). No transfer pursuant to this
Section 13.2 shall be effective to bind the Company unless the Company shall have been furnished with written notice of
such transfer together with such other documents regarding the transfer as the Board shall request. With the exception
of a transfer in compliance with the foregoing provisions of this Section 13.2, all other types of Awards authorized under
this Plan shall be transferable only by will or the laws of descent and distribution; however, no such transfer shall be
effective to bind the Company unless the Board has been furnished with written notice of such transfer and an
authenticated copy of the will and/or such other evidence as the Board may deem necessary to establish the validity of
the transfer and the acceptance by the transferee of the terms and conditions of such Award.
G-13
13.3        Withholding Taxes. Unless otherwise paid by the Participant, the Company, its Subsidiaries or any of its
Affiliated Entities shall be entitled to deduct from any payment under this Plan, regardless of the form of such payment,
the amount of all applicable income and employment taxes required by law to be withheld with respect to such payment,
may require the Participant to pay to it such tax prior to and as a condition of the making of such payment, and shall be
entitled to deduct from any other compensation payable to the Participant any withholding obligations with respect to
Awards. In accordance with any applicable administrative guidelines it establishes, the Board may allow a Participant to
pay the amount of taxes required by law to be withheld from an Award by (i) directing the Company to withhold from any
payment of the Award a number of shares of Common Stock having a Fair Market Value on the date of payment equal to
the minimum amount of the required withholding taxes or (ii) delivering to the Company previously owned shares of
Common Stock having a Fair Market Value on the date of payment equal to the amount of the required withholding
taxes. However, any payment made by the Participant pursuant to either of the foregoing clauses (i) or (ii) shall not be
permitted if it would result in an adverse accounting charge with respect to such shares used to pay such taxes unless
otherwise approved by the Board.
13.4        Change of Control. Unless otherwise provided in the applicable Award Agreement, Awards granted under this
Plan to any Eligible Employee, Consultant or Eligible Director shall be immediately vested, fully earned and exercisable
upon the occurrence of a Change of Control Event.
13.5        Amendments to Awards. Subject to the limitations of Article IV, such as the prohibition on repricing of Options,
the Board may at any time unilaterally amend the terms of any Award Agreement, whether or not presently exercisable
or vested, to the extent it deems appropriate. However, amendments which are adverse to the Participant shall require
the Participant’s consent.
13.6        Regulatory Approval and Listings. In the sole discretion of the Board, the Company may file with the Securities
and Exchange Commission and keep continuously effective, a Registration Statement on Form S-8 with respect to
shares of Common Stock subject to Awards hereunder. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Plan to the contrary,
the Company shall have no obligation to issue shares of Common Stock under this Plan prior to the obtaining of any
approval from, or satisfaction of any waiting period or other condition imposed by, any governmental agency which the
Board shall, in its sole discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable. In addition, and notwithstanding anything
contained in this Plan to the contrary, at such time as the Company is subject to the reporting requirements of
Section 12 of the Exchange Act, the Company shall have no obligation to issue shares of Common Stock under this
Plan prior to:
(a)          the admission of such shares to listing on the stock exchange on which the Common Stock may be listed; and
(b)          the completion of any registration or other qualification of such shares under any state or federal law or ruling of
any governmental body which the Board shall, in its sole discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable.
13.7        Right to Continued Employment. Participation in this Plan shall not give any Eligible Employee any right to
remain employed by or in the service of the Company, any Subsidiary, or any Affiliated Entity. The Company or, in the
case of employment or services with a Subsidiary or an Affiliated Entity, the Subsidiary or Affiliated Entity, reserves the
right to terminate any Participant at any time. Further, the adoption of this Plan shall not be deemed to give any Eligible
Employee or any other individual any right to be selected as a Participant or to be granted an Award.
13.8        Reliance on Reports. Each member of the Board shall be fully justified in relying or acting in good faith upon
any report made by the independent public accountants of the Company and its Subsidiaries and upon any other
information furnished in connection with this Plan by any person or persons other than himself or herself. In no event
shall any person who is or shall have been a member of the Board be liable for any determination made or other action
taken or any omission to act in reliance upon any such report or information or for any action taken, including the
furnishing of information, or failure to act, if in good faith.
13.9        Construction. Masculine pronouns and other words of masculine gender shall refer to both men and women.
The titles and headings of the sections in this Plan are for the convenience of reference only, and in the event of any
conflict, the text of this Plan, rather than such titles or headings, shall control.
13.10      Governing Law. This Plan shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas
except as superseded by applicable federal law.
G-14
13.11      Other Laws. The Board may refuse to issue or transfer any shares of Common Stock or other consideration
under an Award if, acting in its sole discretion, it determines that the issuance or transfer of such shares or such other
consideration might violate any applicable law or regulation or entitle the Company to recover the same under
Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act, and any payment tendered to the Company by a Participant, other holder or
beneficiary in connection with the exercise of such Award shall be promptly refunded to the relevant Participant, holder
or beneficiary. In addition, by accepting or exercising any Award granted under this Plan (or any predecessor plan), the
Participant agrees to abide and be bound by any policies adopted by the Company pursuant to Section 954 of the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and any rules or exchange listing standards promulgated
thereunder calling for the repayment and/or forfeiture of any Award or payment resulting from an accounting
restatement. Such repayment and/or forfeiture provisions shall apply whether or not the Participant is employed by or
affiliated with the Company.
13.12      No Trust or Fund Created. Neither this Plan nor an Award shall create or be construed to create a trust or
separate fund of any kind or a fiduciary relationship between the Company and a Participant or any other person. To the
extent that a Participant acquires the right to receive payments from the Company pursuant to an Award, such right
shall be no greater than the right of any general unsecured creditor of the Company.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Plan has been executed to be effective as of [-], 2014.
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
  
 By:
 Name:
 Title:
G-15
EXHIBIT A
2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
Performance Criteria
Performance Criteria. The performance criteria to be used for purposes of Awards intended to meet the 162(m)
Requirements shall be set in the Committee’s sole discretion and may be described in terms of objectives that are
related to the individual Participant or objectives that are Company-wide or related to a subsidiary, division, department,
region, function or business unit of the Company in which the Participant is employed or with respect to which the
Participant performs services, and shall consist of one or more or any combination of the following criteria:
Operational Criteria may include:
· Reserve additions/replacements
· Finding & development costs
·
·
Production volume
Production Costs
Financial Criteria may include:
·
Earnings
·EBITDA (net income, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization)
·
·
·
Earnings per share
Free cash flow
Cash flow
· Operating income
· General and Administrative Expenses
· Debt to equity ratio
·
·
·
·
·
Debt to cash flow
Debt to EBITDA
EBITDA to Interest
Return on Assets
Return on Equity
· Return on Invested Capital
· Profit returns/margins
G-16
Stock Performance Criteria:
· Stock price appreciation
· Total stockholder return
· Relative stock price performance
Requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code. The Board will have the discretion to determine whether all or any portion
of a Restricted Stock Award, Restricted Stock Unit Award, Performance Unit Award, Performance Bonus, Stock Award
or Other Incentive Award is intended to satisfy the requirements for “performance-based compensation” under
Section 162(m) of the Code (the “162(m) Requirements”). The performance criteria for any such Award that is intended
to satisfy the 162(m) Requirements shall be established in writing by the Board based on one or more performance
criteria listed in this Exhibit A not later than 90 days after commencement of the performance period with respect to
such Award or any such other date as may be required or permitted for “performance-based compensation” under the
162(m) Requirements, provided that the outcome of the performance in respect of the goals remains substantially
uncertain as of such time. At the time of the grant of an Award and to the extent permitted under Section 162(m) of the
Code and the regulations thereunder for an Award intended to satisfy the 162(m) Requirements, the Board may provide
for the manner in which the performance goals will be measured in light of specified corporate transactions,
extraordinary events, accounting changes and other similar occurrences. All determinations made by the Board as to
the establishment or achievement of performance goals, or the final settlement of an Award intended to satisfy the
162(m) Requirements shall be made in writing.
Certification and Negative Discretion. Before payment is made in relation to any Award that is intended to satisfy the
162(m) Requirements, the Board shall certify the extent to which the performance goals and other material terms of the
Award have been satisfied, and the Board in its sole discretion shall have the authority to reduce, but not to increase,
the amount payable and/or the number of shares of Common Stock to be granted, issued, retained or vested pursuant
to any such Award.
Committee. In the case of an Award intended to meet the Section 162(m) Requirements, the term “Board” shall mean the
Committee, which shall be composed of two or more “outside directors” within the meaning of Section 162(m) of the
Code, and the Committee may not delegate its duties with respect to such Awards.
G-17
Annex H
AMENDED AND RESTATED BYLAWS
OF
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
a California corporation
ARTICLE I
OFFICES
Section A.      Principal Offices.
The Board of Directors (the "Board") shall fix the location of the principal executive office of the Corporation at any
place within or outside the State of California. If the principal executive office is located outside the State of California
and the Corporation has one or more business offices in the State of California, the Board shall fix and designate a
principal business office in the State of California.
Section B.      Other Offices.
The Board may at any time establish branch or subordinate offices at any place or places it may choose from time to
time.
ARTICLE II
DIRECTORS
Section A.      Powers.
Subject to the provisions of the California General Corporation Law and any limitations in the Articles of Incorporation of
the Corporation (the “Articles of Incorporation”) and these Bylaws relating to action required to be approved by the
shareholders or by the outstanding shares, the business and affairs of the Corporation shall be managed and all
corporate powers shall be exercised by or under the direction of the Board.
Section B.      Standard of Care; Liability.
In performing the duties of a director, a director shall act in good faith, in the manner such director believes to be in the
best interests of the Corporation and its shareholders, and with such care, including reasonable inquiry, and prudence
as a person in a like position would use under similar circumstances.
In performing the duties of a director, a director shall be entitled to rely on information, opinions, reports, and
statements, including financial statements and other financial data, which have been prepared or presented by any of
the following:
(a)     One or more officers or employees of the Corporation whom the director believes to be reliable and competent in
the matters presented;
(b)     Counsel, independent accountants or other persons as to matters which the director believes to be within such
person's professional or expert competence; or
(c)     A committee of the Board upon which the director does not serve, as to matters within its designated authority,
which committee the director believes to merit confidence, so long as in any such case, the director acts in good faith,
after reasonable inquiry when the need therefor is indicated by the circumstances and without knowledge that would
cause such reliance to be unwarranted.
Section C.      Number of Directors.
The authorized number of directors of the Corporation shall be not less than four (4) nor more than seven (7), and the
exact number of directors within those limits shall be four (4) unless and until the exact number of directors is changed
from time to time, within such specified limits, by a resolution which is duly adopted by the Board.
H-1
Section D.      Election and Term of Office of Directors.
Directors shall be elected at each annual meeting of shareholders to hold office until the next annual meeting of
shareholders and until a successor has been elected and qualified.
Section E.      Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Board may be filled by a majority of the remaining directors, though less than a quorum, or by a sole
remaining director, except that a vacancy created by the removal of a director by the vote or written consent of the
shareholders or by court order may be filled only by the vote of a majority of the shares entitled to vote represented at a
duly held meeting at which a quorum is present, or by the written consent of holders of a majority of the outstanding
shares entitled to vote. Each director so elected shall hold office until the next annual meeting of shareholders and until
a successor has been elected and qualified.
A vacancy or vacancies on the Board shall be deemed to exist in the event of the death, resignation or removal of any
director, or if the Board by resolution declares vacant the office of a director who has been declared of unsound mind
by an order of court or who has been convicted of a felony, or if the authorized number of directors is increased, or if the
shareholders fail, at any meeting of shareholders at which any director or directors are elected, to elect the number of
directors to be elected at such meeting.
The shareholders may elect a director or directors at any time to fill any vacancy or vacancies not filled by the directors,
but any such election by written consent shall require the consent of a majority of the outstanding shares entitled to
vote.
Any director may resign effective on giving written notice to the Chairman of the Board, the President, the Secretary or
the Board, unless the notice specifies a later time for that resignation to become effective. If the resignation of a director
is effective at a later time, the Board may elect a successor to take office when the resignation becomes effective.
No reduction of the authorized number of directors shall have the effect of removing any director before the expiration
of such director's term of office.
Section F.      Removal of Directors.
The entire Board or any individual director named may be removed from office as provided by Sections 302, 303 and
304 of the California Corporations Code. In such a case, the remaining Board members may elect a successor director
to fill such vacancy for the remaining unexpired term of the director so removed. No director may be removed (unless
the entire Board is removed) when the votes cast against removal or not consenting in writing to such removal would be
sufficient to elect such director if voted cumulatively at an election at which the same total number of votes were cast
(or, if such action is taken by written consent, all shares entitled to vote were voted) and the entire number of directors
authorized at the time of the directors most recent election were then being elected; and when by the provisions of the
Articles of Incorporation the holders of the shares of any class or series voting as a class or series are entitled to elect
one or more directors, any director so elected may be removed only by the applicable vote of the holders of the shares
of that class or series.
Section G.      Place of Meetings and Meetings by Telephone.
Regular meetings of the Board may be held at any place within or outside the State of California that has been
designated from time to time by resolution of the Board. In the absence of such a designation, regular meetings shall be
held at the principal executive office of the Corporation. Special meetings of the Board shall be held at any place within
or outside the State of California that has been designated in the notice of the meeting or, if not stated in the notice or if
there is no notice, at the principal executive office of the Corporation. Any meeting, regular or special, may be held by
conference telephone or similar communication equipment, so long as all directors participating in the meeting can hear
one another, and all such directors shall be deemed to be present in person at the meeting.
H-2
Section H.      Annual Meetings.
Immediately following each annual meeting of shareholders, the Board shall hold a regular meeting for the purpose of
the election of officers and the transaction of other business. Notice of this meeting shall not be required. Minutes of any
meeting of the Board, or any committee thereof, shall be maintained as required by Section 1500 of the California
Corporations Code by the Secretary or other officer designated for that purpose.
Section I.      Other Regular Meetings.
Other regular meetings of the Board shall be held at such time as shall from time to time be fixed by the Board. Such
regular meetings may be held without notice, provided the time and place has been fixed by the Board, and further
provided the notice of any change in the time of such meetings shall be given to all the directors. Notice of a change in
the time shall be given to each director in the same manner as notice for special meetings of the Board.
Section J.      Special Meetings.
Special meetings of the Board for any purpose or purposes may be called at any time by the Chairman of the Board, the
President, the Secretary or any two directors.
Notice of the time and place of such special meetings shall be delivered to each director personally or by telephone
(including a voice messaging system or other system designed to record and communicate messages), facsimile,
electronic mail or other electronic means, or sent by first-class mail or telegram, charges prepaid, addressed to each
director at such director's address as is shown on the records of the Corporation. If such notice is mailed, it shall be
deposited in the United States mail at least four days before the time of the holding of such meeting. If such notice is
delivered by telegram, it shall be delivered to the telegraph company at least 48 hours before the time of the holding of
such meeting. If such notice is delivered personally or by telephone, facsimile, electronic mail or other electronic means
it shall be delivered at least 48 hours before the time of holding such meeting. Any oral notice given personally or by
telephone may be communicated either to the director or to a person at the office of the director whom the person giving
such notice has reason to believe will promptly communicate it to such director. The notice need not specify the
purpose of the meeting or the place if the meeting is to be held at the principal executive office of the Corporation.
Section K.      Quorum.
A majority of the authorized number of directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, except to
adjourn as provided in Section M of this Article II. Every act or decision done or made by a majority of the directors
present at a meeting duly held at which a quorum is present shall be regarded as the act of the Board, subject to the
provisions of Section 310 of the Corporations Code of California (as to approval of contracts or transactions in which a
director has a direct or indirect material financial interest), Section 311 of such Code (as to appointment of committees)
and Section 317(e) of such Code (as to indemnification of directors). A meeting at which a quorum initially is present
may continue to transact business notwithstanding the withdrawal of directors, provided any action taken is approved
by at least a majority of the required quorum for such meeting.
H-3
Section L.      Waiver of Notice.
The transactions of any meeting of the Board, however called and noticed, and wherever held, shall be as valid as
though they had occurred at a meeting duly held after regular call and notice if a quorum is present and if, either before
or after such meeting, each of the directors not present signs a written waiver of notice, a consent to hold such meeting
or an approval of the minutes. The waiver of notice or consent need not specify the purpose of such meeting. All such
waivers, consents and approvals shall be filed with the corporate records or made a part of the minutes of such meeting.
Notice of a meeting shall also be deemed given to any director who attends the meeting without protesting, before or at
its commencement, the lack of notice to such director.
Section M.      Adjournment.
A majority of the directors present, whether or not constituting a quorum, may adjourn any meeting to another time and
place.
Section N.      Notice of Adjournment.
Notice of the time and place of holding an adjourned meeting need not be given, unless the meeting is adjourned for
more than 24 hours, in which case notice of the time and place shall be given before the time of the adjourned meeting
in the manner specified in Section J of this Article II to the directors who were not present at the time of the adjournment.
Section O.      Action Without Meeting.
Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Board may be taken without a meeting if all members of the Board
shall individually or collectively consent in writing to such action. Such action by written consent shall have the same
force and effect as a unanimous vote of the Board. Such written consent or consents shall be filed with the minutes of
the proceedings of the Board.
Section P.      Sole Director Provided by Articles of Incorporation.
In the event only one director is required by these Bylaws or the Articles of Incorporation, any references herein to
notices, waivers, consents, meetings or other actions by the majority or quorum of directors shall be deemed notice,
waiver, etc. by such sole director, who shall have all the rights and duties and shall be entitled to exercise all the powers
and shall assume all responsibilities otherwise herein described given to a Board.
Section Q.      Fees and Compensation of Directors.
Directors and members of committees may receive such compensation, if any, for their services and such
reimbursement of expenses as may be fixed or determined by resolution of the Board. This Section Q shall not be
construed to preclude any director from serving the Corporation in any other capacity as an officer, agent, employee or
otherwise, and receiving compensation for such service.
ARTICLE III
COMMITTEES; ADVISORY DIRECTORS
Section A.      Committees of Directors.
The Board may, by resolution adopted by a majority of the whole Board designate one or more committees, each
consisting of two or more directors, to serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Board may designate one or more
directors as alternate members of any such committee, who may replace any absent member at any meeting of such
committee. Any committee, to the extent provided in such a resolution of the Board, shall have all the authority of the
Board, except with respect to:
H-4
(a)     The approval of any action that, under the California General Corporation Law, also requires shareholders'
approval (under Section 153 of the California Corporations Code) or approval of the outstanding shares (under Section
152 of the California Corporations Code);
(b)     The filling of vacancies on the Board or in any committee;
(c)     The fixing of compensation of the directors for serving on the Board or on any committee;
(d)     The amendment or repeal of these bylaws or the adoption of new bylaws;
(e)     The amendment or repeal of any resolution of the Board that by its express terms is not so amendable or
repealable;
(f)     A distribution to the shareholders of the Corporation (under Section 166 of the California Corporations Code),
except at a rate or in a periodic amount or within a price range determined by the Board; and
(g)     The appointment of any other committees of the Board or the members of such committees.
Section B.      Meetings and Action of Committees.
Meetings and actions of committees shall be governed by, and held and taken in accordance with, the provisions of
Article II, Sections G (place of meetings), H (annual meetings), I (other regular meetings) J (special meetings),
K (quorum), L (waiver of notice), M (adjournment), N (notice of adjournment), and O (action without meeting), with such
changes in the context of these Bylaws as are necessary to substitute the committee and its members for the Board and
its members, except that the time of regular meetings of committees may be determined either by resolution of the
Board or by resolution of the committee; special meetings of committees also may be called by resolution of the Board;
and notice of special meetings of committees also shall be given to all alternate members, who shall have the right to
attend all meetings of the committee. The Board may adopt rules for the government of any committee not inconsistent
with the provisions of these Bylaws.
Section C.      Advisory Directors.
The Board from time to time may elect one or more persons to be advisory directors, who shall not by such appointment
be members of the Board. Advisory directors shall be available from time to time to perform special assignments
specified by the President, to attend meetings of the Board upon invitation and to furnish consultation to the Board. The
period during which the title shall be held may be prescribed by the Board. If no period is prescribed, title shall be held at
the pleasure of the Board.
ARTICLE IV
OFFICERS
Section A.      Officers.
The officers of the Corporation shall include a President, a Chief Financial Officer and a Secretary. The Corporation may
also have, at the discretion of the Board, a Chairman of the Board, one or more Vice Presidents, one or more Assistant
Secretaries, one or more Assistant Treasurers and such other officers as may be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of Section C of this Article IV. Any number of offices may be held by the same person.
Section B.      Election of Officers.
The officers of the Corporation, except such officers as may be appointed in accordance with the provisions of
Section C or Section E of this Article IV, shall be chosen by the Board, and each shall serve at the pleasure of the Board,
subject to the rights, if any, of any officer under any contract of employment.
H-5
Section C.      Subordinate Officers.
The Board may appoint and remove, and may empower the President to appoint and remove, such other officers as the
business of the Corporation may require, each of whom shall hold office for such period, have such authority and
perform such duties as are provided in these Bylaws or as the Board may from time to time determine.
Section D.      Removal and Resignation of Officers.
Subject to the rights, if any, of an officer under any contract of employment, any officer may be removed, either with or
without cause, by the Board at any regular or special meeting or, except in the case of any officer chosen by the Board,
by any officer upon whom such power of removal may be conferred by the Board.
Any officer may resign at any time by giving written notice to the Corporation. Any resignation shall take effect at the
date of the receipt of such notice or at any later time specified in such notice; and, unless otherwise specified in such
notice, the acceptance of such resignation shall not be necessary to make it effective. Any resignation is without
prejudice to the rights, if any, of the Corporation under any contract to which the resigning officer is a party.
Section E.      Vacancies in Offices.
A vacancy in any office because of death, resignation, removal, disqualification or any other cause shall be filled in the
manner prescribed in these Bylaws for regular appointments to such office.
Section F.      Chairman of the Board.
The Chairman of the Board, if such an officer be chosen, shall, if present, preside at meetings of the Board and exercise
and perform such other powers and duties as from time to time may be assigned to him by the Board or prescribed by
these Bylaws. If there is no President, the Chairman of the Board shall, in addition, be the Chief Executive Officer of the
Corporation and shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Section G of this Article IV.
Section G.      President.
Subject to such supervisory powers, if any, as may be given by the Board to the Chairman of the Board, if there is such
an officer, the President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation and shall, subject to the control of the
Board, have general supervision, direction and control of the business and the officers of the Corporation. He shall
preside at all meetings of the shareholders and, in the absence of the Chairman of the Board, or if there is none, at all
meetings of the Board. He shall have the general powers and duties of management usually vested in the office of
President of a Corporation and shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Board or these
Bylaws.
Section H.      Vice Presidents.
In the absence or disability of the President, the Vice Presidents, if any, in order of their rank as fixed by the Board or, if
not ranked, a Vice President designated by the Board, shall perform all the duties of the President and, when so acting,
shall have all the powers of, and be subject to all the restrictions upon, the President. The Vice Presidents shall have
such other powers and perform such other duties as from time to time may be prescribed for them by the Board, the
Chairman of the Board, the President or these Bylaws.
Section I.      Secretary.
The Secretary shall keep or cause to be kept, at the principal executive office or such other place as the Board may
direct, a book of minutes of all meetings and actions of directors, committees of directors and shareholders, with the
time and place of holding, whether regular or special and, if special, how authorized, the notice given, the names of
those present at Board meetings and committee meetings, the number of shares present or represented at meetings of
shareholders and the proceedings thereof.
H-6
The Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, at the principal executive office or at the office of the Corporation's
transfer agent or registrar, as determined by resolution of the Board, a share register or a duplicate share register
showing the names of all shareholders and their addresses, the number and classes of shares held by each, the
number and date of certificates issued for the same, and the number and date of cancellation of every certificate
surrendered for cancellation.
The Secretary shall give, or cause to be given, notice of all meetings of shareholders and of the Board required by these
Bylaws or by law to be given, and he shall keep in safe custody the seal of the Corporation, if one is adopted, and shall
have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board or by these Bylaws.
Section J.      Chief Financial Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer shall keep and maintain, or cause to be kept and maintained, adequate and correct books
and records of accounts of the properties and business transactions of the Corporation, including accounts of its
assets, liabilities, receipts, disbursements, gains, losses, capital, retained earnings and shares. The books of account
shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by any director.
The Chief Financial Officer shall deposit all money and other valuables in the name and to the credit of the Corporation
with such depositaries as may be designated by the Board. He shall disburse the funds of the Corporation as may be
ordered by the Board, shall render to the President and directors, whenever they request it, an account of all of his
transactions as Chief Financial Officer and of the financial condition of the Corporation, and shall have such other
powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board or these Bylaws.
ARTICLE V
INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS, OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND OTHER AGENTS
Section A.      Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
The Corporation shall, to the maximum extent and in the manner permitted by the California General Corporation Law,
indemnify each of its directors and officers against expenses (as defined in Section 317(a) of the California General
Corporation Law), judgments, fines, settlements, and other amounts actually and reasonably incurred in connection
with any proceeding (as defined in Section 317(a) of the California General Corporation Law), arising by reason of the
fact that such person is or was an agent of the Corporation. For purposes of this Article V, a “director” or “officer” of the
Corporation includes any person (i) who is or was a director or officer of the Corporation, (ii) who is or was serving at the
request of the corporation as a director or officer of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other
enterprise, or (iii) who was a director or officer of a corporation which was a predecessor corporation of the Corporation
or of another enterprise at the request of such predecessor corporation.
Section B.      Indemnification of Others.
The Corporation shall have the power, to the extent and in the manner permitted by the California General Corporation
Law, to indemnify each of its employees and agents (other than directors and officers) against expenses (as defined in
section 317(a) of the California General Corporation Law), judgments, fines, settlements, and other amounts actually and
reasonably incurred in connection with any proceeding (as defined in Section 317(a) of the California General
Corporation Law), arising by reason of the fact that such person is or was an agent of the corporation. For purposes of
this Article V, an “employee” or “agent” of the Corporation (other than a director or officer) includes any person (i) who
is or was an employee or agent of the Corporation, (ii) who is or was serving at the request of the Corporation as an
employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, or (iii) who was an
employee or agent of a corporation which was a predecessor corporation of the Corporation or of another enterprise at
the request of such predecessor corporation.
H-7
Section C.      Payment of Expenses in Advance.
Expenses incurred in defending any civil or criminal action or proceeding for which indemnification is required pursuant
to this Article V or for which indemnification is permitted pursuant to this Article V following authorization thereof by the
Board shall be paid by the Corporation in advance of the final disposition of such action or proceeding upon receipt of
an undertaking by or on behalf of the indemnified party to repay such amount if it shall ultimately be determined that the
indemnified party is not entitled to be indemnified as authorized in this Article V.
Section D.      Indemnity Not Exclusive.
The indemnification provided by this Article V shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking
indemnification may be entitled under any bylaw, agreement, vote of shareholders or disinterested directors or
otherwise, both as to action in an official capacity and as to action in another capacity while holding such office, to the
extent that such additional rights to indemnification are authorized in the Articles of Incorporation.
Section E.      Insurance Indemnification.
The Corporation shall have the power to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a
director, officer, employee or agent of the Corporation against any liability asserted against or incurred by such person
in such capacity or arising out of such person’s status as such, whether or not the Corporation would have the power to
indemnify them against such liability under the provisions of this Article V.
Section F.      Conflicts.
No indemnification or advance shall be made under this Article V, except where such indemnification or advance is
mandated by law or the order, judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, in any circumstance where it
appears:
(i)     That it would be inconsistent with a provision of the Articles of Incorporation, these Bylaws, a resolution of the
shareholders or an agreement in effect at the time of the accrual of the alleged cause of the action asserted in the
proceeding in which the expenses were incurred or other amounts were paid, which prohibits or otherwise limits
indemnification; or
(ii)     That it would be inconsistent with any condition expressly imposed by a court in approving a settlement.
ARTICLE VI
MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS
Section A.      Place of Meetings.
Meetings of shareholders shall be held at any place within or outside the State of California designated by the Board. In
the absence of any such designation, meetings of shareholders shall be held at the principal executive office of the
Corporation.
Section B.      Annual Meeting.
The annual meeting of shareholders shall be held on such date and at such time as the Board may determine. The
annual meeting shall be held at the Corporation's principal offices or at any other location as may be determined by the
Board. At each annual meeting, directors shall be elected and any other proper business may be transacted.
H-8
Section C.      Special Meetings.
A special meeting of the shareholders may be called at any time by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the President,
or one or more shareholders holding shares in the aggregate entitled to cast not less than 10% of the votes at such
meeting.
If a special meeting is called by any person or persons other than the Board, the request shall be in writing, specifying
the time of such meeting and the general nature of the business proposed to be transacted, and shall be delivered
personally or sent by registered mail or by telegraphic or other facsimile transmission to the Chairman of the Board, the
President, any Vice President or the Secretary. The officer receiving the request shall promptly cause notice to be given
to the shareholders entitled to vote, in accordance with the provisions of Sections D and E of this Article VI, that a
meeting will be held at the time requested by the person or persons calling the meeting, not fewer than 35 days or more
than 60 days after the receipt of the request. If such notice is not given within 20 days after the receipt of the request, the
person or persons requesting the meeting may give the notice in the manner provided in these Bylaws. Nothing
contained in this paragraph of this Section C shall be construed as limiting, fixing or affecting the time when a meeting
of shareholders called by action of the Board may be held.
Section D.      Notice of Meetings of Shareholders.
All notices of meetings of shareholders shall be sent or otherwise given in accordance with Section E of this Article VI
not less than 10 days or more than 60 days before the date of the meeting. Such notice shall specify the place, date, and
hour of the meeting and (i) in the case of a special meeting, the general nature of the business to be transacted, or (ii) in
the case of the annual meeting, those matters that the Board, at the time of giving the notice, intends to present for
action by the shareholders. The notice of any meeting at which directors are to be elected shall include the name of any
nominee or nominees whom, at the time of the notice, management intends to present for election.
If action is proposed to be taken at any meeting for approval of (i) a contract or transaction in which a director has a
direct or indirect financial interest, pursuant to Section 310 of the Corporations Code of California, (ii) an amendment of
the Articles of Incorporation, pursuant to Section 902 of such Code, (iii) a reorganization of the Corporation, pursuant to
Section 1201 of such Code, (iv) a voluntary dissolution of the Corporation, pursuant to Section 1900 of such Code, or (v)
a distribution other than in accordance with the rights of outstanding preferred shares, pursuant to Section 2007 of
such Code, the notice shall also state the general nature of such proposal.
Section E.      Manner of Giving Notice; Affidavit of Notice.
Notice of any meeting of shareholders shall be given either personally or by first-class mail or telegraphic or other
written communication, charges prepaid, addressed to each shareholder at the address of such shareholder appearing
on the books of the Corporation or given by the shareholder to the Corporation for the purpose of notice. If no such
address appears on the books of the Corporation or is given, notice shall be deemed to have been given if sent to a
shareholder by first-class mail or telegraphic or other written communication at the location of the Corporation's
principal executive office, or if published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such
office is located. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time when delivered personally or deposited in the
mail or sent by telegram or other means of written communication.
If any notice addressed to a shareholder at the address of such shareholder appearing on the books of the Corporation
is returned to the Corporation by the United States Postal Service marked to indicate that the United States Postal
Service is unable to deliver such notice to such shareholder at such address, each future notice and report shall be
deemed to have been duly given without further mailing if it shall be available to the shareholder on written demand by
the shareholder at the principal executive office of the Corporation for a period of one year from the date of the giving of
such notice or report.
An affidavit of the mailing or other means of giving any notice of any meeting of shareholders shall be executed by the
Secretary, Assistant Secretary or any transfer agent of the Corporation giving the notice and shall be filed and
maintained in the minutes book of the Corporation.
H-9
Section F.      Nominations For Director.
Nominations for election of members of the Board of Directors may be made by the Board of Directors or by any
shareholder of any outstanding class of voting stock of the corporation entitled to vote for the election of directors.
Notice of intention to make any nominations, other than by the Board of Directors shall be made in writing and shall be
received by the President of the corporation no more than 60 days prior to any meeting of shareholders called for the
election of directors, nor more than 10 days after the date the notice of such meeting is sent to shareholders pursuant to
Article VI Section D of these bylaws, provided, however, that if 10 days’ notice of the meeting is given to shareholders,
such notice of intention to nominate shall be received by the President of the corporation not later than the time fixed in
the notice of the meeting for the opening of the meeting. Such notification shall contain the following information to the
extent known to the notifying shareholder: (a) the name and address of each proposed nominee; (b) the principal
occupation of each proposed nominee; (c) the number of shares of voting stock of the corporation owned by each
proposed nominee; (d) the name and residence address of the notifying shareholder; and (e) the number of shares of
voting stock of the corporation owned by the notifying shareholder. Nominations not made in accordance herewith may
be disregarded by the then chairman of the meeting, and the inspectors of election shall then disregard all votes cast for
each such nominee.
Section G.      Quorum.
The presence in person or by proxy of the holders of a majority of the shares entitled to vote at a meeting of
shareholders shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at such meeting. The shareholders in attendance
at a duly called or held meeting at which a quorum is present may continue to do business until adjournment,
notwithstanding the withdrawal of enough shareholders to leave less than a quorum, if any action taken (other than
adjournment) is approved by at least a majority of the shares required to constitute a quorum.
Section H.      Adjourned Meeting; Notice.
Any meeting of shareholders, annual or special, whether or not a quorum is present, may be adjourned from time to time
by the vote of the majority of the shares represented at such meeting, either in person or by proxy; but in the absence of
a quorum, no other business may be transacted at such meeting, except as provided in Section F of this Article VI.
When any meeting of shareholders, annual or special, is adjourned to another time or place, notice need not be given of
the adjourned meeting if the time and place are announced at a meeting at which the adjournment is taken, unless a new
record date for the adjourned meeting is fixed or unless the adjournment is for more than 45 days from the date set for
the original meeting, in which case the Board shall set a new record date. Notice of any such adjourned meeting shall be
given to each shareholder of record entitled to vote at the adjourned meeting in accordance with the provisions of
Sections D and E of this Article VI. At any adjourned meeting, the Corporation may transact any business that might
have been transacted at the original meeting.
Section I.      Voting.
The shareholders entitled to vote at any meeting of shareholders shall be determined in accordance with the provisions
of Section L of this Article VI, subject to the provisions of Sections 702 to 704, inclusive, of the California Corporations
Code (relating to voting shares held by a fiduciary or in joint ownership). The shareholders' vote may be by voice vote or
by ballot; provided, however, that any election of directors must be by ballot if demanded by any shareholder before the
voting has begun. On any matter other than the election of directors, any shareholder may vote part of the shares in
favor of the proposal and refrain from voting the remaining shares or vote them against the proposal; but if a
shareholder fails to specify the number of shares such shareholder is voting affirmatively, it shall be presumed
conclusively that such shareholder's approving vote is with respect to all shares that such shareholder is entitled to
vote. Except as provided in Section F of this Article VI, the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares represented and
voting at a duly held meeting at which a quorum is present (which shares voting affirmatively also constitute at least a
majority of the required quorum) shall be the act of the shareholders, unless the vote of a greater number or voting by
classes is required by California General Corporation Law or the Articles of Incorporation.
H-10
At a meeting of shareholders at which directors are to be elected, no shareholder shall be entitled to cumulate votes (i.e.,
cast for any one or more candidates a number of votes greater than the number of such shareholder's shares) unless
the candidates' names have been placed in nomination prior to commencement of the voting and a shareholder has
given notice prior to commencement of the voting of such shareholder's intention to cumulate votes. If any shareholder
has given such a notice, every shareholder entitled to vote may cumulate votes for candidates in the number of
directors to be elected multiplied by the number of votes to which such shareholder's shares are entitled or distribute
such shareholder's votes on the same principle among any or all of the candidates as the shareholder thinks fit. The
candidates receiving the highest number of votes, up to the number of directors to be elected, shall be elected.
Section J.      Waiver of Notice or Consent by Absent Shareholders.
The transactions of any meeting of shareholders, annual or special, however called and noticed and wherever held,
shall be as valid as though they had occurred at a meeting duly held after regular call and notice, if a quorum is present
either in person or by proxy, and if, either before or after such meeting, each person entitled to vote who was not
present in person or by proxy signs a written waiver of notice or a consent to a holding of such meeting or an approval
of the minutes thereof. Such waiver of notice or consent need not specify either the business to be transacted or the
purpose of any annual or special meeting of shareholders, except that if action is taken or proposed to be taken for
approval of any of those matters specified in the second paragraph of Section D of this Article VI, the waiver of notice or
consent shall state the general nature of the proposal. All such waivers, consents or approvals shall be filed with the
corporate records or made a part of the minutes of the meeting.
Attendance by a person at a meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of such meeting, except that when the
person objects at the beginning of the meeting to the transaction of any business thereat because such meeting is not
lawfully called or convened, and except that attendance at a meeting is not a waiver of any right to object to the
consideration of matters not included in the notice of such meeting if an objection is expressly made at such meeting.
Section K.      Shareholders Acting Without a Meeting; Filling Vacancies on Board.
Any action to elect directors which may be taken at a meeting of the shareholders may be taken without a meeting or
notice of meeting if authorized by a writing signed by all of the shareholders entitled to vote at a meeting for such
purpose and filed with the Secretary; provided further, that while ordinarily directors can only be elected by unanimous
written consent under California Corporations Code Section 603(d), as to vacancy created by death, resignation or other
causes, if the directors fail to fill a vacancy, then a director to fill that vacancy may be elected by the written consent of
persons holding a majority of shares entitled to vote for the election of directors.
Section L.      Other Actions Without a Meeting.
Unless otherwise provided in the California General Corporation Law, any action that may be taken at any annual or
special meeting of shareholders may be taken without a meeting and without prior notice if a consent in writing, setting
forth the action so taken, is signed by the holders of outstanding shares having not less than the minimum number of
votes that would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to vote on such
action were present and voted.
Unless the consents of all shareholders entitled to vote have been solicited in writing, and unless the unanimous written
consent of all shareholders has been received, the Secretary shall give prompt notice of the corporate action approved
by the shareholders without a meeting. Such notice shall be given in the manner specified in Section E of this Article VI.
In the case of approval of (i) contracts or transactions in which a director has a direct or indirect financial interest,
pursuant to Section 310 of the California Corporations Code, (ii) indemnification of agents of the Corporation, pursuant
to Section 317 of such Code, (iii) a reorganization of the Corporation, pursuant to Section 1201 of such Code, and (iv) a
distribution in dissolution other than in accordance with the rights of outstanding preferred shares, pursuant to Section
2007 of such Code, such notice shall be given at least 10 days before the consummation of any action authorized by
such approval. Any shareholder giving a written consent or the shareholder's proxy holders or a transferee of the
shares or a personal representative of the shareholder or their respective proxy holders may revoke the consent by a
writing received by the Secretary before written consents of the number of shares required to authorize the proposed
action have been filed with the Secretary but may not do so thereafter. Such revocation is effective upon its receipt by
the Secretary.
H-11
Section M.      Record Date for Shareholder Notice, Voting and Giving Consents.
For purposes of determining the shareholders entitled to receive notice of any meeting or to give consent to corporate
action without a meeting, the Board may fix in advance a record date, which shall not be more than 60 days or less than
10 days before the date of any such meeting nor more than 60 days before any such action without a meeting. In this
event, only shareholders of record on the date so fixed are entitled to receive notice and to vote or to give consents, as
the case may be, notwithstanding any transfer of any shares on the books of the Corporation after the record date,
except as otherwise provided in the California General Corporation Law.
If the Board does not so fix a record date:
(a)     The record date for determining shareholders entitled to receive notice of or to vote at a meeting of shareholders
shall be at the close of business on the business day next preceding the day on which notice is given or, if notice is
waived, at the close of business on the business day next preceding the date on which the meeting is held; or
(b)     The record date for determining shareholders entitled to give consent to corporate action in writing without a
meeting, (i) when no prior action by the Board has been taken, shall be the day on which the first written consent is
given, or (ii) when prior action of the Board has been taken, shall be at the close of business on the day on which the
Board adopts the resolution relating to that action or at the close of business on the sixtieth day before the date of such
other action, whichever is later.
Section N.      Proxies.
Every shareholder entitled to vote for directors or on any other matter shall have the right to do so either in person or by
one or more agents authorized by a proxy validly executed by the shareholder. A proxy may be executed by written
authorization signed, or by electronic transmission authorized, by the shareholder or the shareholder's attorney-in-fact,
giving the proxyholder(s) the power to vote the shareholder's shares. A proxy shall be deemed signed if the
shareholder's name or other authorization is placed on the proxy (whether by manual signature, typewriting, telegraphic
or electronic transmission or otherwise) by the shareholder or the shareholder's attorney-in-fact. A proxy may also be
transmitted orally by telephone if submitted with information from which it may be determined that the proxy was
authorized by the shareholder or the shareholder's attorney-in-fact. A validly executed proxy which does not state that it
is irrevocable shall continue in full force and effect unless (i) revoked by the person executing it, before the vote
pursuant to such proxy, by a writing delivered to the Corporation stating that such proxy is revoked, or by a subsequent
proxy executed by, or attendance at the meeting and voting in person by, the person executing such proxy; or (ii)
written notice of the death or incapacity of the maker of such proxy is received by the Corporation before the vote
pursuant to such proxy is counted; provided, however, that no proxy shall be valid after the expiration of eleven months
from the date of the proxy unless otherwise provided in the proxy. The revocability of a proxy that states on its face that
it is irrevocable shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 705(e) and 705(f) of the Corporations Code of California.
Section O.      Inspectors of Election.
Before any meeting of shareholders, the Board may appoint any persons other than nominees for office to act as
inspectors of election at the meeting or its adjournment. If no inspectors of election are so appointed, the chairman of
the meeting may, and on the request of any shareholder or a shareholder's proxy shall, appoint inspectors of election at
the meeting. The number of such inspectors shall be either one (1) or three (3). If such inspectors are appointed at a
meeting on the request of one or more shareholders or proxies, the holders of a majority of shares or their proxies
present at the meeting shall determine whether one (1) or three (3) inspectors are to be appointed. If any person
appointed as inspector fails to appear or fails or refuses to act, the chairman of the meeting may, and upon the request
of any shareholder or a shareholder's proxy shall, appoint a person to fill that vacancy.
H-12
Such inspectors shall:
(a)     Determine the number of shares outstanding and the voting power of each, the shares represented at the meeting,
the existence of a quorum, and the authenticity, validity, and effect of proxies;
(b)     Receive votes, ballots or consents;
(c)     Hear and determine all challenges and questions in any way arising in connection with the right to vote;
(d)     Count and tabulate all votes or consents;
(e)     Determine when the polls shall close;
(f)     Determine the result; and
(g)     Do any other acts that may be necessary or proper to conduct the election or vote with fairness to all shareholders.
ARTICLE VII
RECORDS, REPORTS AND GENERAL CORPORATE MATTERS
Section A.      Maintenance and Inspection of Share Register.
The Corporation shall keep at its principal executive office or at the office of its transfer agent or registrar, if either be
appointed, and as determined by resolution of the Board, a record of its shareholders, giving the names and addresses
of all shareholders and the number and class of shares held by each shareholder.
A shareholder or shareholders of the Corporation holding at least 5% in the aggregate of the outstanding voting shares
of the Corporation may: (i) inspect and copy the record of shareholders' names and addresses and shareholdings
during usual business hours, on five days' prior written demand on the Corporation, and/or (ii) obtain from the transfer
agent of the Corporation, on written demand and on the tender of such transfer agent's usual charges for such list, a list
of the names and addresses of the shareholders who are entitled to vote for the election of directors, and their
shareholdings, as of the most recent record date for which such list has been compiled or as of a date specified by such
shareholder or shareholders after the date of demand. Such list shall be made available to any such shareholder by the
transfer agent on or before the later of five days after the demand is received or the date specified in the demand as the
date as of which such list is to be compiled. The record of shareholders shall also be open to inspection on the written
demand of any shareholder or holder of a voting trust certificate, at any time during usual business hours, for a purpose
reasonably related to the holder's interests as a shareholder or as the holder of a voting trust certificate. Any inspection
and copying under this Section A may be made in person or by an agent or attorney of the shareholder or a holder of a
voting trust certificate making the demand.
Section B.      Maintenance and Inspection of Bylaws.
The Corporation shall keep at its principal executive office or if its principal executive office is not in the State of
California, at its principal business office in the State of California, the original or a copy of these Bylaws as amended to
date, which shall be open to inspection by the shareholders at all reasonable times during office hours. If the principal
executive office of the Corporation is outside the State of California and the Corporation has no principal business
office in the State of California, the Secretary shall, upon the written request of any shareholder, furnish to such
shareholder a copy of these Bylaws as amended to date.
Section C.      Maintenance and Inspection of Other Corporate Records.
The accounting books and records and minutes of proceedings of the shareholders and the Board and any committee
or committees of the Board shall be kept at such place or places as may be designated by the Board or, in the absence
of such designation, at the principal executive office of the Corporation. The minutes shall be kept in written form, and
the accounting books and records shall be kept either in written form or in any other form capable of being converted
into written form. The minutes and accounting books and records shall be open to inspection upon the written demand
of any shareholder or holder of a voting trust certificate, at any reasonable time during usual business hours, for a
purpose reasonably related to the holder's interests as a shareholder or as a holder of a voting trust certificate. The
inspection may be made in person or by an agent or attorney and shall include the right to copy and make extracts. The
rights of inspection set forth in this Section C shall extend to the equivalent records of each subsidiary Corporation of
the Corporation.
H-13
Section D.      Inspection by Directors.
Every director shall have the absolute right at any reasonable time to inspect all books, records and documents of every
kind and the physical properties of the Corporation and each of its subsidiary Corporations. Such inspection by a
director may be made in person or by an agent or attorney, and the right of inspection includes the right to copy and
make extracts of all documents.
Section E.      Annual Report to Shareholders.
Provided the Corporation has 100 shareholders or less, the Annual Report to Shareholders referred to in Section 1501
of the General Corporation Law is expressly dispensed with, but nothing herein shall be interpreted as prohibiting the
Board from issuing annual or other periodic reports to shareholders of the Corporation as they deem appropriate.
Should the Corporation have 100 or more shareholders, an Annual Report must be furnished not later than 120 days
after the end of each fiscal period.
Section F.      Financial Statements.
A copy of any annual financial statement and any income statement of the Corporation for each quarterly period of each
fiscal year, and any accompanying balance sheet of the Corporation as of the end of each such period, that has been
prepared by the Corporation shall be kept on file in the principal executive office of the Corporation for 12 months, and
each such statement shall be exhibited at all reasonable times to any shareholder demanding an examination of any
such statement or a copy shall be mailed to any such shareholder.
If a shareholder or shareholders holding at least 5% of the outstanding shares of any class of stock of the Corporation
makes a written request to the Corporation for an income statement of the Corporation for the three-month, six-month or
nine-month period of the then-current fiscal year ending more than 30 days before the date of the request and a balance
sheet of the Corporation as of the end of such period, the Chief Financial Officer shall cause such statement to be
prepared, if not already prepared, and shall deliver personally or mail such statement to the person making such
request within 30 days after the receipt of such request. If the Corporation has not sent to the shareholders its annual
report for the last fiscal year (and if such report is required to be sent in accordance with Section E of this Article VII),
this report shall likewise be delivered or mailed to the shareholder or shareholders within 30 days after such request.
The Corporation shall also, on the written request of any shareholder, mail to the shareholder a copy of the last annual,
semi-annual or quarterly income statement that it has prepared and a balance sheet as of the end of that period.
The quarterly income statements and balance sheets referred to in this Section F shall be accompanied by the report, if
any, of any independent accountants engaged by the Corporation or the certificate of an authorized officer of the
Corporation that the financial statements were prepared without audit from the books and records of the Corporation.
Section G.      Annual Statement of General Information.
The Corporation shall, within the statutorily required time period, file with the Secretary of State of California, on the
prescribed form, a statement setting forth the authorized number of directors, the names and complete business or
residence addresses of all incumbent directors, the names and complete business or residence addresses of the Chief
Executive Officer, Secretary and Chief Financial Officer, the street address of its principal executive office or principal
business office in this state and the general type of business constituting the principal business activity of the
Corporation, together with a designation of the agent of the Corporation for the purpose of service of process and any
other required information, all in compliance with Section 1502 of the Corporations Code of California.
H-14
Section H.      Record Date for Purposes Other Than Notice and Voting.
For purposes of determining the shareholders entitled to receive any dividend or other distribution or allotment of any
rights or entitled to exercise any rights with respect to any other lawful action (other than action by shareholders by
written consent without a meeting), the Board may fix, in advance, a record date, which shall not be more than 60 days
before any such action, and in such case only shareholders of record on the date so fixed are entitled to receive such
dividend, distribution or allotment of rights or to exercise the rights, as the case may be, notwithstanding any transfer of
any shares on the books of the Corporation after the record date so fixed, except as otherwise provided in the California
General Corporation Law.
If the Board does not so fix a record date, the record date for determining shareholders for any such purpose shall be at
the close of business on the day on which the Board adopts the applicable resolution or the sixtieth day before the date
of such action, whichever is later.
Section I.      Checks, Drafts, Evidence of Indebtedness.
All checks, drafts or other orders for payment of money, notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued in the name
of or payable to the Corporation shall be signed or endorsed by such person or persons and in such manner as, from
time to time, shall be determined by resolution of the Board.
Section J.      Execution of Corporate Contracts and Instruments.
The Board, except as otherwise provided in these Bylaws, may authorize any officer, officers, agent or agents to enter
into any contract or execute any instrument in the name of and for the Corporation; such authority may be general or
confined to specific instances; and, unless so authorized or ratified by the Board or within the agency power of an
officer, no officer, agent or employee shall have any power or authority to bind the Corporation by any contract or
engagement or to pledge its credit or to render it liable for any purpose or in any amount.
ARTICLE VIII
CERTIFICATES AND TRANSFERS OF SHARES
Section A.      Certificates for Shares.
Certificates for shares shall be of such form and device as the Board may designate and shall state the name of the
record holder of the shares represented thereby; its number and date of issuance; the number of shares for which it is
issued; a statement of the rights, privileges, preferences and restrictions, if any; a statement as to the redemption or
conversion, if any; a statement of liens or restrictions upon transfer or voting, if any; and if the shares be assessable, or
if assessments are collectible by personal action, a plain statement of such facts.
Every certificate for shares must be signed by the Chairman of the Board or the President or a Vice President and the
Chief Financial Officer or the Secretary or an Assistant Secretary, and must be authenticated by the signature of the
President and Secretary or an Assistant Secretary. No certificate or certificates for shares are to be issued until such
shares are fully paid, unless the Board authorizes the issuance of certificates or shares as partly paid, provided that
such certificates shall state the amount of consideration to be paid therefore and the amount paid thereon.
Notwithstanding any other provision of these By-Laws that refers to certificates evidencing shares of the Corporation's
outstanding shares of capital stock, shares of the Corporation may be evidenced by registration in the holder's name in
uncertificated, book-entry form in accordance with the direct registration system approved by the United States
Securities and Exchange Commission and by the principal securities exchange on which the stock of the Corporation
may from time to time be traded, or as may be otherwise authorized by Section 416(b) of the California General
Corporation Law or any successor statute, as any of the foregoing may be approved from time to time by the Board of
Directors. Every holder of uncertificated shares of the Corporation shall be entitled to receive a statement of holdings as
evidence of share ownership.
H-15
Section B.      Transfer on the Books.
Upon surrender to the Secretary or transfer agent of the Corporation of a certificate for shares duly endorsed or
accompanied by proper evidence of succession, assignment or authority to transfer, it shall be the duty of the
Corporation to issue a new certificate to the person entitled thereto, cancel the old certificate, and record the transaction
on its books.
Section C.      Lost or Destroyed Certificates.
Any person claiming a certificate or stock to be lost or destroyed shall make an affidavit or affirmation of that fact and
shall, if the directors so require, give the Corporation a bond of indemnity, in the form and with one or more sureties
satisfactory to the Board, in an amount satisfactory to the Board, whereupon a new certificate may be issued in the
same manner and for the same number of shares as the one alleged to be lost or destroyed.
Section D.      Transfer Agents and Registrars.
The Board may appoint one or more transfer agents or transfer clerks and one or more registrars, which shall be an
incorporated bank or trust company, either domestic or foreign, who shall be appointed at such times and places as the
requirements of the Corporation may necessitate and the directors may designate.
Section E.      Legend Condition.
In the event any shares of this Corporation are issued pursuant to a permit or exemption therefrom requiring the
imposition of a legend condition, the person or persons issuing or transferring said shares shall make sure said legend
appears on the certificate and on the stub relating thereto in the stock record book and shall not be required to transfer
any shares free of such legend unless an amendment to such permit to a new permit be first issued so authorizing said
deletion.
ARTICLE IX
AMENDMENTS
Section A.      Amendment by Shareholders.
New bylaws may be adopted or these Bylaws may be amended or repealed by the vote or written consent of holders of a
majority of the outstanding shares entitled to vote; provided, however, that if the Articles of Incorporation set forth the
number of authorized directors of the Corporation, the authorized number of directors may be changed only by an
amendment of such Articles of Incorporation.
Section B.      Amendment by Directors.
Subject to the rights of the shareholders as provided in Section A of this Article IX, bylaws, other than a bylaw or an
amendment of a bylaw changing the authorized number of directors, may be adopted, amended or repealed by the
Board.
H-16
CERTIFICATE OF SECRETARY
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that:
(1)     I am the duly elected and acting Secretary of Pyramid Oil Company, a California corporation; and
(2)     The foregoing Bylaws, comprising 16 pages, constitute the Amended and Restated Bylaws of said Corporation as
duly adopted by the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto subscribed my name Corporation this 17th day of October, 2013.
/s/ Lee G. Christianson
 Lee G. Christianson, Secretary
H-17
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 20.    Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Pyramid
Sections 204(a)(11) and 317 of the California General Corporation Law authorize Pyramid to indemnify, subject to the
terms and conditions set forth therein, its directors, officers, employees and other agents against expenses, judgments,
fines, settlements and other amounts that they may incur in connection with pending, threatened or completed lawsuits
and other proceedings that are based upon their service as Pyramid directors, officers, employees or other agents or
that are based upon their service as directors, officers, employees or other agents of certain other specified entities. The
California General Corporation Law also provides that Pyramid is entitled to purchase indemnification insurance on
behalf of any such director, officer, employee or agent. Article Seventh of Pyramid’s articles of incorporation permits it
to indemnify its directors, officers, employees and other agents in excess of the indemnification otherwise permitted by
Section 317 of the California General Corporation Law, subject only to the applicable limits set forth in Section 204 of the
California General Corporation Law. Article V of Pyramid’s bylaws requires it to indemnify its directors and officers
against such expenses, judgments, fines, settlements and other amounts to the maximum extent permitted by
applicable law.
Article Seventh of Pyramid’s articles of incorporation eliminates the personal liability of its directors for monetary
damages for breach of their duties as directors to the fullest extent permitted under California law. Section 204(a)(10) of
the California General Corporation Law provides that this provision does not eliminate the liability of a director for
specified acts such as (1) acts or omissions that involve intentional misconduct or a knowing and culpable violation of
law, (2) acts or omissions that a director believes to be contrary to the best interests of the corporation or its
stockholders or that involve the absence of good faith on the part of the director, (3) any transaction from which the
director derived an improper personal benefit, (4) acts or omissions that show a reckless disregard for the director’s
duty to the corporation or its stockholders in circumstances in which the director was aware, or should have been
aware, in the ordinary course of performing his or her duties, of a risk of serious injury to the corporation or its
stockholders, (5) acts or omissions that constitute an unexcused pattern of inattention that amounts to an abdication of
the director’s duty to the corporation or its stockholders, or (6) unlawful dividends, loans or stock repurchases.
Pyramid has also entered into individual indemnity agreements with its directors and executive officers. These
agreements indemnify those directors and officers to the fullest extent permitted by law against inordinate risks of
claims and actions against them arising out of their service to and activities on behalf of Pyramid.
II-1
Item 21.    Exhibits
Description
Exhibit
No.
2.1*
3.1*
3.2*
5.1**
8.1**
10.1**
10.2**
10.3**
10.4**
10.5**
10.6**
10.7**
Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization dated as of August 1, 2014, by and among
Yuma Energy, Inc., Pyramid Oil Company, Pyramid Delaware Merger Subsidiary, Inc., and Pyramid Merger Subsidiary,
 
Inc. (included as Annex A to the proxy statement/prospectus in Part I of this Registration Statement and incorporated
herein by reference).
  
Form of Restated Articles of Incorporation of Pyramid Oil Company (included as Annex F to the proxy
 
statement/prospectus forming part of this Registration Statement and incorporated herein by reference).
  
Amended and Restated Bylaws of Pyramid Oil Company (included as Annex H to the proxy statement/prospectus
 
forming part of this Registration Statement and incorporated herein by reference).
  
Opinion of TroyGould PC regarding the legality of the shares of the Registrant’s common stock to be registered under
 
this Registration Statement.
  
 Tax Opinion of TroyGould PC.
  
Amended and Restated Voting Agreement dated as of August 1, 2014, between Yuma Energy, Inc. and Michael D.
Herman (included as Annex B to the proxy statement/prospectus in Part I of this Registration Statement and incorporated
herein by reference).
  
Amended and Restated Voting Agreement dated as of August 1, 2014, by and among Pyramid Oil Company, Pyramid
Merger Subsidiary, Inc., and the Persons listed on Schedule A thereto (included as Annex C to the proxy
statement/prospectus in Part I of this Registration Statement and incorporated herein by reference).
  
Credit Agreement dated as of August 11, 2011, among Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc., as Borrower,
Amegy Bank National Association, as Administrative Agent, and each of the lenders from time to time party thereto.
  
First Amendment and Limited Waiver to Credit Agreement and Assignment effective as of September 21, 2012, among
Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc., as Borrower, Amegy Bank National Association, as Administrative
Agent and Assignor, Union Bank, N.A., as an Assignee and successor Administrative Agent and successor Issuing
Bank, and each of the lenders party thereto.
  
Second Amendment to Credit Agreement and Assignment effective as of February 13, 2013, among Yuma Exploration
and Production Company, Inc., as Borrower, Union Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent and Assignor, Societe General,
as an Assignee and successor Administrative Agent and successor Issuing Bank, and each of the lenders party thereto.
  
Third Amendment to Credit Agreement and Assignment effective as of May 20, 2013, among Yuma Exploration and
Production Company, Inc., as Borrower, Union Bank, N.A., as Assignor, Societe General, as an Assignor and
Administrative Agent and Issuing Bank, OneWest Bank, FSB, as Assignee, and each of the lenders party thereto.
  
Fourth Amendment to Credit Agreement effective as of April 22, 2014, among Yuma Exploration and Production
Company, Inc., as Borrower, Societe General, as Administrative Agent and Issuing Bank, and each of the lenders party
thereto.
10.8**  Employment Agreement dated October 1, 2012, between Yuma Energy, Inc. and Sam L. Banks.
 
10.9**  Employment Agreement dated October 1, 2012, between Yuma Energy, Inc. and Michael F. Conlon.
 
10.10** Employment Agreement dated June 15, 2014, between Yuma Energy, Inc. and Mark D. Hartman.
 
23.1**  Consent of SingerLewak LLP.
 
23.2**  Consent of MHA Petroleum Consultants.
23.3**  Consent of Grant Thornton LLP.
 
23.4**  Consent of TroyGould PC (included in opinion filed as Exhibit 5.1 and Exhibit 8.1).
 
23.5**  Consent of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc.
 
23.6**  Consent of Pressler Petroleum Consultants, Inc.
24.1**
Powers of Attorney (incorporated by reference to the signature page of the Registration Statement on Form S-4, No. 333-
197826, as filed with the SEC on August 4, 2014).
99.1**  Form of Proxy Card for Holders of Pyramid Common Stock.
 
99.2**  Form of Proxy Card for Holders of Yuma Common Stock and Preferred Stock.
II-2
99.3**
Opinion of ROTH Capital Partners, LLC (included as Annex D to the proxy statement/prospectus forming part of this
Registration Statement and incorporated herein by reference).
99.4**  Consent of ROTH Capital Partners, LLC.
99.5**
Report of MHA Petroleum Consultants dated February 12, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on March 31, 2014).
99.6**  Report of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. dated April 22, 2014.
 
99.7**  Consent of Sam L. Banks, as Director Nominee.
 
99.8**  Consent of James W. Christmas, as Director Nominee.
 
99.9**  Consent of Frank A. Lodzinski, as Director Nominee.
 
99.10** Consent of Ben T. Morris, as Director Nominee.
 
99.11** Consent of Richard K. Stoneburner, as Director Nominee.
 
99.12** Consent of Richard W. Volk, as Director Nominee.
 
99.13*  ROTH Capital Partners presentation dated December, 2014.
 
99.14*  Consent of ROTH Capital Partners, LLC.
*Filed herewith.
**Previously filed.
II-3
Item 22.    Undertakings
The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes:
(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this Registration
Statement: (i) to include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933, (ii) to reflect in the
prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the Registration Statement (or the most recent post-
effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information
set forth in the Registration Statement, and (iii) to include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution
not previously disclosed in the Registration Statement or any material change to such information in the Registration
Statement.
(2) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective
amendment shall be deemed to be a new Registration Statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which
remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4) That prior to any public reoffering of the securities registered hereunder through use of a prospectus which is part of
this Registration Statement, by any person or party who is deemed to be an underwriter within the meaning of Rule
145(c), the issuer undertakes that such reoffering prospectus will contain the information called for by the applicable
registration form with respect to reofferings by persons who may be deemed underwriters, in addition to the information
called for by the other Items of the applicable form.
(5) That every prospectus: (i) that is filed pursuant to paragraph 4 immediately preceding, or (ii) that purports to meet the
requirements of Section 10(a)(3) of the Act and is used in connection with an offering of securities subject to Rule 415,
will be filed as a part of an amendment to the Registration Statement and will not be used until such amendment is
effective, and that, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective
amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offering therein, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(6) To respond to requests for information that is incorporated by reference into the prospectus pursuant to Item 4 of
this Form, within one business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated documents by first class
mail or other equally prompt means. This includes information contained in the documents filed subsequent to the
effective date of the Registration Statement through the date of responding to the request.
(7) To supply by means of a post-effective amendment all information concerning a transaction, and the company being
acquired involved therein, that was not the subject of and included in the Registration Statement when it became
effective.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers
and controlling persons of the Registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the Registrant has been
advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as
expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against
such liabilities (other than the payment by the Registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or
controlling person of the Registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such
director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the Registrant will, unless in the
opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction
the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be
governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this Amendment No. 1 to the
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of
Bakersfield, State of California, on August 7, 2014.
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY
  
 By:
 Name:Michael D. Herman
/s/ Michael D. Herman
Chairman of the Board, Interim President and
Chief Executive Officer
Title:
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Amendment No. 1 to the Registration Statement has
been signed by the following persons in the capacities indicated below on August 7, 2014.
Title
(Principal Executive Officer)
Signature
 
/s/ Michael D. Herman  Chairman of the Board, Director, Interim President and Chief Executive Officer
Michael D. Herman
 
/s/ Lee G. Christianson Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary
Lee G. Christianson
 
/s/ Rick D. Kasch
Rick D. Kasch
 
/s/ Gary L. Ronning
Gary L. Ronning
(Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer)
  
 Director
  
  
 Director
II-5