
News Release
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
 
Suncor Energy announces 2015 capital spending plan and production outlook 
 
(All financial figures are approximate and in Canadian dollars unless otherwise noted) 
 
Calgary, Alberta (Nov. 18, 2014) – Suncor Energy released its 2015 corporate guidance today, which 
includes capital spending of between $7.2 and $7.8 billion and planned average production of 540,000 
to 585,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day. 
 
"Our production guidance for next year reflects a continued trend of improved reliability and steady 
growth,” said Steve Williams, Suncor president and chief executive officer. “We remain focused on 
driving down our Oil Sands cash operating costs, underscoring our commitment to creating value for 
shareholders.” 
 
Approximately 55 per cent or up to $4.3 billion of the 2015 capital spend is expected to go towards 
growth projects with over $2.0 billion earmarked for the Oil Sands segment.  About 45 per cent or up to 
$3.5 billion of Suncor’s 2015 capital spend is expected to be allocated towards sustaining capital 
investments focused on safe, reliable and efficient operations across the company’s assets. 
 
“Our disciplined approach to building a strong balance sheet and prudently managing our capital 
program has positioned us to execute on our strategy even during periods of lower crude prices,” said 
Williams. “We will continue to invest in both our base business and in our key growth projects going 
forward and would expect to generate free cash flow even with Brent oil prices in the US$80 to US$85 
per barrel range.”  
 
Suncor also confirmed comments made in its Q3 release that total production for 2014 is anticipated to 
be in the low end of its annual guidance range, with Oil Sands operations production slightly below the 
lower end of the guidance range. 
 
Suncor’s corporate guidance provides management’s outlook for 2015 in certain key areas of the 
company’s business. Users of this forward-looking information are cautioned that actual results may 
vary materially from the targets disclosed. Readers are cautioned against placing undue reliance on 
this guidance.
Suncor Energy 
150 6 Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta  T2P 3E3 
suncor.com
Capital Expenditures ($ millions) (1) 
  
  
   Oil Sands operations 
   Oil Sands ventures 
Oil Sands segment 
Exploration and Production 
Refining and Marketing 
Corporate 
Total
2015 Full Year Outlook
November 18, 2014 
-  2,900 
-  1,850 
-  4,750 
-  1,850 
-  1,000 
-  200 
-  7,800
2,600 
1,700 
4,300 
1,750 
975 
175 
7,200
% Growth 
Capital (2)
20% 
90% 
50% 
95% 
10% 
65% 
55%
(1)  Capital expenditures exclude capitalized interest of $400 million - $500 million. 
(2)  Balance of capital expenditures represents sustaining capital. For definitions of growth and sustaining capital 
expenditures, see the Capital Investment Update section of Suncor’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
dated October 29, 2014 (the “MD&A).
Suncor Total Production (boe/d)  (1) 
Oil Sands operations(bbls/d) 
Syncrude (bbls/d) 
Exploration and Production - Canada (boe/d) 
Exploration and Production - International (boe/d)  (1) 
  
Suncor Refinery Throughputs 
Eastern North America (bbls/d) 
Western North America (bbls/d) 
Suncor Refinery Utilization (2) 
Eastern North America 
Western North America
2015 Full Year Outlook
November 18, 2014 
-  585,000 
540,000 
410,000 
-  440,000 
-  36,000 
32,000 
-  58,000 
53,000 
-  51,000 
45,000 
  
  
  
  
-  210,000 
190,000 
-  240,000 
220,000 
  
  
-  95% 
86% 
92% 
-  100%
(1)  At the time of publication, production in Libya continues to be affected by political unrest and therefore guidance is not
being provided.  Suncor Total Production excludes Libya production.
(2)  Refinery utilizations are based on the following crude processing capabilities:  Montreal – 137,000 bbls/d; Sarnia – 85,000
bbls/d; Edmonton – 142,000 bbls/d; and Commerce City – 98,000 bbls/d.
For more detail on Suncor's outlook and capital spending plan, see suncor.com/guidance. 
 
 
Legal Advisory – Forward-Looking Information 
 
This news release contains certain forward-looking information and forward-looking statements (collectively 
referred to herein as “forward-looking statements”) within the meaning of applicable Canadian and U.S. securities 
laws. Forward-looking statements are based on Suncor’s current expectations, estimates, projections and 
assumptions that were made by the company in light of information available at the time the statement was made 
and consider Suncor’s experience and its perception of historical trends, including expectations and assumptions 
concerning: the accuracy of reserves and resources estimates; commodity prices and interest and foreign 
exchange rates; capital efficiencies and cost savings; applicable royalty rates and tax laws; future production 
rates; the sufficiency of budgeted capital expenditures in carrying out planned activities; the availability and cost of
labour and services; and the receipt, in a timely manner, of regulatory and third-party approvals. In addition, all 
other statements and information about Suncor’s strategy for growth, expected and future expenditures or 
investment decisions, commodity prices, costs, schedules, production volumes, operating and financial results 
and the expected impact of future commitments are forward-looking statements. Some of the forward-looking 
statements and information may be identified by words like “expects”, “anticipates”, “will”, “estimates”, “plans”, 
“scheduled”, “intends”, “believes”, “projects”, “indicates”, “could”, “focus”, “vision”, “goal”, “outlook”, “proposed”, 
“target”, “objective”, “continue”, “should”, “may” and similar expressions. 
 
Forward-looking statements in this news release include references to: Suncor’s anticipated capital spending 
investment of between $7.2 and $7.8 billion (and expectations of where that spending will be directed); Suncor’s 
expectations around production, including planned average production of 540,000 to 585,000 barrels of oil 
equivalent per day; Suncor’s expectation of a continued trend of improved reliability and steady growth; Suncor’s 
focus on driving down its Oil Sands cash operating costs; Suncor’s expected ability to execute its strategy even 
during periods of lower crude prices; Suncor’s expectation that it will invest in both its base business and key 
growth projects going forward; Suncor’s expectation that it will be in the lower end of its annual guidance range for 
total production for 2014 and that Oil Sands operations production will be slightly below the lower end of the 
guidance range; and Suncor’s expectation around refinery throughputs and utilizations. In addition, the 
expectation that Suncor would generate free cash flow with Brent oil priced at US$80 to US$85 per barrel is a 
forward-looking statement. This statement is based on a number of assumptions, including: WTI Cushing of 
US$77 per barrel; Brent, Sullom Voe of US$82.50 per barrel; WCS, Hardisty of US$60 per barrel; Bitumen of 
US$44 per barrel; New York Harbor 3:2:1 crack spread of US$17 per barrel; AECO-C Spot natural gas price of $4 
per GJ; US$/Cdn$ exchange rate of $0.87; upstream production of 563,000 boe/d; Oil Sands production 
(excluding Syncrude) of 425,000 bbls/d and capital expenditures of $7.5 billion plus capitalized interest of $500 
million.  
 
Forward-looking statements and information are not guarantees of future performance and involve a number of 
risks and uncertainties, some that are similar to other oil and gas companies and some that are unique to Suncor. 
Suncor’s actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by its forward-looking statements, so 
readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on them. 
 
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that is calculated by deducting capital and exploration 
expenditures (inclusive of capitalized interest) from cash flow from operations. Cash flow from operations is a 
non-GAAP financial measure that adjusts a GAAP measure, cash flow provided by operating activities, for 
changes in non-cash working capital. For a further description of these non-GAAP measures, please refer to the 
MD&A. Readers are cautioned that these non-GAAP measures do not have any standardized meaning and 
therefore are unlikely to be comparable to similar measures presented by other companies and should not be 
considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. 
 
Suncor’s corporate guidance is based on the following assumptions around oil prices:  WTI, Cushing of US$78 
per barrel; Brent, Sullom Voe of US$85 per barrel; and WCS, Hardisty of US$60 per barrel.  In addition, the 
guidance is based on the assumption of a natural gas price (AECO-C Spot) of $4 per GJ and a US$/Cdn$ 
exchange rate of $0.87.  Assumptions for the Oil Sands and Syncrude 2015 production outlook include those 
relating to reliability and operational efficiency initiatives that the company expects will minimize unplanned 
maintenance in 2015. Assumptions for the Exploration and Production - Canada and Exploration and Production - 
International 2015 production outlook include those relating to reservoir performance, drilling results and facility 
reliability. Factors that could potentially impact Suncor's 2015 corporate guidance include, but are not limited to: 
 
•  Bitumen supply. Bitumen supply may be dependent on unplanned maintenance of mine equipment and
extraction plants, bitumen ore grade quality, tailings storage and in situ reservoir performance.
•  Third-party infrastructure. Production estimates could be negatively impacted by issues with third-party 
infrastructure, including pipeline or power disruptions, that may result in the apportionment of capacity, 
pipeline or third-party facility shutdowns, which would affect the company's ability to produce or market its 
crude oil.
•  Performance of recently commissioned facilities or well pads. Production rates while new equipment is being
brought into service are difficult to predict and can be impacted by unplanned maintenance.
•  Unplanned maintenance. Production estimates could be negatively impacted if unplanned work is required at
any of our mining, extraction, upgrading, in situ processing, refining, natural gas processing, pipeline, or 
offshore assets.
•  Planned maintenance events. Production estimates, including production mix, could be negatively impacted if
planned maintenance events are affected by unexpected events or not executed effectively. The successful 
execution of maintenance and start-up of operations for offshore assets, in particular, may be impacted by 
harsh weather conditions, particularly in the winter season.
•  Commodity prices. Declines in commodity prices may alter our production outlook and/or reduce our capital
expenditure plans.
•  Foreign operations. Suncor’s foreign operations and related assets are subject to a number of political,
economic and socio-economic risks.
Additional risks, uncertainties and other factors that could influence the financial and operating performance of all 
of Suncor’s operating segments and activities include, but are not limited to, changes in general economic, market 
and business conditions, such as commodity prices, interest rates and currency exchange rates; fluctuations in 
supply and demand for Suncor’s products; the successful and timely implementation of capital projects, including 
growth projects and regulatory projects; competitive actions of other companies, including increased competition 
from other oil and gas companies or from companies that provide alternative sources of energy; labour and 
material shortages; actions by government authorities, including the imposition or reassessment of taxes or 
changes to fees and royalties, such as the Notices of Reassessment (NORs) received by Suncor from the 
Canada Revenue Agency, Ontario and Quebec relating to the settlement of certain derivative contracts, including 
the risk that: (i) Suncor may not be able to successfully defend its original filing position and ultimately be required 
to pay increased taxes, interest and penalty as a result, and (ii) Suncor may be required to post cash instead of 
security in relation to the NORs, and changes in environmental and other regulations; the ability and willingness of 
parties with whom we have material relationships to perform their obligations to us; outages to third-party 
infrastructure that could cause disruptions to production; the occurrence of unexpected events such as fires, 
equipment failures and other similar events affecting Suncor or other parties whose operations or assets directly 
or indirectly affect Suncor; the potential for security breaches of Suncor’s information systems by computer 
hackers or cyberterrorists, and the unavailability or failure of such systems to perform as anticipated as a result of 
such breaches; our ability to find new oil and gas reserves that can be developed economically; the accuracy of 
Suncor’s reserves, resources and future production estimates; market instability affecting Suncor’s ability to 
borrow in the capital debt markets at acceptable rates; maintaining an optimal debt to cash flow ratio; the success 
of the company’s risk management activities using derivatives and other financial instruments; the cost of 
compliance with current and future environmental laws; and the accuracy of cost estimates, some of which are 
provided at the conceptual or other preliminary stage of projects and prior to commencement or conception of the 
detailed engineering that is needed to reduce the margin of error and increase the level of accuracy. The 
foregoing important factors are not exhaustive. 
 
Suncor’s MD&A and Suncor’s Annual Information Form, Form 40-F and Annual Report to Shareholders, each 
dated February 28, 2014, and other documents it files from time to time with securities regulatory authorities 
describe the risks, uncertainties, material assumptions and other factors that could influence actual results and 
such factors are incorporated herein by reference. Copies of these documents are available without charge from 
Suncor at 150 6th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 3E3, by calling 1-800-558-9071, or by email request to 
info@suncor.com or by referring to the company’s profile on SEDAR at sedar.com or EDGAR at sec.gov. Except 
as required by applicable securities laws, Suncor disclaims any intention or obligation to publicly update or revise 
any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 
 
Legal Advisory – BOEs 
 
Certain natural gas volumes have been converted to barrels of oil equivalent (boe) on the basis of one barrel to 
six thousand cubic feet. Any figure presented in boe may be misleading, particularly if used in isolation. A 
conversion ratio of one bbl of crude oil or natural gas liquids to six thousand cubic feet of natural gas is based on 
an energy equivalency conversion method primarily applicable at the burner tip and does not represent a value
equivalency at the wellhead. Given that the value ratio based on the current price of crude oil as compared to 
natural gas is significantly different from the energy equivalency of 6:1, utilizing a conversion on a 6:1 basis may 
be misleading as an indication of value. 
 
Suncor Energy is Canada's leading integrated energy company. Suncor's operations include oil sands 
development and upgrading, conventional and offshore oil and gas production, petroleum refining, and product 
marketing under the Petro-Canada brand. A member of Dow Jones Sustainability indexes, FTSE4Good and CDP, 
Suncor is working to responsibly develop petroleum resources while also growing a renewable energy portfolio. 
Suncor is listed on the UN Global Compact 100 stock index and the Corporate Knights’ Global 100. Suncor's 
common shares (symbol: SU) are listed on the Toronto and New York stock exchanges. 
 
For more information about Suncor Energy visit our web site at suncor.com, follow us on Twitter 
@SuncorEnergy, read our blog, OSQAR or come and See what Yes can do.
– 30 –
Investor inquiries: 
800-558-9071 
invest@suncor.com 
 
Media inquiries: 
403-296-4000 
media@suncor.com