
News Release
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
 
Suncor Energy Offer for Canadian Oil Sands expires
•  Canadian Oil Sands sets shareholder meeting to approve final acquisition transaction
(All dollar amounts referenced are in Canadian dollars) 
 
Calgary, Alberta (Feb. 22, 2016) – Suncor announced today that its Offer for all of the common shares 
and  accompanying  rights  of  Canadian  Oil  Sands  Limited  (“COS”)  has  expired  and  that  a  total  of 
approximately 84.2 per cent of COS shares equating to approximately 408,097,416 common shares and 
accompanying rights have been tendered to Suncor's Offer.  
 
Since Suncor’s initial take up of shares on Feb. 5, 2016, approximately 11.4 per cent of additional COS 
shares  equating  to  approximately  55,195,265  common  shares  and  accompanying  rights  have  been 
tendered.  Suncor  will  take  up  all  additional  shares  that  were  validly  tendered  into  the  Offer  and  not 
withdrawn and those shares will be paid for in accordance with the terms of the Offer.  
 
COS shareholders whose shares are taken up today will receive 0.28 of a common share of Suncor for 
each  COS  share  (subject  to  rounding  for  fractional  shares),  which  will  be  paid  in  accordance  with  the 
terms  of  the  Offer.  Based  on  today’s  closing  trading  price  of  Suncor's  common  shares  on  the  Toronto 
Stock Exchange, the take-up of shares today represents an implied acquisition price of $9.49 per COS 
share. 
 
Following  this  additional  take-up  of  shares,  Suncor  expects  to  complete  a  subsequent  acquisition 
transaction to acquire the remaining COS shares, as outlined below.  
 
COS shareholder meeting 
 
In addition, COS announced today that it has entered into an amalgamation agreement with Suncor and 
certain  wholly  owned  subsidiaries  of  Suncor,  under  which  a  subsequent  acquisition  transaction  will  be 
completed  by  way  of  an  amalgamation  of  COS  and  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  Suncor  (the  “COS 
Amalgamation”).    A  special  meeting  of  COS  shareholders  will  be  held  to  consider  this  transaction  on 
March 21, 2016 at 10:30 am (MT) at the Telus Convention Centre, 120 – 9th Avenue S.E., in Calgary, 
Alberta.   
 
As Suncor exercises control and direction over greater than 66⅔% of the outstanding COS shares, it is in 
a  position  to  ensure  the  successful  outcome  of  the  shareholder  vote  in  respect  of  this  subsequent 
acquisition transaction.  Once this transaction is completed, all COS shares that remain outstanding will 
be  acquired for  the  same  consideration  offered  in  the  Offer.    Further  details regarding this  subsequent 
acquisition transaction are contained in the COS information circular and related meeting materials which
- 2 -
are  being  mailed  to  COS  shareholders  in  advance  of  the  meeting  and  which  are  available  on  SEDAR 
under  COS’  profile  at  sedar.com.    COS  shareholders  are  urged  to  review  the  circular  and  related 
materials carefully and in their entirety. 
 
Shortly after completion of the subsequent acquisition transaction, COS expects that its common shares 
will  be  de-listed  from  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  and  that  an  application  will  be  made  to  have  COS 
cease  to  be  a  reporting  issuer  in  all  provinces  of  Canada.  Once  the  de-listing  occurs,  an  additional 
amalgamation  is  anticipated  whereby  Suncor  Energy  Ventures  Corporation  (a  direct  wholly-owned 
subsidiary of Suncor) and the entity resulting from the COS Amalgamation will undertake a subsequent 
amalgamation. This newly amalgamated entity will also be named Suncor Energy Ventures Corporation 
and will continue to carry on the business and operations of COS with all of its assets and liabilities as a 
direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Suncor. 
 
NOTICE TO U.S. HOLDERS 
 
The  offering  of  Suncor  shares  in  connection  with  the  COS  Amalgamation  is  being  made  by  a  Canadian 
issuer  pursuant  to  a  multijurisdictional  disclosure  system  adopted  by  the  United  States  that  permits  the 
circular  for  the  COS  Amalgamation  and  related  meeting  materials  (collectively.  the  “Amalgamation 
Documents”) to be prepared in accordance with the disclosure  requirements of Canada.  Shareholders in 
the  United  States  should  be  aware  that  such  requirements  are  different  from  those  of  the  United  States. 
The  financial  statements  included  or  incorporated  by  reference  in  the  Amalgamation  Documents  have 
been  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards,  and  are  subject  to 
Canadian  auditing  and  auditor  independence  standards,  and  thus  may  not  be  comparable  to  financial 
statements of U.S. companies. 
 
Shareholders  in  the  United  States  should  be  aware  that  the  disposition  of  their  COS  shares  and  the 
acquisition of Suncor's common shares by them as described in the Amalgamation Documents may have 
tax consequences both in the United States and in Canada. Such consequences for shareholders who are 
resident in, or citizens of, the United States may not be described fully in the Amalgamation Documents. 
 
The  enforcement  by  shareholders  of  civil  liabilities  under  U.S.  federal  securities  laws  may  be  affected 
adversely by the fact that each of Suncor, COS and the other Suncor subsidiaries involved with the COS 
Amalgamation are incorporated under the laws of Canada, that some or all of their respective officers and 
directors  may  be  residents  of  a  foreign  country,  that  some  or  all  of  the  experts  named  in  the 
Amalgamation Documents may be residents of a foreign country and that all or a substantial portion of the 
assets of Suncor and COS and said persons and other entities may be located outside the United States. 
 
THE SUNCOR COMMON SHARES CONTEMPLATED TO BE DELIVERED IN  CONNECTION WITH THE COS 
AMALGAMATION HAVE NOT BEEN APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED BY THE UNITED STATES SECURITIES 
AND  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION  ("SEC")  OR  ANY  U.S.  STATE  SECURITIES  COMMISSION  NOR  HAS  THE 
SEC OR ANY U.S. STATE SECURITIES COMMISSION PASSED UPON THE ACCURACY OR ADEQUACY OF 
THE  AMALGAMATION  DOCUMENTS.  ANY  REPRESENTATION  TO  THE  CONTRARY  IS  A  CRIMINAL 
OFFENSE. 
 
Suncor filed a registration statement on Form F-80 in respect of the COS Amalgamation with the SEC on 
February 22, 2016, which includes the Amalgamation Documents. This news release is not a substitute for 
such registration statement or any other documents that Suncor has filed or may file with the SEC or send 
to  shareholders  in  connection  with  the  COS  Amalgamation.  INVESTORS  AND  SHAREHOLDERS  ARE 
URGED TO READ THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT ON FORM F-80, AS IT MAY BE AMENDED FROM TIME 
TO  TIME,  AND  ALL  OTHER  RELEVANT  DOCUMENTS  FILED  OR  TO  BE  FILED  WITH  THE  SEC  IN 
CONNECTION  WITH  THE  COS  AMALGAMATION  AS  THEY  BECOME  AVAILABLE,  AS  WELL  AS  ANY 
AMENDMENTS  OR  SUPPLEMENTS  TO  THOSE  DOCUMENTS,  BECAUSE  THEY  CONTAIN  OR  WILL 
CONTAIN IMPORTANT INFORMATION. You will be able to obtain a free copy of the registration statement 
on  Form  F-80,  as  well  as  other  filings  containing  information  about  Suncor,  at  the  SEC's  website
- 3 -
(www.sec.gov). 
 
 
Forward-Looking Statements 
This  news  release  contains  certain  "forward-looking  statements"  within  the  meaning  of  the  United  States  Private 
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and "forward-looking information" within the meaning of applicable Canadian 
securities  legislation  (collectively,  "forward-looking  statements"),  including  statements  about  the  subsequent 
acquisition  transaction,  and  the  timing  and  completion  of  a  subsequent  acquisition  transaction,  the  subsequent  de-
listing  of  the  COS  common  shares  from  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange,  the  application  for  COS  to  cease  to  be  a 
reporting  issuer  in  all  Provinces  of  Canada  and  the  further  amalgamation  involving  Suncor  Energy  Ventures 
Corporation. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve a number of risks and 
uncertainties.  Users  of  this  information  are cautioned that actual  events  may  differ materially as  a result  of, among 
other things, assumptions that Suncor and COS will receive all necessary approvals, certificates and registrations in 
connection with such transactions and applications in the timelines and in a manner consistent with Suncor's current 
expectations.  
 
Although  Suncor  believes  that  the  expectations  represented  by  such  forward-looking  statements  are  reasonable, 
there  can  be  no  assurance  that  such  expectations  will  prove  to  be  correct.  Suncor's  Offer  documents,  including  its 
take-over bid circular and all  amendments thereto, the  Amalgamation Documents, Suncor’s fourth  quarter report to 
shareholders  dated  February  3,  2016,  Suncor's  2014  Annual  Report  and  Suncor’s  most  recently  filed  Annual 
Information Form/Form 40-F and other documents Suncor and COS file from time to time with securities regulatory 
authorities describe the risks, uncertainties, material assumptions and other factors that could influence actual results 
and such risk factors are incorporated herein by reference.
Copies of these documents are available, and copies of Suncor's early warning report to be filed in connection with 
the additional take-up COS shares under the Offer will be available, without charge from the Corporate Secretary 
of  Suncor  Energy  Inc.  at  150  6th  Avenue  S.W.,  Calgary,  Alberta  T2P  3E3,  by  calling  1-800-558-9071,  or  by  email 
request to invest@suncor.com or by referring to Suncor’s profile on SEDAR at sedar.com (and, where applicable, on 
EDGAR  at  sec.gov)  or,  in  the  case  of  the  Offer  documents  and  the  Amalgamation  Documents,  by  referring  to  the 
COS  profile  on  SEDAR  at  sedar.com  or  Suncor’s  profile  on  EDGAR  at  sec.gov.  Except  as  required  by  applicable 
securities  laws,  Suncor  disclaims  any  intention  or  obligation  to  publicly  update  or  revise  any  forward-looking 
statements,  whether  as  a  result  of  new  information,  future  events  or  otherwise.  Suncor's  actual  results  may  differ 
materially from those expressed or implied by its forward-looking statements, so readers are cautioned not to place 
undue reliance on them. 
 
Suncor  Energy  is  Canada's  leading  integrated  energy  company.  Suncor's  operations  include  oil  sands 
development  and  upgrading,  conventional  and  offshore  oil  and  gas  production,  petroleum  refining,  and  product 
marketing under the Petro-Canada brand. A member of Dow Jones Sustainability indexes, FTSE4Good and CDP, 
Suncor  is  working  to  responsibly  develop  petroleum  resources  while  also  growing  a  renewable  energy  portfolio. 
Suncor  is  listed  on  the  UN  Global  Compact  100  stock  index  and  the  Corporate  Knights'  Global  100.  Suncor's 
common shares (symbol: SU) are listed on the Toronto and New York stock exchanges. 
 
NOT AN OFFER
This press release does not constitute an offer to buy or sell, or an invitation or a solicitation of an offer to buy or 
sell any securities of COS or Suncor. The offering of Suncor shares in connection with the COS Amalgamation is 
made exclusively by means of, and subject to the terms and conditions set out in, the Amalgamation Documents, 
as they may be amended from time to time.
For  more  information  about  Suncor,  visit  our  web  site  at  suncor.com,  follow  us  on  Twitter  @SuncorEnergy,  or 
come and See what Yes can do. 
 
Media inquiries: 
403-296-4000 
media@suncor.com
- 4 -
Investor inquiries: 
800-558-9071 
invest@suncor.com