
5 September 2016
5 September 2016   |   1
MANAGEMENT SUCCESSION PLANNING AND BOARD RENEWAL
the
following
Perth,  Western  Australia:  Troy  Resources  Limited  (ASX:TRY)  advises  on 
management succession planning initiatives and Board renewal process. 
 
Management Succession Planning 
 
Following successful completion and commissioning of the processing plant at Karouni, Troy will be 
implementing  management  changes  in  Guyana  in  order  to  transition  the  mine  from  project 
development  to  full  scale  operations.  Given  the  recent  departure  of  former  COO  Andrew  Storrie, 
following the scaling back of operations in both Argentina and Brazil, the Board has tasked the CEO, 
Martin  Purvis,  to  undertake  a  detailed  review  of  the  organisational  structure  and to  implement key 
changes  necessary  to  simplify  and  align  the  management  systems  of  Troy  around  the  new 
operational platform. 
 
With  the  Karouni  plant  now  operating  near  design  capacity,  the  on-site  management  team  will  be 
strengthened through the appointment of a General Manager – Operations who will report directly to 
the CEO. This search process has commenced and is anticipated to be completed before the end of 
the year. 
 
After almost three years in Guyana, during which time he pioneered the planning, construction and 
development  of  the  Karouni  project,  Ken  Nilsson  will  step  back  from  active  management  and 
transition to an oversight role for Troy’s broader interests in South America. This role will encompass 
Government  relations,  new  business  opportunities  and  overseeing  Troy’s  remaining  interests  in 
Argentina and Brazil. Ken will work closely with Troy’s new General Manager at Karouni in order to 
effect  a  smooth  operational  transition  and  hand  over,  whilst  also  providing  his  considerable  South 
American expertise towards the Company’s future development opportunities in the region. 
 
Board Renewal 
 
Over the past two years Troy has made significant changes to its Board composition with a view to 
increasing  independence,  reducing  the  number  of  Directors  and  providing  for  a  predominantly 
Australian based Board. 
 
To this end Sean Harvey (Canadian based) resigned as a Director on 20 April 2015 and Robin Parish 
(UK based) resigned on 24 April 2015. Former Chairman David Dix passed away on 1 February 2016 
after a long leave of absence due to illness and Richard Monti (Belgium based) resigned on 27 June 
2016.
Fred  Grimwade  (Melbourne  based)  was  appointed  Acting  Chair  of Troy  on  14  July  2015  and  was 
subsequently confirmed as an Independent Non-Executive Chairman by the Board on 1 March 2016. 
David Southam (Perth based) was recently appointed as an Independent Non-Executive Director (29 
July 2016) and  will become Chair of the Audit Committee after the 2016 annual financial report is 
approved by the Board.  
 
Shareholders  reappointed  Ken  Nilsson  (Guyana  based)  as  an  Executive  Director  at  Troy’s  2014 
AGM and John Jones as a Non-Executive Director (Perth based) at the following 2015 AGM. Ken 
has confirmed that he will not be seeking to stand for re-election as a Director at the 2017 AGM when 
he is next required to retire by rotation.  
 
As  part  of  the  Board  renewal  process,  Troy  has  commenced  a  process  to  appoint  another 
independent non-executive director to the Board, with relevant geological and technical experience.   
 
 
 
ENDS 
 
For further information please contact: 
 
Fred Grimwade 
Chairman 
Troy Resources Limited 
T: (61 8) 9481 1277 
E: troy@troyres.com.au
Martin Purvis 
CEO 
Troy Resources Limited  
T: (61 8) 9481 1277 
E: troy@troyres.com.au
5 September 2016   |   2