
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One) 
(cid:95) ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015
OR
(cid:133) TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from                      to
Commission file number 001-34574
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Bermuda
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
16803 Dallas Parkway
Addison, Texas
(Address of principal executive offices)
None
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
75001
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (214) 220-4323
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Common shares, par value $0.10
Name of each exchange on which registered
NYSE MKT
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.    Yes  (cid:133)    No  (cid:95)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    Yes  (cid:133)    No  (cid:95)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 
90 days.    Yes  (cid:95)    No  (cid:133)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post 
such files).    Yes  (cid:95)    No   (cid:133)
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of 
registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.  (cid:133)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See definitions of
“large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one): 
Large accelerated filer
Non-accelerated filer
(cid:133)
(cid:133)  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Accelerated filer
Smaller reporting company
(cid:95)
(cid:133)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    Yes  (cid:133)    No   (cid:95)
The aggregate market value of common shares, par value $0.10 per share, held by non-affiliates of the registrant, based on the last sale price of the common shares on
June 30, 2015 (the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter), was approximately $22.1 million. For purposes of this computation, all 
officers, directors and 10% beneficial owners of the registrant are deemed to be affiliates. Such determination should not be deemed an admission that such officers, directors 
or 10% beneficial owners are, in fact, affiliates of the registrant.
As of March 29, 2016, there were 41,106,194 common shares outstanding.
The information required by Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, to the extent not set forth herein, is incorporated by reference to the registrant’s definitive
proxy statement relating to the 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders which will be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 120 days after the end of the 
fiscal year to which this Annual Report on Form 10-K relates.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2015
FORM 10-K
INDEX
Business
PART I
Item 1.
Item 1A. Risk Factors
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Item 2.
Item 3.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Properties
Legal Proceedings
Selected Financial Data
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Item 6.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.
Item 8.
Item 9.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Item 9B. Other Information
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Item 11. Executive Compensation
Item 12.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Item 14.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
Page
6
14
25
26
41
42
43
45
46
60
61
61
61
62
63
63
63
63
63
64
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of applicable U.S.
and Canadian securities legislation. Additionally, forward-looking statements may be made orally or in press releases, conferences, 
reports, on our website or otherwise, in the future, by us or on our behalf. Such statements are generally identifiable by the terminology 
used such as “plans,” “expects,” “estimates,” “budgets,” “intends,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “projects,” “indicates,” “targets,” 
“objective,” “could,” “should,” “may” or other similar words.
By their very nature, forward-looking statements require us to make assumptions that may not materialize or that may not be accurate.
Forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, 
levels of activity and achievements to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such statements, including the factors discussed 
under Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the following: our ability to 
access sufficient capital to fund our operations, sell assets, repay our borrowing base deficiency, continue as a going concern and 
restructure our debt; fluctuations in and volatility of the market prices for oil and natural gas products; the ability to produce and transport 
oil and natural gas; the results of exploration and development drilling and related activities; global economic conditions, particularly in 
the countries in which we carry on business, especially economic slowdowns; actions by governmental authorities including increases in 
taxes, legislative and regulatory initiatives related to fracture stimulation activities, changes in environmental and other regulations, and 
renegotiations of contracts; political uncertainty, including actions by insurgent groups or other conflicts; the negotiation and closing of 
material contracts or sale of assets; future capital requirements and the availability of financing; estimates and economic assumptions used 
in connection with our acquisitions; risks associated with drilling, operating and decommissioning wells; actions of third-party co-owners 
of interests in properties in which we also own an interest; our ability to effectively integrate companies and properties that we acquire; 
and the other factors discussed in other documents that we file with or furnish to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the 
“SEC”) and Canadian securities regulatory authorities. The impact of any one factor on a particular forward-looking statement is not 
determinable with certainty as such factors are interdependent upon other factors and our course of action would depend upon our 
assessment of the future, considering all information then available. In that regard, any statements as to: future oil or natural gas 
production levels; capital expenditures; asset sales; negotiations with creditors; the allocation of capital expenditures to exploration and 
development activities; sources of funding for our capital expenditure programs or operations; drilling of new wells; demand for oil and 
natural gas products; expenditures and allowances relating to environmental matters; dates by which certain areas will be developed or 
will come on-stream; expected finding and development costs; future production rates; ultimate recoverability of reserves, including the 
ability to convert probable and possible reserves to proved reserves; dates by which transactions are expected to close; future cash flows, 
uses of cash flows, collectability of receivables and availability of trade credit; expected operating costs; changes in any of the foregoing 
and other statements using forward-looking terminology are forward-looking statements, and there can be no assurance that the 
expectations conveyed by such forward-looking statements will, in fact, be realized.
Although we believe that the expectations conveyed by the forward-looking statements are reasonable based on information available
to us on the date such forward-looking statements were made, no assurances can be given as to future results, levels of activity, 
achievements or financial condition.
Readers should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement and should recognize that the statements are predictions of
future results, which may not occur as anticipated. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking 
statements and from historical results, due to the risks and uncertainties described above, as well as others not now anticipated. The 
foregoing statements are not exclusive and further information concerning us, including factors that potentially could materially affect our 
financial results, may emerge from time to time. We do not intend to update forward-looking statements to reflect actual results or changes 
in factors or assumptions affecting such forward-looking statements, except as required by law.
Glossary of Selected Oil and Natural Gas Terms
The following are abbreviations and definitions of terms commonly used in the oil and natural gas industry and this Annual Report on
Form 10-K.
2D seismic. Geophysical data that depict the subsurface strata in two dimensions.
3D seismic. Geophysical data that depict the subsurface strata in three dimensions. 3D seismic typically provides a more detailed and
accurate interpretation of the subsurface strata than 2D seismic.
Appraisal wells. Wells drilled to convert an area or sub-region from the resource to the reserves category.
i
Bbl. One stock tank barrel, or 42 U.S. gallons liquid volume, used in reference to oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
Bbl/d. Barrels of oil per day.
Bcf. One billion cubic feet of natural gas.
Boe. Barrels of oil equivalent. Boe is not included in the DeGolyer and MacNaughton reserves report and is derived by the Company
by converting natural gas to oil in the ratio of six Mcf of natural gas to one Bbl of oil. The conversion factor is the current convention used 
by many oil and natural gas companies. Boe may be misleading, particularly if used in isolation. A Boe conversion ratio of six Mcf to one 
Bbl is based on an energy equivalency conversion method primarily applicable at the burner tip and does not represent a value equivalency 
at the wellhead.
Boepd. Barrels of oil equivalent per day.
Commercial well; commercially productive well. An oil and natural gas well which produces oil and natural gas in sufficient
quantities such that proceeds from the sale of such production exceed production expenses and taxes.
Completion. The installation of permanent equipment for the production of oil or natural gas or, in the case of a dry hole, the reporting
of abandonment to the appropriate agency.
Developed acreage. The number of acres which are allocated or assignable to producing wells or wells capable of production.
Development well. A well drilled within the proved area of an oil or natural gas reservoir to the depth of a stratigraphic horizon known
to be productive.
Directional drilling. The technique of drilling a well while varying the angle of direction of a well and changing the direction of a well
to hit a specific target.
Dry hole; dry well. A well found to be incapable of producing either oil or natural gas in sufficient quantities to justify completion as
an oil or natural gas well.
Exploitation. The continuing development of a known producing formation in a previously discovered field, including efforts to
maximize the ultimate recovery of oil or natural gas from the field by development wells, secondary recovery equipment or other suitable 
processes and technology.
Exploratory well. A well drilled to find a new field or to find a new reservoir in a field previously found to be productive of oil or
natural gas in another reservoir. Generally, an exploratory well is any well that is not a development well.
Farm-in or farm-out. An assignment of an interest in a drilling location and related acreage conditional upon the drilling of a well on
that location, the completion of other work commitments related to that acreage, or some combination thereof.
Formation. A succession of sedimentary beds that were deposited under the same general geologic conditions.
Frac; fracture stimulation. A stimulation treatment involving the fracturing of a reservoir and then injecting water, sand and
chemicals into the fractures under pressure to stimulate hydrocarbon production in low-permeability reservoirs.
Gross acres or gross wells. The total acres or wells, as the case may be, in which a working interest is owned.
Horizontal drilling. A technique used in certain formations where a well is drilled vertically to a certain depth and then drilled at a
right angle with a specified interval.
Initial production rate. Generally, the maximum 24-hour production volume from a well.
Mbbl. One thousand stock tank barrels.
Mboe. One thousand barrels of oil equivalent.
Mboepd. One thousand barrels of oil equivalent per day.
ii
Mcf. One thousand cubic feet of natural gas.
Mcf/d. One thousand cubic feet of natural gas per day.
Mmbbl. One million stock tank barrels.
Mmboe. One million barrels of oil equivalent.
Mmcf. One million cubic feet of natural gas.
Mmcf/d. One million cubic feet of natural gas per day.
Net acres or net wells. The sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross acres or gross wells.
Overriding royalty interest. An interest in an oil or natural gas property entitling the owner to a share of oil and natural gas
production free of costs of production.
Play. A term applied to a portion of the exploration and production cycle following the identification by geologists and geophysicists
of areas with potential oil and natural gas reserves.
Present value of estimated future net revenues or PV-10. The present value of estimated future net revenues is an estimate of future
net revenues from a property at the date indicated, without giving effect to derivative financial instrument activities, after deducting 
production and ad valorem taxes, future capital costs, abandonment costs and operating expenses, but before deducting future federal 
income taxes. The future net revenues have been discounted at an annual rate of 10% to determine their “present value.” The present value 
is shown to indicate the effect of time on the value of the net revenue stream and should not be construed as being the fair market value of 
the properties. Estimates have been made using constant oil and natural gas prices and operating and capital costs at the date indicated, at 
its acquisition date, or as otherwise indicated. We believe that the present value of estimated future net revenues before income taxes, 
while not a financial measure in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”), is an important financial 
measure used by investors and independent oil and natural gas producers for evaluating the relative significance of oil and natural gas 
properties and acquisitions because the tax characteristics of comparable companies can differ materially.
Productive well. A productive well is a well that is not a dry well.
Proved developed reserves. Developed oil and natural gas reserves are reserves of any category that can be expected to be recovered:
(i) through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively 
minor compared to the cost of a new well and (ii) through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the time of the 
reserves estimate.
Proved reserves. Those quantities of oil and natural gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with
reasonable certainty to be economically producible, from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic 
conditions, operating methods, and government regulations, prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, 
unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the 
estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator must be reasonably certain that it will 
commence the project within a reasonable time.
The area of the reservoir considered as proved includes: (i) the area identified by drilling and limited by fluid contacts, if any, and
(ii) adjacent undrilled portions of the reservoir that can, with reasonable certainty, be judged to be continuous with it and to contain 
economically producible oil or natural gas on the basis of available geoscience and engineering data.
In the absence of data on fluid contacts, proved quantities in a reservoir are limited by the lowest known hydrocarbons as seen in a well
penetration unless geoscience, engineering, or performance data and reliable technology establishes a lower contact with reasonable 
certainty. Where direct observation from well penetrations has defined a highest known oil elevation and the potential exists for an 
associated gas cap, proved oil reserves may be assigned in the structurally higher portions of the reservoir only if geoscience, engineering, 
or performance data and reliable technology establish the higher contact with reasonable certainty.
Reserves which can be produced economically through application of improved recovery techniques (including, but not limited to, 
fluid injection) are included in the proved classification when: (i) successful testing by a pilot project in an area of the reservoir with
iii
properties no more favorable than in the reservoir as a whole, the operation of an installed program in the reservoir or an analogous 
reservoir, or other evidence using reliable technology establishes the reasonable certainty of the engineering analysis on which the project 
or program was based and (ii) the project has been approved for development by all necessary parties and entities, including governmental 
entities.
Existing economic conditions include prices and costs at which economic producibility from a reservoir is to be determined. The price
shall be the average price during the twelve month period prior to the ending date of the period covered by the report, determined as an 
unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within such period, unless prices are defined by 
contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions.
Proved undeveloped reserves. Reserves of any category that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage or
from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion.
Reserves on undrilled acreage shall be limited to those directly offsetting development spacing areas that are reasonably certain of
production when drilled, unless evidence using reliable technology exists that establishes reasonable certainty of economic producibility at 
greater distances. Undrilled locations can be classified as having undeveloped reserves only if a development plan has been adopted 
indicating that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the specific circumstances justify a longer time.
Undrilled locations can be classified as having proved undeveloped reserves only if a development plan has been adopted indicating
that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the specific circumstances justify a longer time.
Under no circumstances shall estimates for undeveloped reserves be attributable to any acreage for which an application of fluid
injection or other improved recovery technique is contemplated, unless such techniques have been proved effective by actual projects in 
the same reservoir or an analogous reservoir or by other evidence using reliable technology establishing reasonable certainty.
Reasonable certainty. If deterministic methods are used, reasonable certainty means a high degree of confidence that the quantities 
will be recovered. If probabilistic methods are used, there should be at least a 90% probability that the quantities actually recovered will 
equal or exceed the estimate. A high degree of confidence exists if the quantity is much more likely to be achieved than not and, as 
changes due to increased availability of geoscience (geological, geophysical, and geochemical), engineering, and economic data are made 
to estimated ultimate recovery (“EUR”) with time, reasonably certain EUR is much more likely to increase or remain constant than to 
decrease.
Recompletion. An operation within an existing well bore to make the well produce oil or natural gas from a different, separately
producible zone other than the zone from which the well had been producing.
Reservoir. A porous and permeable underground formation containing a natural accumulation of producible oil and/or natural gas that
is confined by impermeable rock or water barriers and is individual and separate from other reservoirs.
Sales volumes. The amount of production of oil or natural gas sold after deducting royalties and working interests owned by third
parties.
Shale. Fine-grained sedimentary rock composed mostly of consolidated clay or mud. Shale is one of the most frequently occurring
sedimentary rocks.
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows or the Standardized Measure. Under the Standardized Measure, future 
cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are estimated by applying the simple average spot prices for the trailing 
twelve month period using the first day of each month beginning on January 1 and ending on December 1 of each respective year, adjusted 
for fixed and determinable escalations, to the estimated future production of year-end proved reserves. Future cash inflows are reduced by 
estimated future production and development costs based on period-end and future plugging and abandonment costs to determine pre-tax 
cash inflows. Future income taxes are computed by applying the statutory tax rate to the excess of pre-tax cash inflows over our tax basis 
in the associated properties. Future net cash inflows after income taxes are discounted using a 10% annual discount rate to arrive at the 
Standardized Measure.
Tcf. One trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
Undeveloped acreage. License or lease acreage on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit the
production of commercial quantities of oil and natural gas regardless of whether such acreage contains proved reserves.
iv
Wellhead production. The volume of oil or natural gas produced after deducting royalties and working interests owned by third
parties prior to any oil and natural gas lost or used from wellhead to market.
Working interest (“WI”). The operating interest that gives the owner the right to drill, produce and conduct activities on the property
and a share of production.
v
PART I
Item 1. Business
In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company” refer to TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and its 
subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. Unless stated otherwise, all sums of money stated in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are expressed 
in U.S. Dollars.
Our Business
We are an international oil and natural gas company engaged in acquisition, exploration, development and production. We have
focused our operations in countries that have established, yet underexplored, petroleum systems, are net importers of petroleum, have an 
existing petroleum transportation infrastructure and provide favorable commodity pricing, royalty rates and tax rates to exploration and 
production companies. As of December 31, 2015, we held interests in approximately 880,000 and 567,000 net acres of developed and 
undeveloped oil and natural gas properties in Turkey and Bulgaria, respectively. As of March 29, 2016, approximately 36% of our 
outstanding common shares were beneficially owned by N. Malone Mitchell 3rd, the chairman of our board of directors and our chief 
executive officer.
Based on the reserves report prepared by DeGolyer and MacNaughton, independent petroleum engineers, our estimated proved
reserves at December 31, 2015 in Turkey were approximately 13,457 Mboe, of which 80.4% was oil. Of these estimated proved reserves, 
52.5% were proved developed reserves. As of December 31, 2015, the PV-10 and Standardized Measure, as calculated by the Company, 
of our proved reserves in Turkey were $222.5 million and $199.2 million, respectively. See “Item 2. Properties—Value of Proved 
Reserves” for a reconciliation of PV-10 to the Standardized Measure.
Recent Developments
Convertible Promissory Note. On December 30, 2015, we entered into a $5.0 million draw down convertible promissory note (the
“Note”) with ANBE Holdings, L.P. (“ANBE”), an entity owned by Mr. Mitchell’s children and controlled by an entity managed by Mr. 
Mitchell and his wife. The Note bears interest at a rate of 13.0% per annum and matures on June 30, 2016. On December 30, 2015, we 
borrowed $3.6 million under the Note (the “Initial Advance”). The conversion price of the Initial Advance is $1.3755 per share.  The 
Initial Advance was used for general corporate purposes.  We can request subsequent advances of $500,000 under the Note prior to June 
15, 2016. The Note is an unsecured obligation of the Company and is structurally subordinated to all indebtedness of our subsidiaries.
Senior Credit Facility Borrowing Base Deficiency.  Due to the significant decline in Brent crude oil prices during 2015, the borrowing
base under the Company’s senior credit facility (the “Senior Credit Facility”) with BNP Paribas (Suisse) SA (“BNP Paribas”) and the 
International Finance Corporation (“IFC”) was decreased to $16.6 million effective December 30, 2015. The decline in the borrowing base 
resulted in a $15.5 million borrowing base deficiency under the Senior Credit Facility as of December 30, 2015.
On December 30, 2015, the lenders granted us a waiver of certain defaults under the Senior Credit Facility that existed as of December
30, 2015, including, among other things, the borrowing base deficiency.  The waiver is conditioned upon, among other things, no 
borrowing base deficiency existing as of March 31, 2016.
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had $32.1 million outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility and no availability and was not 
in compliance with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility.  As of March 30, 2016, the borrowing base deficiency 
was $14.2 million.
We have negotiated a preliminary waiver of the existing defaults under the Senior Credit Facility and an extension of the borrowing
base deficiency repayment obligation until at least September 30, 2016.  This preliminary waiver and extension is subject to the approval 
of the lenders’ respective credit committees.  The lenders have advised us that they will seek credit committee approval of the preliminary 
waiver and extension in early April 2016.  We cannot guarantee that this waiver and extension will be approved by our lenders.  Because 
we are currently in default under the Senior Credit Facility and will be unable to repay the borrowing base deficiency by March 31, 2016, 
the lenders could declare all outstanding principal and interest to be due and payable, could freeze our accounts, could foreclose against 
the assets securing their borrowings, and we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.  In addition, a payment default under the 
Senior Credit Facility could result in a cross default under our 13.0% convertible notes due 2017 (“Convertible Notes”).
Sale of Albania Operations. In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in our wholly-owned subsidiary, Stream Oil & Gas
Ltd. (“Stream”), to GBC Oil Company Ltd. (“GBC Oil”) in exchange for (i) the future payment of $2.3 million to Raiffeisen
6
Bank Sh.A (“Raiffeisen”) to pay down a term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) dated as of September 17, 2014 between Stream’s 
wholly-owned subsidiary, TransAtlantic Albania Ltd. (“TransAtlantic Albania”), and Raiffeisen, and (ii) the assumption of $29.2 million 
of liabilities owed by Stream, consisting of $23.1 million of accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $6.1 million of 
debt.  TransAtlantic Albania owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  In addition, GBC Oil issued us a warrant pursuant to 
which we have the option to acquire up to 25% of the fully diluted equity interests in TransAtlantic Albania for nominal consideration at 
any time on or before March 1, 2019.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC Oil, TransAtlantic Albania entered into an assignment and 
assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will assign its Delvina natural gas assets and $12.9 million of associated 
liabilities (the “Delvina Gas Liabilities”) to Delvina Gas Company, Ltd. (“Delvina Gas”), our newly formed, wholly-owned subsidiary, to 
be effective immediately upon receipt of required contractual consents.  There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain the required 
contractual consents.  In addition, we agreed to indemnify GBC Oil and Stream for the Delvina Gas Liabilities.  We are currently 
negotiating a joint venture with a third party for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no assurance that we will be able to 
complete a joint venture for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.
Our Properties and Operations
Summary of Geographic Areas of Operations 
The following table shows net reserves information as of December 31, 2015:
Proved Developed
Reserves (Mboe)
7,061
4,241
Turkey
Albania(1)
Proved
Undeveloped
Reserves (Mboe)
6,396
938
Total Proved
Reserves (Mboe)
13,457
5,179
Probable Reserves
(Mboe)
14,307
15,439
Possible Reserves
(Mboe)
22,995
13,601
(1) As of December 31, 2015, we have classified our Albanian assets and liabilities as held for sale and presented the operating
results within discontinued operations for all periods presented in our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report 
on Form 10-K.  In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in Stream to GBC Oil.  Stream’s wholly owned 
subsidiary, TransAtlantic Albania, owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC 
Oil, TransAtlantic Albania entered into an assignment and assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will 
assign its Delvina natural gas assets and the Delvina Gas Liabilities to Delvina Gas to be effective immediately upon receipt of 
required contractual consents. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain the required contractual consents.  We are 
currently negotiating a joint venture with a third party for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no assurance that 
we will be able to complete a joint venture for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.
Turkey 
As of December 31, 2015, we held interests in 18 onshore and offshore exploration licenses and 25 onshore production leases covering
a total of 1.4 million gross acres (880,000 net acres) in Turkey. As of December 31, 2015, we had total net proved reserves of 10,815 
Mbbl of oil and 15,847 Mmcf of natural gas, net probable reserves of 10,931 Mbbl of oil and 20,253 Mmcf of natural gas and net possible 
reserves of 11,205 Mbbl of oil and 70,739 Mmcf of natural gas in Turkey. During 2015, our average wellhead production was 
approximately 5,128 net Boepd of oil and natural gas in Turkey. The following summarizes our core producing properties in Turkey:
Southeastern Turkey. During 2015, substantially all of our oil production was concentrated in southeastern Turkey, primarily in the
Arpatepe, Bahar, Goksu and Selmo oil fields. These fields are located southwest of the Turkish portion of the Zagros fold belt. The Zagros 
fold belt includes prolific oil trends that extend from Iran and Iraq into Turkey.
We hold a 100% working interest in the Selmo production lease, which expires in June 2025. The Selmo oil field is the second largest
oil field in Turkey in terms of historical cumulative production and is responsible for the largest portion of our current crude oil 
production. We expanded our waterflood program and executed several low-cost production optimizations in the Selmo field in 2015.  We 
believe secondary recovery will continue to increase production recovery from the field. For 2015, our net wellhead production of crude 
oil from the Selmo field was 934,777 Bbls at an average rate of approximately 2,561 Bbl/d. Turkiye Petrolleri Anonim Ortakligi 
(“TPAO”), a Turkish government-owned oil and natural gas company, and Türkiye Petrol Rafinerileri A.Ş. (“TUPRAS”), a privately-
owned oil refinery in Turkey, purchase all of our crude oil production from the Selmo oil field, which is transported by truck to their 
neighboring facilities. At December 31, 2015, we had 69 gross and net producing wells in the Selmo oil field.
We hold a 100% working interest in each of our three Molla exploration licenses, which contain the Goksu and Bahar oil fields. In the
Goksu field, we are primarily targeting the Mardin formation, and in the Bahar field, we are primarily targeting the Bedinan and
7
Hazro formations. In 2015, we drilled three wells, completed one well, and completed one re-entry well as a water injection well in the 
Bahar field. For 2015, our wellhead production of crude oil from the Molla exploration licenses was 491,090 Bbls at an average rate of 
approximately 1,345 Bbl/d. At December 31, 2015, we had six gross and net producing wells on the Molla exploration licenses.
We hold a 50% working interest in our Arpatepe production lease and exploration license. For 2015, our wellhead production of crude
oil from the Arpatepe field was 51,527 Bbls at an average rate of approximately 141 Bbl/d. At December 31, 2015, we had seven gross 
(3.5 net) producing wells on the Arpatepe production lease. We became the operator of the Arpatepe production lease in December 2015.
Northwestern Turkey. Substantially all of our natural gas production is concentrated in the Thrace Basin, which is one of Turkey’s most
productive onshore natural gas regions. It is located in northwestern Turkey near Istanbul.
Bulgaria 
As of December 31, 2015, we held interests in one onshore exploration license and one onshore production concession covering a total
of 567,106 acres in Bulgaria. During 2015, we had no production in Bulgaria.  At December 31, 2015, we had no reserves in Bulgaria.
Albania
In November 2015, we launched a marketing process for the sale of all of our oil and natural gas assets and operations in
Albania.  Accordingly, as of December 31, 2015, we have classified our Albanian segment as assets and liabilities held for sale and 
presented the operating results within discontinued operations for all periods presented in our consolidated financial statements included in 
this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in Stream to GBC Oil.  Stream’s wholly owned subsidiary, TransAtlantic
Albania, owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC Oil, TransAtlantic Albania entered 
into an assignment and assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will assign its Delvina natural gas assets and the 
Delvina Gas Liabilities to Delvina Gas to be effective immediately upon receipt of required contractual consents. There is no assurance 
that we will be able to obtain the required contractual consents.  We are currently negotiating a joint venture with a third party for the 
purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a joint venture for the purchase of a portion 
of Delvina Gas.  See “—Recent Developments.”
Current Operations
As of March 24, 2016, our net wellhead production in Turkey was an aggregate of approximately 3,750 Bbl/d, primarily from the
Selmo production lease, Arpatepe production lease and Molla exploration licenses, and approximately 5.7 Mmcf/d of natural gas, 
primarily from our various Thrace Basin production leases and exploration licenses.
In January 2016, we completed the Bahar-7 and Bahar-9 wells in the Bedinan formation.  The initial production rate on the Bahar-7
well was approximately 570 Bbl/d of oil and 300 Mmcf/d of natural gas.  The Bahar-9 well tested both oil and water and was temporarily 
plugged back.  In February 2016, we completed the Hazro formation in the Bahar-9 well, which had an initial production rate of 
approximately 100 Bbl/d of oil.  We expect to commingle producing zones when our electrification and our artificial lift program is 
completed later in 2016.  We are continuing our well optimization work program in the Selmo oil field and have been able to stem natural 
decline as a result.
Planned Operations
We expect our net field capital expenditures for 2016 to range between $5.0 million and $15.0 million. Given the market conditions 
and our limited access to capital, our 2016 development plan may be limited to drilling obligation wells and performing low cost, high 
return well optimizations.  We expect net field capital expenditures during 2016 to include approximately $5.0 million of drilling and 
completion expense for gross obligation wells to hold our most promising licenses in Turkey. We expect cash on hand and cash flow from 
operations will be sufficient to fund our 2016 net field capital expenditures.  If not, we will either curtail our discretionary capital 
expenditures or seek other funding sources. Our projected 2016 capital expenditure budget is subject to change.
8
Principal Markets
In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 280, Segment
Reporting (“ASC 280”), we had three reportable geographic segments during 2015: Turkey, Albania and Bulgaria. For financial 
information about our operating segments and geographic areas, refer to “Note 12—Segment information” to our consolidated financial 
statements.
Customers
Oil. During 2015, 56.6% of our oil production was concentrated in the Selmo field in Turkey. TUPRAS purchases the majority of our
oil production. During 2015, we sold $63.0 million of oil to TUPRAS, representing approximately 74.0% of our total revenues. We sell all 
of our southeastern Turkey oil to TUPRAS pursuant to a domestic crude oil purchase and sale agreement. Under the purchase and sale 
agreement, TUPRAS purchases oil produced by us and delivered to our Boru Hatlari ile Petrol Tasima A.S. (“BOTAŞ”) Batman tanks and 
to the BOTAŞ Dörtyol plant. The price of the oil delivered pursuant to the purchase and sale agreement is determined under the Petroleum 
Market Law No. 5015 under the laws of the Republic of Turkey. The purchase and sale agreement automatically renews for successive 
one-year terms unless earlier terminated in writing by either party. No other purchasers of our oil accounted for more than 10% of our total 
revenues.
Natural Gas. During 2015, no purchasers of our natural gas accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues.
Competition
We operate in the highly competitive areas of oil and natural gas exploration, development, production and acquisition with a number
of other companies, including U.S.-based and international companies doing business in each of the countries in which we operate. We 
face intense competition from independent, technology-driven companies as well as from both major and other independent oil and natural 
gas companies in each of the following areas seeking oil and natural gas exploration licenses and production licenses and leases and 
acquiring desirable producing properties or new leases for future exploration.
Many of our competitors have substantially greater financial, managerial, technological and other resources than we do. To the extent
competitors are able to pay more for properties than we are paying, we will be at a competitive disadvantage. Further, many of our 
competitors enjoy technological advantages over us and may be able to implement new technologies more rapidly than we can. Our ability 
to explore for and produce oil and natural gas prospects and to acquire additional properties in the future will depend upon our ability to 
successfully conduct operations, implement advanced technologies, evaluate and select suitable properties and consummate transactions in 
this highly competitive environment.
Fracture Stimulation Program
Oil and natural gas may be recovered from our properties through the use of fracture stimulation combined with modern drilling and
completion techniques. Fracture stimulation involves the injection of water, sand and chemicals under pressure into formations to fracture 
the surrounding rock and stimulate production. We have successfully utilized fracture stimulation in our Thrace Basin, Molla and Selmo 
licenses and production leases.
For unconventional reservoirs, including the Mezardere formation in the Thrace Basin, a typical fracture stimulation consists of
injecting between 20,000 and 100,000 gallons of fluid that contain between 10,000 and 150,000 pounds of sand. Fluids vary depending on 
formation and treatment objective but, in general, are either slickwater (fresh water with salt and friction reducer) or a gelled fluid 
containing organic polymers with a 4% potassium chloride solution and required breakers. Fracture stimulations in Molla are conducted in 
a low permeability reservoir. These stimulations generally consist of injecting between 20,000 and 100,000 gallons of fluid that contain 
between 10,000 and 100,000 pounds of sand. Fluids are generally a mixture of slickwater and gells, which is typical in  stimulation. The 
size of fracture stimulation treatments is dependent on net pay thickness and the proximity of the hydrocarbon zones of interest to water 
bearing zones.
Although the cost of each well will vary, on average approximately 30% of the total cost of drilling and completing a well in the 
unconventional Mezardere formation in the Thrace Basin and approximately 15% of the total cost of completing a well at Selmo is 
associated with stimulation activities. We account for these costs as typical drilling and completion costs and include them in our capital 
expenditure budget.
We believe that the stacked nature of the sandstone intervals within the Mezardere unconventional formation, which is up to
approximately 5,300 feet thick, and the limited number of deep penetrations to date on these structures provides significant opportunities 
for additional drilling and multi-stage fracs as the program matures.
9
We diligently review best practices and industry standards in connection with fracture stimulation activities and strive to comply with 
all regulatory requirements in the protection of potable water sources. Protective practices include, but are not limited to, setting multiple 
strings of protection pipe across potable water sources, cementing surface casing from setting depth to surface and second string from 
setting depth up into the surface casing and, in some cases, to surface, continuously monitoring the fracture stimulation process in real 
time and disposing of all non-commercially produced fluids in certified disposal wells at depths below the potable water sources or at a 
certified water treatment plant. There have not been any incidents, citations or suits involving environmental concerns related to our 
fracture stimulation operations on our properties.
In the Thrace Basin, Selmo and Molla, we have access to water resources which we believe will be adequate to execute any stimulation
activities that we may perform in the future. We also employ procedures for environmentally friendly disposal of fluids recovered from 
fracture stimulation, including recycling approximately 50% of these fluids.
For more information on the risks of fracture stimulation, please read “Item 1A. Risk Factors—Risks Related to the Oil and Natural
Gas Industry—Our oil and natural gas operations are subject to extensive and complex laws and government regulation in the jurisdictions 
in which we operate and compliance with existing and future laws may increase our costs or impair our operations” and “Item 1A. Risk 
Factors—Risks Related to the Oil and Natural Gas Industry—Legislative and regulatory initiatives and increased public scrutiny relating 
to fracture stimulation activities could result in increased costs and additional operating restrictions or delays.”
Governmental Regulations
Government Regulation. Our current or future operations, including exploration and development activities on our properties, require
permits from various governmental authorities, and such operations are and will be governed by laws and regulations concerning 
exploration, development, production, exports, taxes, labor laws and standards, occupational health, waste disposal, toxic substances, land 
use, environmental protection and other matters. Compliance with these requirements may prove to be difficult and expensive. Due to our 
international operations, we are subject to the following issues and uncertainties that can affect our operations adversely:
(cid:120) the risk of expropriation, nationalization, war, revolution, political instability, border disputes, renegotiation or modification of
existing contracts, and import, export and transportation regulations and tariffs;
(cid:120) laws of foreign governments affecting our ability to fracture stimulate oil or natural gas wells, such as the legislation enacted in
Bulgaria in January 2012;
(cid:120) the risk of not being able to procure residency and work permits for our expatriate personnel; 
(cid:120) taxation policies, including royalty and tax increases and retroactive tax claims; 
(cid:120) exchange controls, currency fluctuations and other uncertainties arising out of foreign government sovereignty over international
operations;
(cid:120) laws and policies of the United States affecting foreign trade, taxation and investment, including anti-bribery and anti-corruption
laws;
(cid:120) the possibility of being subjected to the exclusive jurisdiction of foreign courts in connection with legal disputes and the possible
inability to subject foreign persons to the jurisdiction of courts in the United States; and 
(cid:120) the possibility of restrictions on repatriation of earnings or capital from foreign countries.
Permits and Licenses. In order to carry out exploration and development of oil and natural gas interests or to place these into
commercial production, we may require certain licenses and permits from various governmental authorities. There can be no guarantee 
that we will be able to obtain all necessary licenses and permits that may be required. In addition, such licenses and permits are subject to 
change and there can be no assurances that any application to renew any existing licenses or permits will be approved.
Repatriation of Earnings. Currently, there are no restrictions on the repatriation of earnings or capital to foreign entities from Turkey,
Albania or Bulgaria. However, there can be no assurance that any such restrictions on repatriation of earnings or capital from the 
aforementioned countries or any other country where we may invest will not be imposed in the future. We may be liable for the payment 
of taxes upon repatriation of certain earnings from the aforementioned countries.
10
Environmental. The oil and natural gas industry is subject to extensive and varying environmental regulations in each of the
jurisdictions in which we operate. Environmental regulations establish standards respecting health, safety and environmental matters and 
place restrictions and prohibitions on emissions of various substances produced concurrently with oil and natural gas. In most instances, 
the regulatory requirements relate to the handling and disposal of drilling and production waste products and waste created by water and 
air pollution control procedures. These regulations can have an impact on the selection of drilling locations and facilities, and potentially 
result in increased capital expenditures. In addition, environmental legislation may require those wells and production facilities to be 
abandoned and sites reclaimed to the satisfaction of local authorities. Such regulation has increased the cost of planning, designing, 
drilling, operating and, in some instances, abandoning wells. We are committed to complying with environmental and operational 
legislation wherever we operate.
There has been a surge in interest among the media, government regulators and private citizens concerning the possible negative
environmental and geological effects of fracture stimulation. Some have alleged that fracture stimulation results in the contamination of 
aquifers and may even contribute to seismic activity. In January 2012, the government of Bulgaria enacted legislation that banned the 
fracture stimulation of oil and natural gas wells in the Republic of Bulgaria and imposed large monetary penalties on companies that 
violate that ban.  There is a risk that Turkey could at some point impose similar legislation or regulations. Such legislation or regulations 
could severely impact our ability to drill and complete wells, and could increase the cost of planning, designing, drilling, completing and 
operating wells. We are committed to complying with legislation and regulations involving fracture stimulation wherever we operate.
Such laws and regulations not only expose us to liability for our own negligence, but may also expose us to liability for the conduct of 
others or for our actions that were in compliance with all applicable laws at the time those actions were taken. We may incur significant 
costs as a result of environmental accidents, such as oil spills, natural gas leaks, ruptures, or discharges of hazardous materials into the 
environment, including clean-up costs and fines or penalties. Additionally, we may incur significant costs in order to comply with 
environmental laws and regulations and may be forced to pay fines or penalties if we do not comply.
Insurance
We currently carry general liability insurance and excess liability insurance, including pollution insurance, with a combined annual
limit of $22.0 million per occurrence and $24.0 million in the aggregate. These insurance policies contain maximum policy limits and are 
subject to customary exclusions and limitations. Our general liability insurance covers us and our subsidiaries for third-party claims and 
liabilities arising out of lease operations and related activities. The excess liability insurance is in addition to, and is triggered if, the 
general liability insurance per occurrence limit is reached.  We also maintain control of well insurance. Our control of well insurance has a 
per occurrence and combined single limit of $15.0 million and is subject to deductibles ranging from $150,000 to $500,000 per 
occurrence.  We will continue to monitor our insurance coverage and will maintain appropriate levels of insurance to satisfy applicable 
regulations, as well as maintain levels of insurance appropriate for prudent operations within the industry in which we operate.
We require our third-party service providers to sign master service agreements with us pursuant to which they agree to indemnify us for
the personal injury and death of the service provider’s employees as well as subcontractors that are hired by the service provider. 
Similarly, we generally agree to indemnify our third-party service providers against similar claims regarding our employees and our other 
contractors.
We also require our third-party service providers that perform fracture stimulation operations for us to sign master service agreements
containing the indemnification provisions noted above. We do not currently have any insurance policies in effect that are intended to 
provide coverage for losses solely related to fracture stimulation operations. We believe that our general liability, excess liability and 
pollution insurance policies would cover third-party claims related to fracture stimulation operations and associated legal expenses, in 
accordance with, and subject to, the terms of such policies. However, these policies may not cover fines, penalties or costs and expenses 
related to government-mandated environmental clean-up responsibilities.
Bermuda Tax Exemption
As a Bermuda exempted company and under current Bermuda law, we are not subject to tax on profits, income or dividends, nor is
there any capital gains tax applicable to us in Bermuda. Profits can be accumulated, and it is not obligatory for us to pay dividends.
Furthermore, we have received an assurance from the Minister of Finance of Bermuda under the Exempted Undertakings Tax
Protection Act 1966, as amended, that in the event that Bermuda enacts any legislation imposing tax computed on profits, income, any 
capital asset, gain or appreciation, we and any of our operations or our shares, debentures or other obligations shall be exempt from the 
imposition of such tax until March 31, 2035, provided that such exemption shall not prevent the application of any tax payable in 
accordance with the provisions of the Land Tax Act, 1967 or otherwise payable in relation to land in Bermuda leased to us.
11
We are required to pay an annual government fee (the “AGF”), which is determined on a sliding scale by reference to our authorized
share capital and share premium account, with a minimum fee of $1,995 Bermuda Dollars and a maximum fee of $31,120 Bermuda 
Dollars. The Bermuda Dollar is treated at par with the U.S. Dollar. The AGF is payable each year on or before the end of January and is 
based on the authorized share capital and share premium account on August 31 of the preceding year.
In Bermuda, stamp duty is not chargeable in respect of the incorporation, registration, licensing of an exempted company or, subject to
certain minor exceptions, on their transactions.
Employees
As of December 31, 2015, we employed 402 people in Albania, 178 people in Turkey, 39 people in Addison, Texas and three people in
Bulgaria. Approximately 38 of our employees at one of our subsidiaries operating in Turkey were represented by collective bargaining 
agreements with the Petroleum, Chemical and Rubber Workers Union of Turkey (“PETROL-IS”). Approximately 36 of our employees at 
another of our subsidiaries operating in Turkey were represented by a separate collective bargaining agreement with PETROL-IS. We 
consider our employee relations to be satisfactory.
Formation
We were incorporated under the laws of British Columbia, Canada on October 1, 1985 under the name Profco Resources Ltd. and
continued to the jurisdiction of Alberta, Canada under the Business Corporations Act (Alberta) on June 10, 1997. Effective December 2, 
1998, we changed our name to TransAtlantic Petroleum Corp. Effective October 1, 2009, we continued to the jurisdiction of Bermuda 
under the Bermuda Companies Act 1981 under the name TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.
Available Information
Our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed
or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), are made 
available free of charge on our website at www.transatlanticpetroleum.com as soon as reasonably practicable after those reports and other 
information are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC.
Executive Officers of the Registrant
The following table and text sets forth certain information with respect to our executive officers as of March 1, 2016:
Name
N. Malone Mitchell 3rd
Todd C. Dutton
Wil F. Saqueton
Chad D. Burkhardt
Harold “Lee” Muncy
Positions
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
President
Age
54
62
46 Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
41 Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate Secretary
63 Vice President of Geosciences
N. Malone Mitchell 3rd has served as our chief executive officer since May 2011, as a director since April 2008 and as our chairman
since May 2008. Since 2005, Mr. Mitchell has served as the president of Riata Corporate Group, LLC, a Dallas-based private oil and 
natural gas exploration and production company. From June to December 2006, Mr. Mitchell served as president and chief operating 
officer of SandRidge Energy, Inc. (formerly Riata Energy, Inc.), an independent oil and natural gas company concentrating in exploration, 
development and production activities. Until he sold his controlling interest in Riata Energy, Inc. in June 2006, Mr. Mitchell also served as 
president, chief executive officer and chairman of Riata Energy, Inc., which Mr. Mitchell founded in 1985 and built into one of the largest 
privately held energy companies in the United States.
Todd C. Dutton has served as our president since May 2014.  Mr. Dutton has served as president of Longfellow Energy, LP
("Longfellow"), a Dallas, Texas-based independent oil and natural gas exploration and production company owned by the Company's 
chairman and chief executive officer, N. Malone Mitchell 3rd and his family, since January 2007, where his primary responsibility is to 
originate and develop oil and natural gas projects. He brings 39 years of experience in the oil and natural gas industry, focusing on 
exploration, acquisitions and property evaluation. He has served in various supervisory and management roles at Texas Pacific Oil 
Company, Coquina Oil Corporation, BEREXCO INC. and Riata Energy, Inc. Mr. Dutton earned a B.B.A. in Petroleum Land Management 
from the University of Oklahoma.
12
Wil F. Saqueton has served as the Company’s vice president and chief financial officer since August 2011. Mr. Saqueton previously
served as the Company’s corporate controller from May 2011 until August 2011 and as a consultant to the Company from February 2011 
until May 2011. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Saqueton served as the vice president and chief financial officer of BCSW, LLC, the 
owner of Just Brakes in Dallas, Texas, from July 2006 to December 2010. From July 1995 until July 2006, he held a variety of positions at 
Intel Corporation, including strategic controller at the Chipset Group, operations controller at the Americas Sales and Marketing 
Organization Division, finance manager at the Intel Online Services, Inc. Division and senior financial analyst at the Chipset Group. Prior 
to 1995, Mr. Saqueton was a senior associate at Price Waterhouse, LP.
Chad D. Burkhardt has served as the Company’s vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary since August 2015.  From
2008 until August 2015, Mr. Burkhardt served as partner in the corporate department of Baker Botts L.L.P., where he advised clients on 
various corporate transactions including corporate securities offerings, mergers and acquisitions and various public company filings.  Mr. 
Burkhardt brings significant cross-border and international transaction experience from a variety of industries ranging from oil and gas 
exploration, midstream, and oil field services to high-tech and start-up transactions. Mr. Burkhardt is a graduate of Duke University 
School of Law.
Harold “Lee” Muncy has served as the Company’s vice president of geosciences since June 2014.  Mr. Muncy previously served as 
vice president, exploration for the Bass Companies, a group of Fort Worth, Texas-based independent oil and natural gas exploration and 
production companies, where he worked from 2000 to 2012. He brings more than 35 years of geological experience in the oil and natural 
gas industry, where he has focused on exploration, exploitation and worldwide transactions. He began his career as a geologist with Mobil 
Oil Corporation and served as exploration manager for Fina Oil & Chemical Company and vice president of exploration and land for 
TransTexas Gas Corp. Mr. Muncy earned a B.S. and an M.S. in Geology & Mineralogy from The Ohio State University.
13
Item 1A. Risk Factors 
Risks Related to Our Business 
We are currently in default under our Senior Credit Facility, and our Senior Credit Facility lenders could foreclose against the assets 
securing their borrowings, and we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.
As of December 31, 2015, we had $32.1 million outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility and no availability and were not in
compliance with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility.
In addition, we had a borrowing base deficiency as of December 30, 2015.  On December 30, 2015, the lenders granted us a waiver of 
certain defaults under the Senior Credit Facility that existed as of December 30, 2015, including, among other things, the borrowing base 
deficiency. The waiver is conditioned upon, among other things, no borrowing base deficiency existing as of March 31, 2016. As of 
March 30, 2016, the borrowing base deficiency was $14.2 million.  We will not be able to repay the borrowing base deficiency by March 
31, 2016.  A payment default under the Senior Credit Facility could result in a cross default under the Convertible Notes.
As a result of our current rational financial covenant default under the Senior Credit Facility or our future failure to repay the
borrowing base deficiency on or before March 31, 2016, the lenders could declare all outstanding principal and interest to be due and 
payable, could freeze our accounts, could foreclose against the assets securing their borrowings, and we could be forced into bankruptcy or 
liquidation.
The prevailing commodity price environment may require us to sell certain assets, restructure our debt, raise additional capital or seek 
bankruptcy protection.
Our current liquidity position is very constrained.  Even if we obtain the funds to repay our borrowing base deficiency, we would need
some form of debt restructuring, capital raising effort or asset sale in order to fund our operations and meet our substantial debt service 
obligations of approximately $41.9 million in 2016 and $55.0 million in 2017. Our management is actively pursuing improving our 
working capital position and/or reducing our future debt service obligations in order to remain a going concern for the foreseeable future. 
If we are unable to restructure our outstanding debt, obtain additional debt or equity financing, or raise adequate proceeds from sales of 
assets, we may not be able to make payments on our indebtedness, our secured lenders could foreclose against the assets securing their 
borrowings or freeze our accounts, and we may find it necessary to file a voluntary petition for reorganization relief in order to provide us 
additional time to identify an appropriate solution to our financial situation and implement a plan of reorganization aimed at improving our 
capital structure.
There is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We incurred a net loss from continuing operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 of $26.7 million. In addition, we had a
working capital deficit (excluding assets and liabilities held for sale) of $30.1 million at December 31, 2015. We continue to experience 
decreased liquidity as a result of the decline in oil and natural gas commodity prices and other factors discussed below.  As of March 30, 
2016, we had a borrowing base deficiency of $14.2 million under the Senior Credit Facility that must be repaid by March 31, 2016 and 
were not in compliance with the current ratio financial covenant as of December 31, 2015.  We will not be able to repay the borrowing 
base deficiency by March 31, 2016.  Consequently, we have undertaken marketing effects with respect to certain assets to fund our 
operations and debt obligations. However, proceeds from these potential asset sales may not provide sufficient liquidity to fund operations 
and debt obligations for the next twelve months. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The 
consolidated financial statements included in this report do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of 
recorded asset amounts or amounts of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Oil prices have decreased substantially from historic highs and may remain depressed for the foreseeable future. The decline in oil 
prices has materially and adversely affected our cash generated from operations, results of operations, financial position, our ability to 
repay our debt, and the trading price of our common shares.
Since the second half of 2014, oil prices have declined significantly. As a result of the decrease in oil prices, we incurred an impairment
of proved oil and natural gas properties and exploratory well costs of $16.0 million, not including an impairment on goodwill of $5.5 
million, during the year ended December 31, 2015, which reduced earnings and shareholders’ equity. In addition, as a result of decreased 
oil and natural gas prices, our borrowing base under the Senior Credit Facility was reduced, which resulted in a borrowing base deficiency 
of $14.2 million as of March 30, 2016.
We may incur additional impairments of our oil and natural gas properties and experience continued constrained liquidity if prices do
not increase. The possibility and amounts of any future impairments or losses are difficult to predict, and will depend, in part, upon
14
future oil and natural gas prices. If prices for oil continue to remain depressed for lengthy periods, we may be required to write down the 
value of our oil and natural gas properties, and some of our current projects may no longer be economically viable. In addition, sustained 
low prices for oil will negatively impact the value of our estimated proved reserves and reduce the amounts of cash we would otherwise 
have available to fund the drilling of obligation wells, pay expenses and service our indebtedness. If we are unable to fund the drilling of 
some or all of our obligation wells, we could lose some or all of our licenses.
We have a history of losses and may not achieve consistent profitability in the future.
We have incurred substantial losses in prior years. During 2015, we generated a net loss from continuing operations of $26.7 million. 
We will need to generate and sustain increased revenue levels in future periods in order to become consistently profitable, and even if we 
do, we may not be able to maintain or increase our level of profitability. We may incur losses in the future for a number of reasons, 
including the risks described herein, unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications and delays, and other unknown risks.
Our Senior Credit Facility contains various restrictive covenants that limit our management’s discretion in the operation of our 
business and could lead to an event of default that may adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. 
The operating and financial restrictions and covenants in our Senior Credit Facility may adversely affect our ability to finance future
operations or capital needs or to engage in other business activities.
Our Senior Credit Facility contains various covenants that restrict our ability to, among other things:
(cid:120) incur additional debt; 
(cid:120) create liens; 
(cid:120) enter into any hedge agreement for speculative purposes; 
(cid:120) engage in business other than as an oil and natural gas exploration and production company; 
(cid:120) enter into sale and leaseback transactions; 
(cid:120) enter into any merger, consolidation or amalgamation; 
(cid:120) declare or provide for any dividends or other payments or distributions; 
(cid:120) redeem or purchase any shares; or 
(cid:120) guarantee the obligations of any other person.
In addition, the Senior Credit Facility requires us to maintain specified financial ratios and tests.  Various risks, uncertainties and events
beyond our control could affect our ability to comply with the covenants and financial tests and ratios required by the Senior Credit 
Facility and could result in an event of default under the Senior Credit Facility.  As of December 31, 2015, we were not in compliance 
with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility, which is an event of default.
An event of default under the Senior Credit Facility includes, among other events, failure to pay principal or interest when due, breach 
of certain covenants and obligations, cross default to other indebtedness, bankruptcy or insolvency, failure to meet the required financial 
covenant ratios and the occurrence of a material adverse effect. In addition, the occurrence of a change of control is an event of default. A 
change of control is defined as the occurrence of any of the following: (i) our failure to own, of record and beneficially, all of the equity of 
TransAtlantic Exploration Mediterranean International Pty Ltd (“TEMI”), Talon Exploration, Ltd. (“Talon Exploration”), TransAtlantic 
Turkey, Amity Oil International Pty. Ltd. (“Amity”), Petrogas Petrol Gaz ve Petrokimya Ürünleri Inşaat Sanayi ve Ticaret A.Ş. 
(“Petrogas”), and DMLP, Ltd. (“DMLP,” and together with TEMI, Talon Exploration, TransAtlantic Turkey, Amity and Petrogas, the 
“Borrowers”) or either of TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and TransAtlantic Worldwide, Ltd. (“TransAtlantic Worldwide”) or to 
exercise, directly or indirectly, day-to-day management and operational control of any Borrower or TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. 
and TransAtlantic Worldwide; (ii) the failure by the Borrowers to own or hold, directly or indirectly, all of the interests granted to 
Borrowers pursuant to certain hydrocarbon licenses designated in the Senior Credit Facility; or (iii) (a) Mr. Mitchell ceases for any reason 
to be the executive chairman of our board of directors at any time, (b) Mr. Mitchell and certain of his affiliates cease to own of record and 
beneficially at least 35% of our common shares; or (c) any person or group, excluding Mr. Mitchell and certain of his affiliates, shall 
become, or obtain rights to become, the beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of more than 35% of our outstanding common shares 
entitled to vote for members of our board of directors on a fully-diluted basis; provided that, if Mr. Mitchell ceases to be executive 
chairman of our board of directors by reason of his death or disability, such event shall not constitute an event of default unless we have 
not appointed a successor reasonably acceptable to the lenders within 60 days of the occurrence of such event.
15
In the event of a default and acceleration of indebtedness under the Senior Credit Facility, our business, financial condition and results
of operations may be materially and adversely affected.
We depend on the services of our chairman and chief executive officer.
We depend on the performance of Mr. Mitchell, our chairman and chief executive officer. The loss of Mr. Mitchell could negatively
impact our ability to execute our strategy. We do not maintain a key person life insurance policy on Mr. Mitchell.
The majority of our oil is sold to one customer, and the loss of this customer could have a material adverse impact on our results of 
operations.
TUPRAS purchases all of our oil production from Turkey, representing 74.0% of our total revenues in 2015. If TUPRAS reduces its oil
purchases or fails to purchase our oil production, or there is a material non-payment, our results of operations could be materially and 
adversely affected. TUPRAS may be subject to its own operating risks that could increase the risk that it could default on its obligations to 
us. Under Turkish law, TUPRAS is obligated to purchase all of our oil production in Turkey, and we are prohibited from selling any of our 
oil produced in Turkey to any other customer. Pursuant to a purchase and sale agreement with TUPRAS, the price of oil delivered to 
TUPRAS is determined under the Petroleum Market Law No. 5015 under the laws of the Republic of Turkey. Changes to Turkish law 
could adversely affect our business and results of operations.
A significant failure of our computer systems may increase our operating costs or otherwise adversely affect our business.
We depend upon our computer systems to perform accounting and administrative functions as well as manage other aspects of our
operations. We maintain normal backup polices with respect to our computer systems and networks.  Nevertheless, our computer systems 
and networks are subject to risks that may cause interruptions in service, including, but not limited to, security breaches, physical damage, 
power loss, software defects, hacking attempts, computer viruses and malware, lost data and programming and/or human errors. 
Significant interruptions in service, security breaches or lost data may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition 
or results of operations.
We could lose permits or licenses on certain of our properties in Turkey unless the permits or licenses are extended or we commence 
production and convert the permits or licenses to production leases or concessions.
At December 31, 2015, of our total net undeveloped acreage, 25.0% and 7.0% will expire during 2016 and 2017, respectively, unless
we are able to extend the permits or licenses covering this acreage or commence production on this acreage and convert the permits or 
licenses into production leases or concessions. If our permits or licenses expire, we will lose our right to explore and develop the related 
properties. Our drilling plans for these areas are subject to change based upon various factors, including factors that are beyond our 
control. Such factors include drilling results, oil and natural gas prices, the availability and cost of capital, drilling and production costs, 
availability of drilling services and equipment, gathering system and pipeline transportation constraints, and regulatory approvals.  In 
addition, if our liquidity continues to be constrained and we are not able to access additional capital, we may be unable to fund the drilling 
of some or all of our obligation wells, and we could lose some or all of our licenses.
Virtually all of our operations are conducted in Turkey and Bulgaria, and we are subject to political, economic and other risks and 
uncertainties in these countries.
Virtually all of our international operations are performed in the emerging markets of Turkey and Bulgaria, which may expose us to 
greater risks than those associated with U.S. or Canadian markets. Due to our foreign operations, we are subject to the following issues 
and uncertainties that can adversely affect our operations:
(cid:120) the risk of, and disruptions due to, expropriation, nationalization, war, revolution, election outcomes, economic instability,
political instability, or border disputes;
(cid:120) the uncertainty of local contractual terms, renegotiation or modification of existing contracts and enforcement of contractual
terms in disputes before local courts;
(cid:120) the risk of import, export and transportation regulations and tariffs, including boycotts and embargoes; 
(cid:120) the risk of not being able to procure residency and work permits for our expatriate personnel; 
(cid:120) the requirements or regulations imposed by local governments upon local suppliers or subcontractors, or being imposed in an
unexpected and rapid manner;
16
(cid:120) taxation and revenue policies, including royalty and tax increases, retroactive tax claims and the imposition of unexpected taxes
or other payments on revenues;
(cid:120) exchange controls, currency fluctuations and other uncertainties arising out of foreign government sovereignty over foreign
operations;
(cid:120) laws and policies of the United States, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, (“FCPA”) and of the other countries in
which we operate affecting foreign trade, taxation and investment, including anti-bribery and anti-corruption laws;
(cid:120) our internal control policies may not protect us from reckless and criminal acts committed by our employees or agents, including
violations or alleged violations of the FCPA;
(cid:120) the possibility of being subjected to the exclusive jurisdiction of foreign courts in connection with legal disputes and the possible
inability to subject foreign persons to the jurisdiction of courts in the United States; and 
(cid:120) the possibility of restrictions on repatriation of earnings or capital from foreign countries.
To manage these risks, we sometimes form joint ventures and/or strategic partnerships with local private and/or governmental entities. 
Local partners provide us with local market knowledge. However, there can be no assurance that changes in conditions or regulations in 
the future will not affect our profitability or ability to operate in such markets.
Acts of violence, terrorist attacks or civil unrest in southeastern Turkey and nearby countries could adversely affect our business.
During 2015, we derived 56.6% of our oil production from the Selmo oil field in southeastern Turkey. Historically, the southeastern
area of Turkey and nearby countries such as Iran, Iraq and Syria have experienced political, social, security and economic problems, 
terrorist attacks, insurgencies, war and civil unrest. Since December 2010, political instability has increased markedly in a number of 
countries in the Middle East and North Africa. As a result of the civil war in Syria, hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees have fled to 
Turkey and more can be expected to cross the border as the conflict continues. Moreover, tensions continue between Turkey and Syria, 
and Turkey’s relations with Russia have recently deteriorated.
The current conflict with the terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (“ISIS”), as well as tension in and involving the Kurdish
regions of northern Iraq, which are contiguous to the region where our southeast Turkey licenses are located, may have political, social or 
security implications in Turkey or otherwise have a negative impact on the Turkish economy. Stability and security in Iraq deteriorated 
significantly since 2014 due to the conflict with ISIS.
Turkey has also experienced problems with domestic terrorist and ethnic separatist groups. For example, Turkey has been in conflict
for many years with the People’s Congress of Kurdistan (formerly known as the PKK), an organization that is listed as a terrorist 
organization by states and organizations, including Turkey, the European Union and the United States.
In response to escalating violence, the United States has increased military operations against ISIS. In addition, Turkey has authorized
military action, engaging in recent land and air strikes, against ISIS and PKK.  This instability has raised concerns regarding security in 
the region, including Turkey, and these situations may escalate in the future to more violent events.
The potential impact on our business from such events, conditions and conflicts in these countries is uncertain. We may be unable to 
access the locations where we conduct operations or transport oil to our offtakers in a reliable manner. In those locations where we have 
employees or operations, we may incur substantial costs to maintain the safety of our personnel and our operations. Despite these 
precautions, the safety of our personnel and operations in these locations may continue to be at risk, and we may in the future suffer the 
loss of employees and contractors or our operations could be disrupted, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business 
and results of operations.
We could experience labor disputes that could disrupt our business in the future.
As of December 31, 2015, approximately 39 of our employees at one of our subsidiaries operating in Turkey were represented by
collective bargaining agreements with PETROL-IS. In 2015, we negotiated a collective bargaining agreement with PETROL-IS covering 
approximately 41 employees at another of our subsidiaries operating in Turkey. Potential work disruptions from labor disputes with these 
employees could disrupt our business and adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
We could be assessed for Canadian federal tax as a result of our 2009 continuance under the Bermuda Companies Act 1981. 
For Canadian tax purposes, we were deemed, immediately before the completion of our 2009 continuance under the Bermuda
Companies Act 1981, to have disposed of each property owned by us for proceeds equal to the fair market value of that property, and
17
will be subject to tax on any resulting net income. In addition, we were required to pay a special “branch tax” equal to 25% of any excess 
of the fair market value of our property over the “paid-up capital” (as defined in the Income Tax Act (Canada)) of our outstanding 
common shares and our liabilities. However, management, together with its professional advisors, has determined that the paid-up capital 
of our common shares and our liabilities exceeded the fair market value of our property, resulting in no “branch tax” being payable. The 
Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”) may not accept our determination of the fair market value of our property. In the event that CRA’s 
determination of fair market value is significantly higher than our valuation and such determination is final, we may be subject to material 
amounts of tax resulting from the deemed disposition.
Risks Related to the Oil and Natural Gas Industry 
Oil and natural gas prices are volatile. Continued or further declines in prices could adversely affect our financial condition, results of 
operations, cash flows, access to capital, and ability to grow.
Oil and natural gas prices historically have been volatile and may continue to be volatile in the future. Therefore, even if oil prices
recover for a period of time, volatility will remain, and prices could move downward or upward on a rapid or repeated basis. The decline 
since late 2014 in oil and natural gas prices has reduced our revenue, cash flows and access to capital and, unless commodity prices 
improve, this trend will likely continue or worsen. Lower oil and natural gas prices also potentially reduce the amount of oil and natural 
gas that we can economically produce resulting in a reduction in the proved oil and natural gas reserves we could recognize. Thus, 
significant and sustained commodity price reductions could materially and adversely affect our financial condition and results of 
operations which could impact our ability to maintain or increase our current levels of borrowing, our ability to repay current or future 
indebtedness, our ability to refinance our current indebtedness or obtain additional capital on attractive terms.
The markets for crude oil and natural gas have historically been, and are likely to continue to be, volatile and subject to wide
fluctuations in response to numerous factors, including the following:
(cid:120) worldwide and domestic supplies of oil and gas, and the productive capacity of the oil and gas industry as a whole;
(cid:120) changes in the supply and the level of consumer demand for such fuels;
(cid:120) overall global and domestic economic conditions;
(cid:120) political conditions in oil, natural gas, and other fuel-producing and fuel-consuming areas;
(cid:120) the availability and capacity of gathering, transportation, processing, and/or refining facilities in regional or localized areas that
may affect the realized price for crude oil or natural gas;
(cid:120) the price and level of imports of crude oil, refined petroleum products, and liquefied natural gas;
(cid:120) weather conditions, including effects of weather conditions on prices and supplies in worldwide energy markets;
(cid:120) technological advances affecting energy consumption and conservation;
(cid:120) the ability of the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other exporting countries to agree to and
maintain crude oil prices and production controls;
(cid:120) the competitive position of each such fuel as a source of energy as compared to other energy sources;
(cid:120) strengthening and weakening of the U.S. Dollar relative to other currencies; and
(cid:120) the effect of governmental regulations and taxes on the production, transportation, and sale of oil, natural gas, and other fuels.
These factors and the volatility of the energy markets make it extremely difficult to predict future oil and gas price movements with any
certainty, but in general we expect oil and gas prices to continue to fluctuate significantly.
Reserves estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate.
Any material inaccuracies in our reserves estimates or underlying assumptions could materially affect the quantities and present values 
of our reserves. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is complex. It requires interpretations of available technical data and 
various assumptions, including assumptions relating to economic factors. Any significant inaccuracies in these interpretations or 
assumptions could materially affect the estimated quantities and present value of reserves that we may report. In order to prepare these 
estimates, we must project production rates and timing of development expenditures. We must also analyze available geological, 
geophysical, production and engineering data, and the extent, quality and reliability of this data can vary. The process also requires 
economic assumptions relating to matters such as oil and natural gas prices, drilling and operating expenses, capital expenditures, taxes 
and availability of funds.
18
Actual future production, oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating expenses and quantities of
recoverable oil and natural gas reserves most likely will vary from our estimates. Any significant variance could materially affect the 
estimated quantities and pre-tax net present value of reserves that we may report. In addition, we may adjust estimates of proved, probable 
and possible reserves to reflect production history, results of exploration and development, prevailing oil and natural gas prices and other 
factors, many of which are beyond our control. Moreover, there can be no assurance that our reserves will ultimately be produced or that 
our proved undeveloped, probable and possible reserves will be developed within the periods anticipated. Any significant variance in the 
assumptions could materially affect the estimated quantity and value of our reserves.
Investors should not assume that the pre-tax net present value of our proved, probable and possible reserves is the current market value 
of our estimated oil and natural gas reserves. We base the pre-tax net present value of future net cash flows from our proved, probable and 
possible reserves on prices and costs on the date of the estimate. Actual future prices, costs, and the volume of produced reserves may 
differ materially from those used in the pre-tax net present value estimate.
Future price declines may result in further write-downs of our asset carrying values.
We follow the successful efforts method of accounting for our oil and gas operations. Under this method, all property acquisition costs
and costs of exploratory and development wells are capitalized when incurred, pending determination of whether proved reserves have 
been discovered. If proved reserves are not discovered with an exploratory well, the costs of drilling the well are expensed.
The capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties, on a depletion pool basis, cannot exceed the estimated undiscounted future 
net cash flows of that depletion pool. If net capitalized costs exceed undiscounted future net revenues, we generally must write down the 
costs of each depletion pool to the estimated fair value (discounted future net cash flows of that depletion pool). Any such charge will not 
affect our cash flow from operating activities, but will reduce our earnings and shareholders’ equity. For example, in the year ended 
December 31, 2015, as a result of significant declines in oil commodity prices, we incurred a loss of $16.0 million on proved impairment 
and exploratory well costs, not including an impairment on goodwill of $5.5 million. A further decline in oil or natural gas prices from 
current levels, or other factors, could cause a further impairment write-down of capitalized costs and a non-cash charge against future 
earnings. Once incurred, a write-down of oil and natural gas properties cannot be reversed at a later date, even if oil or natural gas prices 
increase.
We may be unable to acquire or develop additional reserves, which would reduce our cash flow and income.
In general, production from oil and natural gas properties declines over time as reserves are depleted, with the rate of decline depending
on reservoir characteristics. If we are not successful in our exploration and development activities or in acquiring properties containing 
reserves, our reserves will generally decline as reserves are produced. Our oil and natural gas production is highly dependent upon our 
access to capital and our ability to economically find, develop or acquire reserves in commercial quantities.
To the extent cash flow from operations is reduced, either by a decrease in prevailing prices for oil and natural gas or an increase in 
finding and development costs, and external sources of capital become limited or unavailable, our ability to make the necessary capital 
investment to maintain or expand our asset base of oil and natural gas reserves would be impaired. Even with sufficient available capital, 
our future exploration and development activities may not result in additional reserves, and we might not be able to drill productive wells 
at acceptable costs.
Our future exploration, development and production activities may not be profitable or achieve our expected returns.
After oil and natural gas prices recover, the long-term performance of our business will depend upon our ability to identify, acquire and
develop additional oil and natural gas reserves that are economically recoverable. Future success will depend upon our ability to acquire 
working and revenue interests in properties upon which oil and natural gas reserves are ultimately discovered in commercial quantities, 
and the ability to develop prospects that contain additional proven oil and natural gas reserves to the point of production. Without 
successful acquisition and exploration activities, we will not be able to develop additional oil and natural gas reserves or generate 
additional revenues. There are no assurances that additional oil and natural gas reserves will be identified or acquired on acceptable terms, 
or that oil and natural gas reserves will be discovered in sufficient quantities to enable us to recover our exploration and development costs 
or sustain our business.
19
The successful acquisition and development of oil and natural gas properties requires an assessment of recoverable reserves, future oil 
and natural gas prices and operating costs, potential environmental and other liabilities, and other factors. Such assessments are inherently 
uncertain. In addition, no assurance can be given that our exploration and development activities will result in the discovery of additional 
reserves. Operations may be curtailed, delayed or canceled as a result of lack of adequate capital and other factors, such as lack of 
availability of rigs and other equipment, title problems, weather, compliance with governmental regulations or price controls, mechanical 
difficulties, or unusual or unexpected formations, pressures and/or work interruptions. In addition, the costs of exploration and 
development may materially exceed our internal estimates.
Drilling for and producing oil and natural gas are high-risk activities with many uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, 
financial condition or results of operations.
After oil and natural gas prices recover, our long-term success depends on the success of our exploration, development and production
activities in each of our prospects. These activities are subject to numerous risks beyond our control, including the risk that we will be 
unable to economically produce our reserves or be able to find commercially productive oil or natural gas reservoirs. Our decisions to 
purchase, explore, develop or otherwise exploit prospects or properties will depend in part on the evaluation of data obtained through 
geophysical and geological analyses, production data and engineering studies, the results of which are often inconclusive or subject to 
varying interpretations. The cost of drilling, completing and operating wells is often uncertain before drilling commences. Overruns in 
budgeted expenditures are common risks that can make a particular project unprofitable. Further, many factors may curtail, delay or 
prevent drilling operations, including:
(cid:120) unexpected drilling conditions; 
(cid:120) pressure or irregularities in geological formations; 
(cid:120) equipment failures or accidents; 
(cid:120) pipeline and processing interruptions or unavailability; 
(cid:120) title problems; 
(cid:120) adverse weather conditions; 
(cid:120) lack of market demand for oil and natural gas; 
(cid:120) delays imposed by, or resulting from, compliance with environmental laws and other regulatory requirements; 
(cid:120) declines in oil and natural gas prices; and 
(cid:120) shortages or delays in the availability of drilling rigs, equipment and qualified personnel.
Our future drilling activities might not be successful, and drilling success rates overall or within a particular area could decline. We 
could incur losses by drilling unproductive wells. Shut-in wells, curtailed production and other production interruptions may materially 
adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The development of proved undeveloped reserves is uncertain. In addition, there are no assurances that our probable and possible 
reserves will be converted to proved reserves.
At December 31, 2015, approximately 47.5% of our total estimated net proved reserves in Turkey were proved undeveloped reserves.
Undeveloped reserves, by their nature, are significantly less certain than developed reserves. At December 31, 2015, we also had a 
significant amount of unproved reserves, which consist of probable and possible reserves. There is significant uncertainty attached to 
unproved reserves estimates. The discovery, determination and exploitation of undeveloped or unproved reserves requires significant 
capital expenditures and successful drilling and exploration programs. We do not currently have the funds available to develop our 
undeveloped reserves.  We may not be able to raise the additional capital that we need to develop these reserves. There is no certainty that 
we will be able to convert undeveloped reserves to developed reserves or unproved reserves into proved reserves or that our undeveloped 
or unproved reserves will be economically viable or technically feasible to produce.
Legislative and regulatory initiatives and increased public scrutiny relating to fracture simulation activities could result in increased 
costs and additional operating restrictions or delays.
Fracture stimulation is an important and commonly used process for the completion of oil and natural gas wells and involves the
pressurized injection of water, sand and chemicals into rock formations to stimulate production. Recently, there has been increased public 
concern regarding the potential environmental impact of fracture stimulation activities. Most of these concerns have raised
20
questions regarding the drilling fluids used in the fracturing process, their effect on drinking water supplies, the use of water in connection 
with completion operations, and the potential for impact to surface water, groundwater and the environment generally.
The increased attention regarding fracture stimulation could lead to greater opposition, including litigation, to oil and natural gas
production activities using fracture stimulation techniques. Increased public scrutiny may also lead to additional levels of regulation in the 
countries in which we operate that could cause operational restrictions or delays, make it more difficult to perform fracture stimulation or 
could increase our costs of compliance and doing business. Additional legislation or regulation, such as a requirement to disclose the 
chemicals used in fracture stimulation, could make it easier for third parties opposing fracture stimulation to initiate legal proceedings 
based on allegations that specific chemicals used in the fracturing process could adversely affect groundwater. A substantial portion of our 
operations rely on fracture stimulation, and the adoption of legislation in Bulgaria have placed restrictions on our fracture stimulation 
activities, causing us to suspend our fracture stimulation activities in Bulgaria. The adoption of legislative or regulatory initiatives in 
Turkey restricting fracture stimulation could impose operational delays, increased operations costs and additional related burdens on our 
exploration and production activities which could suspend or make it more difficult to perform fracture stimulation, cause a material 
decrease in the drilling of new wells and related completion activities and increase our costs of compliance and doing business, which 
could materially impact our business and profitability.
We are subject to operating hazards.
The oil and natural gas exploration and production business involves a variety of operating risks, including the risk of fire, explosion,
blowout, pipe failure, casing collapse, stuck tools, uncontrollable flows of oil or natural gas, abnormally pressured formations and 
environmental hazards such as oil spills, surface cratering, natural gas leaks, pipeline ruptures, discharges of toxic gases, underground 
migration, surface spills, mishandling of fracture stimulation fluids, including chemical additives, and natural disasters. The occurrence of 
any of these events could result in substantial losses to us due to injury and loss of life, loss of or damage to well bores and/or drilling or 
production equipment, costs of overcoming downhole problems, severe damage to and destruction of property, natural resources and 
equipment, pollution and other environmental damage, clean-up responsibilities, regulatory investigation and penalties and suspension of 
operations. Gathering systems and processing facilities are subject to many of the same hazards and any significant problems related to 
those facilities could adversely affect our ability to market our production.
Our oil and natural gas operations are subject to extensive and complex laws and government regulation in the jurisdictions in which 
we operate and compliance with existing and future laws may increase our costs or impair our operations.
Our oil and natural gas operations are subject to numerous federal, state, local, foreign and provincial laws and regulations, including 
those related to the environment, employment, immigration, labor, oil and natural gas exploration and development, payments to local, 
foreign and provincial officials, taxes and the repatriation of foreign earnings. If we fail to adhere to any applicable federal, state, local, 
foreign and provincial laws or regulations, or if such laws or regulations restrict exploration or production, or negatively affect the sale, of 
oil and natural gas, our business, prospects, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows may be impaired. We may be subject to 
governmental sanctions, such as fines or penalties, as well as potential liability for personal injury, property or natural resource damage 
and might be required to make significant capital expenditures to comply with federal, state or international laws or regulations. In 
addition, existing laws or regulations, as currently interpreted or reinterpreted in the future, or future laws or regulations could adversely 
affect our business or operations, or substantially increase our costs and associated liabilities.
In addition, exploration for, and exploitation, production and sale of, oil and natural gas in each country in which we operate is subject 
to extensive national and local laws and regulations requiring various licenses, permits and approvals from various governmental agencies. 
If these licenses or permits are not issued or unfavorable restrictions or conditions are imposed on our exploration or drilling activities, we 
might not be able to conduct our operations as planned. Alternatively, failure to comply with these laws and regulations, including the 
requirements of any licenses or permits, might result in the suspension or termination of operations and subject us to penalties. Our costs 
to comply with these numerous laws, regulations, licenses and permits are significant.
Specifically, our oil and natural gas operations are subject to stringent laws and regulations relating to the release or disposal of
materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may 
result in the imposition of administrative, civil and/or criminal penalties, incurring investigatory or remedial obligations and the imposition 
of injunctive relief.
Changes in environmental laws and regulations occur frequently, and any changes that result in more stringent or costly waste
handling, storage, transport, disposal or cleanup requirements could require us to make significant expenditures to attain and maintain 
compliance and may otherwise have a material adverse effect on our industry in general and on our own results of operations, competitive 
position or financial condition. Although we intend to comply in all material respects with applicable environmental laws and regulations, 
we cannot assure you that we will be able to comply with existing or new regulations. In addition, the risk of
21
accidental spills, leakages or other circumstances could expose us to extensive liability. We are unable to predict the effect of additional 
environmental laws and regulations that may be adopted in the future, including whether any such laws or regulations would materially 
adversely increase our cost of doing business or affect operations in any area.
Under certain environmental laws that impose strict, joint and several liability, we may be required to remediate our contaminated 
properties regardless of whether such contamination resulted from the conduct of others or from consequences of our own actions that 
were or were not in compliance with all applicable laws at the time those actions were taken. In addition, claims for damages to persons or 
property may result from environmental and other impacts of our operations. Moreover, new or modified environmental, health or safety 
laws, regulations or enforcement policies could be more stringent and impose unforeseen liabilities or significantly increase compliance 
costs. Therefore, the costs to comply with environmental, health or safety laws or regulations or the liabilities incurred in connection with 
them could significantly and adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations.
In addition, many countries have agreed to regulate emissions of “greenhouse gases.” Methane, a primary component of natural gas, 
and carbon dioxide, a byproduct of burning of oil and natural gas, are greenhouse gases. Regulation of greenhouse gases could adversely 
impact some of our operations and demand for some of our services or products in the future.
We do not plan to insure against all potential operating risks. We might incur substantial losses from, and be subject to substantial 
liability claims for, uninsured or underinsured risks related to our oil and natural gas operations.
We do not intend to insure against all risks. Our oil and natural gas exploration and production activities are subject to numerous
hazards and risks associated with drilling for, producing and transporting oil and natural gas, and storing, transporting and using explosive 
materials, and any of the following risks can cause substantial losses:
(cid:120) environmental hazards, such as uncontrollable flows of natural gas, oil, brine, well fluids, toxic gas or other pollution into the
environment, including groundwater contamination, underground migration and surface spills or mishandling of fracture 
stimulation fluids, including chemical additives;
(cid:120) abnormally pressured formations; 
(cid:120) leaks of oil, natural gas and other hydrocarbons or losses of these hydrocarbons as a result of accidents during drilling and
completion operations, including fracture stimulation activities, or from the gathering and transportation of oil, natural gas and 
other hydrocarbons, malfunctions of pipelines, processing or other facilities in our operations or at delivery points to third 
parties;
(cid:120) spillage or mishandling of oil, natural gas, brine, well fluids, hydraulic fracturing fluids, toxic gas or other pollutants by third-
party service providers;
(cid:120) mechanical difficulties, such as stuck oil field drilling and service tools and casing collapse; 
(cid:120) fires and explosions; 
(cid:120) personal injuries and death; 
(cid:120) regulatory investigations and penalties; and 
(cid:120) natural disasters.
As is customary in the oil and natural gas industry, we maintain insurance against some, but not all, of our operating risks. Our
insurance may not be adequate to cover potential losses or liabilities and insurance coverage may not continue to be available at 
commercially acceptable premium levels or at all. We might not elect to obtain insurance if we believe that the cost of available insurance 
is excessive relative to the risks presented. Losses and liabilities arising from uninsured or under-insured events could require us to make 
large unbudgeted cash expenditures that could adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations.
We might not be able to identify liabilities associated with properties or obtain protection from sellers against them, which could cause 
us to incur losses.
Our review and evaluation of prospects and future acquisitions might not necessarily reveal all existing or potential problems. For
example, inspections may not always be performed on every well, and environmental problems, such as groundwater contamination, may 
not be readily identified even when an inspection is undertaken. Even when problems are identified, a seller may be unwilling or unable to 
provide effective contractual protection against all or part of those problems, and we may assume environmental and other risks and 
liabilities in connection with acquired properties.
22
We might not be able to obtain necessary permits, approvals or agreements from one or more government agencies, surface owners, or 
other third parties, which could hamper our exploration, development or production activities.
There are numerous permits, approvals, and agreements with third parties, which will be necessary in order to enable us to proceed 
with our exploration, development or production activities and otherwise accomplish our objectives. The government agencies in each 
country in which we operate have discretion in interpreting various laws, regulations, and policies governing operations under the licenses. 
Further, we may be required to enter into agreements with private surface owners to obtain access to, and agreements for, the location of 
surface facilities. In addition, because many of the laws governing oil and natural gas operations in the international countries in which we 
operate have been enacted relatively recently, there is only a relatively short history of the government agencies handling and interpreting 
those laws, including the various regulations and policies relating to those laws. This short history does not provide extensive precedents 
or the level of certainty that allows us to predict whether such agencies will act favorably toward us. The governments have broad 
discretion to interpret requirements for the issuance of drilling permits. Our inability to meet any such requirements could have a material 
adverse effect on our exploration, development or production activities.
Our hedging transactions expose us to counterparty credit risk.
Our hedging transactions expose us to risk of financial loss if a counterparty fails to perform under a derivative contract. Disruptions in
the financial markets could lead to sudden decreases in a counterparty’s liquidity, which could make them unable to perform under the 
terms of the derivative contract and we may not be able to realize the benefit of the derivative contract.
Competition in the oil and natural gas industry is intense, and many of our competitors have greater financial, technological and other 
resources than we do, which may adversely affect our ability to compete.
We operate in the highly competitive areas of oil and natural gas exploration, development, production and acquisition with a number
of other companies, including U.S.-based and foreign companies doing business in each of the countries in which we operate. We face 
intense competition from independent, technology-driven companies as well as from both major and other independent oil and natural gas 
companies in seeking oil and natural gas exploration licenses and production licenses, and acquiring desirable producing properties or new 
leases for future exploration.
Many of our competitors have substantially greater financial, managerial, technological and other resources than we do. These 
companies are able to pay more for exploratory prospects and productive oil and natural gas properties than we can. To the extent 
competitors are able to pay more for properties than we are paying, we will be at a competitive disadvantage. Further, many of our 
competitors enjoy technological advantages over us and may be able to implement new technologies more rapidly than we can. Our ability 
to explore for and produce oil and natural gas prospects and to acquire additional properties in the future will depend upon our ability to 
successfully conduct operations, implement advanced technologies, evaluate and select suitable properties and consummate transactions in 
this highly competitive environment.
Risks Related to Our Common Shares 
The interests of our controlling shareholder may not coincide with yours and such controlling shareholder may make decisions with 
which you may disagree.
As of March 29, 2016, Mr. Mitchell beneficially owned approximately 36% of our outstanding common shares. In addition, persons
and entities affiliated with Mr. Mitchell participated in our offering of $55.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes and 
have the right to convert their Convertible Notes to common shares subject to the terms and conditions of the Convertible Notes.  Dalea 
Partners, LP, an affiliate of Mr. Mitchell, purchased $2.0 million of the Convertible Notes; trusts benefitting Mr. Mitchell’s four children 
each purchased $2.0 million of the Convertible Notes; Pinon Foundation, a non-profit charitable organization directed by Mr. Mitchell’s 
spouse, purchased $10.0 million of the Convertible Notes; and a trust benefitting Barbara and Terry Pope, Mr. Mitchell’s sister-in-law and 
brother-in-law, purchased $200,000 of the Convertible Notes.  Also, on December 30, 2015, we entered into a $5.0 million draw down 
convertible promissory note (the “Note”) with ANBE Holdings L.P. (“ANBE”), an entity owned by the children of Mr. Mitchell, and 
controlled by an entity managed by Mr. Mitchell and his wife.  ANBE has the right to convert the principal amount outstanding under the 
Note to common shares ($3.6 million as of December 31, 2015) subject to the terms and conditions of the Note.   As a result, Mr. Mitchell 
could control substantially all matters requiring shareholder approval, including the election of directors and approval of significant 
corporate transactions. In addition, this concentration of ownership may delay or prevent a change in control of our company and make 
some future transactions more difficult or impossible without the support of Mr. Mitchell. The interests of Mr. Mitchell may not coincide 
with your interests or the interests of our other shareholders.
23
We may seek to raise additional funds or restructure our debt by issuing securities that would dilute your ownership. Depending on the 
terms available to us, if these activities result in significant dilution, it may negatively impact the trading price of our common shares.
We may seek to raise additional funds or restructure our debt by issuing common shares, preferred shares, or securities convertible into
or exercisable for common shares, that would dilute your ownership. Depending on the terms available to us, if these activities result in 
significant dilution, it may negatively impact the trading price of our common shares. Further, any additional financing that we secure may 
require the granting of rights, preferences or privileges senior to, or pari passu with, those of our common shares. Any issuances by us of 
equity securities may be at or below the prevailing market price of our common shares and in any event may have a dilutive impact on 
your ownership interest, which could cause the market price of our common shares to decline. We may also raise additional funds through 
the incurrence of convertible debt or the issuance or sale of other securities or instruments senior to our common shares. If we experience 
dilution from the issuance of additional securities and we grant superior rights to new securities over common shareholders, it may 
negatively impact the trading price of our common shares and you may lose all or part of your investment.
The value of our common shares may be affected by matters not related to our own operating performance.
The value of our common shares may be affected by matters that are not related to our operating performance and which are outside of
our control. These matters include the following:
(cid:120) general economic conditions in the United States, Turkey, Bulgaria and globally; 
(cid:120) industry conditions, including fluctuations in the price of oil and natural gas; 
(cid:120) governmental regulation of the oil and natural gas industry, including environmental regulation and regulation of fracture
stimulation activities;
(cid:120) fluctuation in foreign exchange or interest rates; 
(cid:120) liabilities inherent in oil and natural gas operations; 
(cid:120) geological, technical, drilling and processing problems; 
(cid:120) unanticipated operating events which can reduce production or cause production to be shut in or delayed; 
(cid:120) failure to obtain industry partner and other third-party consents and approvals, when required; 
(cid:120) stock market volatility and market valuations; 
(cid:120) competition for, among other things, capital, acquisition of reserves, undeveloped land and skilled personnel; 
(cid:120) the need to obtain required approvals from regulatory authorities; 
(cid:120) worldwide supplies and prices of, and demand for, oil and natural gas; 
(cid:120) political conditions and developments in each of the countries in which we operate; 
(cid:120) political conditions in oil and natural gas producing regions; 
(cid:120) revenue and operating results failing to meet expectations in any particular period; 
(cid:120) investor perception of the oil and natural gas industry; 
(cid:120) limited trading volume of our common shares; 
(cid:120) announcements relating to our business or the business of our competitors; 
(cid:120) the sale of assets;
(cid:120) the issuance of common shares, debt or other securities; 
(cid:120) our liquidity; and 
(cid:120) our ability to raise additional funds or restructure our debt.
In the past, companies that have experienced volatility in the trading price of their common shares have been the subject of securities
class action litigation. We might become involved in securities class action litigation in the future. Such litigation often results in 
substantial costs and diversion of management’s attention and resources and could have a material adverse effect on our business, 
financial condition and results of operation.
24
U.S. shareholders who hold common shares during a period when we are classified as a passive foreign investment company may be 
subject to certain adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences.
Management believes that we are not currently a passive foreign investment company. However, we may have been a passive foreign 
investment company during one or more of our prior taxable years and could become a passive foreign investment company in the future. 
In general, classification of our company as a passive foreign investment company during a period when a U.S. shareholder holds common 
shares could result in certain adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences to such shareholder.
Certain U.S. shareholders who hold common shares during a period when we are classified as a controlled foreign corporation may be 
subject to certain adverse U.S. federal income tax rules.
Management believes that we currently are a controlled foreign corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes and that we will
continue to be so treated. Consequently, a U.S. shareholder that owns 10% or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of our 
shares entitled to vote on the last day of our taxable year may be subject to certain adverse U.S. federal income tax rules with respect to 
the shareholder’s investment in us.
Risks Related to Our Indebtedness
Our substantial level of indebtedness could adversely affect our financial condition and prevent us from fulfilling our debt service and 
other obligations.
We have a significant amount of indebtedness. Our substantial indebtedness could have significant effects on our business. For
example, it could:
(cid:120) make it more difficult for us to satisfy our financial obligations, including with respect to our indebtedness, and any failure to
comply with the obligations of any of our debt agreements, including financial and other restrictive covenants, could result in an 
event of default under the agreements governing our indebtedness;
(cid:120) increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic, industry and competitive conditions, especially declines in oil and natural
gas prices;
(cid:120) limit our ability to borrow additional funds, and 
(cid:120) limit our financial flexibility
Each of these factors may have a material and adverse effect on our financial condition and viability. Our ability to make payments
with respect to our indebtedness and to satisfy any other debt obligations will depend on commodity prices, our ability to raise capital and 
our future operating performance, which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors 
affecting our company and industry, many of which are beyond our control.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Not applicable.
25
Item 2. Properties 
Turkey
General. As of December 31, 2015, we held interests in 18 onshore and offshore exploration licenses and 25 onshore production leases
covering a total of approximately 1.4 million gross acres (approximately 880,000 net acres) in Turkey. We acquired our interests in 
Turkey through acquisitions, as well as through farm-in agreements with existing third-party license holders and through applications 
submitted to the Turkish General Directorate for Petroleum Affairs (the “GDPA”), the agency responsible for the regulation of oil and 
natural gas activities under the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources in Turkey.
The following map shows our interests in Turkey:
Reserves. As of December 31, 2015, we had total net proved reserves of 10,815 Mbbl of oil and 15,847 Mmcf of natural gas, net
probable reserves of 10,931 Mbbl of oil and 20,253 Mmcf of natural gas and net possible reserves of 11,205 Mbbl of oil and 70,739 Mmcf 
of natural gas in Turkey.
Equipment Yards. As of December 31, 2015, we leased equipment yards in Muratli, Diyarbakir and Tekirdag and owned equipment
yards at Selmo and Edirne.
26
Commercial Terms. Turkey’s fiscal regime for oil and natural gas licenses is presently comprised of royalties and income tax. The
royalty rate is 12.5% and the corporate income tax rate is 20%. Our revenue from the Selmo oil field is subject to an additional 10% 
royalty, which is offset by the amount of exploration expense that TEMI and DMLP, the owners of our interest in the Selmo oil field, 
incur in Turkey. As of December 31, 2015, our carryforward exploration credit from TEMI and DMLP was $56.5 million and $6.2 
million, respectively.  If those exploration expenses do not equal or exceed the amount of this additional 10% royalty, we would owe the 
difference. Dividends repatriated from Turkey would be subject to a withholding tax rate of 15% unless reduced by a tax treaty. There is 
also an 18% value added tax. However, for exploration licenses, no value added tax is assessed on drilling, completion, workover, seismic 
and geologic activities.
Licensing Regime. The licensing process in Turkey for oil and natural gas concessions occurs in three stages: permit, license and
lease. Under a permit, the government grants the non-exclusive right to conduct a geological investigation over an area. The size of the 
area and the term of the permit are subject to the discretion of the GDPA. A new petroleum law was passed by the Turkish government in 
May 2013, amending some of the processes related to licensing and operations in Turkey. The regulations concerning implementation 
were passed by the Turkish government in January 2014. The existing licenses and future licensing processes are currently in a transition 
phase from the old petroleum law to the new petroleum law. The new law provides that operators have the option to maintain their 
licenses under the old petroleum law for the duration of the existing terms of a license or to convert their licenses to the new petroleum 
law prior to the expiration of the license.
The GDPA awards a license after it approves the applicant’s work program, which may include obligations such as geological and
geophysical work, seismic reprocessing and interpretation and contingent shooting of seismic and drilling of wells. A license grants 
exclusive rights over an area for the exploration for and production of petroleum.
Licensing Under the Old Petroleum Law. A license has a term of four years and requires drilling activities by the third year, but this 
obligation may be deferred into the fourth year by posting a bond. A license is eligible for two separate two-year extensions by fulfilling 
prior work commitments and subscribing to additional work commitments. A final three-year term may be granted as an appraisal period 
for any oil or natural gas discovery registered in the previous terms. No single company may own more than an aggregate of 100% of 
eight licenses within a district. Rentals are due annually based on the size of the license.
Once a discovery is made, the license holder may apply to convert the area, not to exceed 25,000 hectares (approximately 62,000
acres), to a lease. Under a lease, the lessee may produce oil and natural gas. The term of a lease is for 20 years and may be extended for 
two further terms of 10 years each. Annual rentals are due based on the size of the lease. The production lease holder is typically able to 
apply for a new exploration license covering the area of the original exploration license, minus the area of the newly-granted production 
lease.
Licensing Under the New Petroleum Law. A license has a term of five years and requires the license holder to post a bond equal to 
2% of the cost of the work commitments to secure the fulfillment of the work commitments. Licenses shall be based on map sections of 
scale equal to 1/50,000 (approximately 148,000 acres) or 1/25,000 (approximately 37,000 acres). A license is eligible for two separate two
-year extensions by fulfilling prior work commitments and subscribing to additional work commitments, including the drilling of at least 
one well in each separate extension period, and providing a bond to secure fulfillment of the additional work commitments. A final two-
year term may be granted to appraise a petroleum discovery made during the prior terms. An additional six-month extension may be 
granted during any of the foregoing terms in order to complete the drilling or testing of a well.
Once a discovery is made, the license holder may apply to convert part of the license area, covering the prospective petroleum field, to 
a production lease. Under a lease, the lessee may produce oil and natural gas. The term of a lease is for 20 years and may be extended for 
two further terms of 10 years each. The production lease holder is typically able to apply for a new exploration license covering the area of 
the original exploration license, minus the area of the newly-granted production lease.
The expiration dates reported on our exploration licenses and production leases below are subject to various extensions available under 
the old petroleum law and the new petroleum law. Those portions of exploration licenses with production are available during any term for 
conversion to a production lease with a term of 20 years plus two further 10 year extensions if production is maintained. We have applied 
to the GDPA to convert some of our qualifying acreage into the new petroleum law regulations. This will be a gradual process, but we 
anticipate that conversion into the new petroleum law will provide for the renewal of the exploration license terms for qualifying acreage.
27
Northwestern Turkey. The following map shows our interests in northwestern Turkey at December 31, 2015:
Adatepe (Production Lease 4959 and License 5016). We own a 50% working interest in Production Lease 4959 and License 5016,
which cover approximately 3,086 gross acres and 117,000 gross acres, respectively. As of December 31, 2015, we had six gross (three net) 
producing wells on the Adatepe Production Lease. We are the operator of Production Lease 4959 and License 5016. The current terms of 
Production Lease 4959 and License 5016 expire in September 2031 and January 2016, respectively.  We are evaluating extension options 
for License 5016, and Production Lease 4959 has extensions available under the petroleum law.
Alpullu (Production Lease 4794) and Temrez (Licenses F17B3, F18A3, F18A4, and F18B4). We own a 100% working interest in the
Alpullu Production Lease and the Temrez Licenses, which cover approximately 3,158 acres and 134,296 acres, respectively. As of 
December 31, 2015, we had nine gross (8.8 net) producing wells on the Alpullu Production Lease. We plan to maintain production to 
satisfy our obligation on the Alpullu Production Lease. We are the operator of the Alpullu Production Lease and the Temrez License, 
which expire in September 2028 and July 2020, respectively, with extensions available under the petroleum law.
Atakoy (Production Lease 5122). We own a 41.5% working interest, subject to a 0.415% overriding royalty interest, in Production 
Lease 5122, which covers approximately 440 gross acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had 14 gross (5.8 net) producing wells on the 
Atakoy production lease. We plan to maintain production to satisfy our obligation on Production Lease 5122. We are the operator of 
Production Lease 5122, which expires in November 2032, with extensions available under the old and new petroleum laws.
Banarli (Production Lease 5059). We own a 50% working interest in Production Lease 5059, which covers approximately 4,608 gross
acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had one gross (0.5 net) producing well on the Banarli Production Lease. We plan to maintain 
production to satisfy our obligation on Production Lease 5059. We are the operator of Production Lease 5059, which expires in February 
2032, with extensions available under the petroleum law.
28
Bekirler (License 4126). We own a 41.5% working interest, subject to a 0.415% overriding royalty interest, in License 4126, which 
covers approximately 124,000 gross acres. We are the operator of License 4126, which expired in December 2015, but we have filed an 
application to convert the productive areas into a new production lease.
Dogu Adatepe (Production Lease F19-b4-1). We own a 50% working interest in the Dogu Adatepe Production Lease, which covers
part of our former Cayirdere license. The lease covers approximately 4,000 gross acres and expires in October 2017, with an additional 28 
years of extensions under the new petroleum law available with the maintenance of production on the production lease.
Edirne Production Leases and Habiller Production Lease. We own a 55% working interest in three Edirne Production Leases and a
100% working interest in the Habiller Production Lease, which cover an aggregate of approximately 65,000 gross acres. As of December 
31, 2015, we had 20 gross (14.7 net) producing wells on the Edirne and Habiller Production Leases. We are the operator of the Edirne 
Production Leases and the Habiller Production Lease which expire in 2034 and March 2020, respectively, with extensions available under 
the petroleum law.
Gocerler (Production Lease 4200 and License 4288). We own a 50% working interest in Production Lease 4200 and License 4288, 
which cover approximately 3,363 gross acres and 119,000 gross acres, respectively. As of December 31, 2015, we had seven gross (3.5 
net) producing wells on the Gocerler Production Lease and 13 gross (6.4 net) producing wells on License 4288. We plan to drill one well 
in 2016 on License 4288 to satisfy the work program for License 4288 and we plan to maintain production to satisfy our obligations on 
Production Lease 4200. We are the operator of Production Lease 4200 and License 4288, which expire in May 2023 and August 2017, 
respectively, with extensions available under the petroleum law.
Hayrabolu (Production Lease 2926). We own a 41.5% working interest, subject to a 0.415% overriding royalty interest, in Production 
Lease 2926, which covers approximately 12,400 gross acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had 16 gross (6.6 net) producing wells on the 
Hayrabolu Production Lease. We plan to maintain production which satisfies our obligation on Production Lease 2926. We are the 
operator of Production Lease 2926, which expires in February 2020, with one ten-year extension available under the old and new 
petroleum laws.
Karaevli (Production Lease). We own a 41.5% working interest, subject to a 0.415% overriding royalty interest, in the Karaevli
Production Lease, which covers approximately 8,500 gross acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had seven gross (2.9 net) producing wells 
on the Karaevli lease. We are the operator of the Karaevli Production Lease.  The Karaevli Production Lease expires in November 2020, 
with extensions available under the petroleum law.  We have submitted an application for another Karaevli Production Lease covering 
approximately 15,800 gross acres, which is pending.
Karanfiltepe (Licenses F17c-2,3 and F18d-1,2,4). We own a 41.5% working interest, subject to a 0.415% overriding royalty interest, in
the Karanfiltepe licenses, which cover approximately 160,000 gross acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had five gross (2.1 net) 
producing wells on the Karanfiltepe licenses. We are the operator of the Karanfiltepe licenses, which expire in June 2020, with extensions 
available under the petroleum law.
Osmanli Production Leases. We own 41.5%, subject to a 0.415% overriding royalty interest, in six Osmanli Production Leases, which
cover approximately 107,000 gross acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had 114 gross (47.3 net) producing wells on the Osmanli 
Production Leases.  We are the operator of the Osmanli Production Leases, which will not expire for 40 years if production is maintained.
Tekirdag (Production Lease 3860) and Gazioglu (Production Lease 3861). We own a 41.5% working interest, subject to a 0.415% 
overriding royalty interest, in Production Leases 3860 and 3861, which cover an aggregate of approximately 4,300 gross acres. As of 
December 31, 2015, we had 67 gross (28.2 net) producing wells on the Tekirdag and Gazioglu Production Leases. We plan to maintain 
production to satisfy our obligation on Production Leases 3860 and 3861. We are the operator of Production Leases 3860 and 3861, which 
expire in December 2023 and December 2021, respectively, with extensions available under the petroleum law.
29
Southeastern Turkey. The following map shows our interests in southeastern Turkey at December 31, 2015:
Arpatepe (Production Lease 5003 and License 5025). We own a 50% working interest in Production Lease 5003 and License 5025,
which cover approximately 11,200 and 84,800 gross acres, respectively. For 2015, our wellhead production of oil from the Arpatepe field 
was 51,527 Bbls of oil, at an average rate of approximately 141 Bbl/d. As of December 31, 2015, we had seven gross (3.5 net) producing 
wells on the Arpatepe production lease. We are the operator of Production Lease 5003 and License 5025, which expire in November 2028 
and February 2016, respectively, with extensions available under the old and new petroleum laws.  We are working on establishing 
production and extending License 5025 for at least two years.
Bakuk (License 5064 and Production Lease 5043). We own a 50% working interest in License 5064 and Production Lease 5043. The
exploration license covers approximately 61,000 gross acres, and the production lease covers approximately 34,400 gross acres. 
Production continues from the Bakuk-101 well, and we are evaluating additional offset well locations. Tiway Turkey, Ltd. (“Tiway”) is 
the operator of License 5064 and Production Lease 5043, which expire in June 2016 and January 2032, respectively, with extensions 
available under the petroleum law.
Bati Yasince Production Lease (Lease M45A1-1). We own a 100% working interest in the Bati Yasince Production Lease, which
covers approximately 7,200 gross acres. We drilled the Bati Yasince-1 discovery well in the fourth quarter of 2014, which was producing 
oil as of December 31, 2015. We are the operator of the lease, which expires in 2035 with two 10 year extensions available under the 
petroleum law.
Gaziantep (Gaziantep Licenses). We own a 62.5% working interest in the Gaziantep Licenses, subject to a 0.313% overriding royalty 
interest, which cover an aggregate of 152,000 gross acres. We are the operator of the Gaziantep Licenses, which expire in October 2019. 
We are currently evaluating additional prospects on the Gaziantep Licenses, including an offset to the Alibey-1H discovery well.
30
Idil (License 4642). We own a 50% working interest in License 4642, which covers approximately 123,000 gross acres. In February 
2014, we entered into a farm-out agreement with Onshore Petroleum Company AS (“Onshore”). We are the operator of License 4642, 
which expires in October 2016.
Molla (Licenses 4174 and 4845) and West Molla (License 5046). We own a 100% working interest in Licenses 4174, 4845 and 5046, 
which cover an aggregate of approximately 109,000 gross acres. As of December 31, 2015, we had six gross and net wells producing on 
the Molla licenses. We continue to interpret the 800 sq. km. 3D seismic data to delineate prospects on the Molla licenses. We are the 
operator of Licenses 4174, 4845 and 5046, which expire in June 2016, March 2017 and June 2016, respectively, with extensions available 
under the old and new petroleum laws.
Selmo (Production Lease 829). We own a 100% working interest in Production Lease 829, which covers 8,900 acres and includes the
Selmo oil field. As of December 31, 2015, there were 69 gross and net producing wells on the Selmo production lease. For 2015, our 
wellhead production of oil in the Selmo field was approximately 934,777 Bbls of oil, at an average rate of approximately 2,561 Bbl/d. We 
are the operator of Production Lease 829, which expires in June 2025.
Bulgaria
General. As of December 31, 2015, we held interests in one onshore exploration permit and one onshore production concession in 
Bulgaria. We acquired all of our Bulgarian interests through the purchase of Direct Petroleum Bulgaria EOOD (“Direct Bulgaria”) in 
February 2011. In January 2012, the Bulgarian Parliament enacted legislation that banned the fracture stimulation of oil and natural gas 
wells in the Republic of Bulgaria. The legislation also had the effect of preventing conventional drilling and completion activities. In June 
2012, the Bulgarian Parliament amended the legislation to clarify that conventional drilling and completion activities were not intended to 
be affected by the law. As long as this legislation remains in effect, our unconventional natural gas exploration, development and 
production activities in Bulgaria will be significantly constrained. The following map shows our interests in Bulgaria at December 31, 
2015:
Reserves. As of December 31, 2015, there were no economic reserves associated with our properties in Bulgaria.
31
Commercial Terms. Bulgaria’s petroleum laws provide a framework for investment and operation that allows foreign investors to
retain the proceeds from the sale of petroleum production. The fiscal regime is comprised of royalties and income tax.
The royalty ranges from 2.5% to 30%, based on an “R factor” which is particular to each production concession agreement, but is
typically calculated by dividing the total cumulative revenues from a production concession by the total cumulative costs incurred for that 
production concession.
The production concession holder pays Bulgarian corporate income tax, which is assessed at a rate of 10%. All costs incurred in
connection with exploration, development and production operations are deductible for corporate income tax purposes.
Resident companies which remit dividends outside of Bulgaria are subject to a dividend withholding tax between 10% and 15%,
depending on the proportion of the capital owned by the recipient. No customs duty is payable on the export of petroleum, nor is customs 
duty payable on the import of material necessary to conduct petroleum operations. There is also a 20% value added tax. Oil is priced at 
market while natural gas is tied to a bundle pricing based in part on the import price and in part on the domestic price.
Licensing Regime. The licensing process in Bulgaria for oil and natural gas concessions occurs in two stages: exploration permit and
then production concession.
Under an exploration permit, the government grants exploration rights for a term of up to five years to conduct seismic and other
exploratory activities, including drilling. The recipient of an exploration permit commits to a work program and posts a bank guarantee in 
the amount of the estimated cost for the program. The area covered by an onshore exploration permit may be as large as 5,000 square 
kilometers. The exploration permit may be extended for up to two additional two-year terms, subject to fulfillment of minimum work 
programs, and may be extended for an additional one-year term in order to appraise potential geologic discoveries. Interests under an 
exploration permit are transferable, subject to government approval. The permit holder is required to pay an annual area fee equal to 40 
Bulgarian Lev (approximately $25 at December 31, 2015) per square kilometer, or 40 Bulgarian Lev (approximately $25 at December 31, 
2015) per square kilometer in the event the permit term is extended.
Upon the registration of a commercial discovery, an exploration permit holder may apply for a production concession. The production
concession size corresponds to the area of the commercial discovery. The duration of a production concession is 35 years and may be 
extended by a further 15 years subject to the terms and conditions of the production concession agreement. Interests under a production 
concession are transferable, subject to government approval. No bonus is paid to the government by the company upon conversion to a 
production concession.
Koynare. We own a 100% working interest, subject to a 3.02% overriding royalty interest and Koynare Development Ltd.’s (“KDL”)
50% farm-in interest, in the Koynare production concession covering approximately 163,000 acres. The Koynare Concession Area 
contains the Deventci-R1 well, where we discovered a reservoir in the Jurassic-aged Ozirovo formation at a depth of approximately 
13,800 feet, which the Bulgarian government has certified as a geologic and commercial discovery. In November 2011, we commenced 
drilling the Deventci-R2 appraisal well on the Koynare Concession Area, which we suspended following the enactment of the Bulgarian 
government’s January 2012 legislation. During the second half of 2013, we resumed drilling the Deventci-R2 directional well on our 
Koynare Concession Area. In January 2014, we reached target depth of 14,100 feet on the Deventci-R2 well, and conducted a long-term 
test on the well during the second quarter of 2014 with an initial production test of approximately 2.0 Mmcf/d of natural gas with 
condensates. In the fourth quarter of 2014, we received approval from the Bulgarian government to acidize the well. We conducted the 
acidizing operation in December 2014 to enhance its productivity. Following the acidizing operation, the Deventci-R2 well was deemed 
unproductive and was temporarily abandoned in the second quarter of 2015.
Stefenetz. In November 2011, we initiated the application process for a production concession covering approximately 395,000 acres
over the southern portion of our former A-Lovech exploration permit. The Stefenetz Concession Area is estimated to contain over 300,000 
prospective acres for Etropole shale at a depth of approximately 12,500 feet, which the Bulgarian government has certified as a geologic 
discovery. During 2012, we initiated an environmental impact assessment, which the Bulgarian government must approve prior to 
granting the production concession.
In September 2011, we entered into an agreement with Esrey Energy (“Esrey”) pursuant to which Esrey funded the drilling of an
exploration well on the Stefenetz Concession Area to core and test the Etropole shale formation. This well, the Peshtene-R11, reached 
total depth in late November 2011, from which we collected more than 900 feet of core. We suspended the completion of the Peshtene-
R11 well following enactment of the Bulgarian government’s January 2012 legislation. If we obtain a production concession over the 
Stefenetz Concession Area, Esrey would fund up to an additional $12.5 million in exchange for a 50% working interest in the production 
concession. The remaining 50% working interest in the production concession would be split equally between us and KDL.
32
Aglen. We have applied to relinquish the Aglen exploration permit, which covers approximately 1,700 acres within the boundaries of
the former A-Lovech exploration permit and lies within the boundary of the Stefenetz Concession Area.
Albania
General. As of December 31, 2015, we owned 100% of the interests in three onshore oil fields and one onshore gas field.  The
following map shows our interests in Albania at December 31, 2015:
Reserves. As of December 31, 2015, we had total net proved reserves of 4,258 Mbbl of oil and 5,527 Mmcf of natural gas, net
probable reserves of 13,062 Mbbl of oil and 14,256 Mmcf of natural gas and net possible reserves of 9,620 Mbbl of oil and 23,884 Mmcf 
of natural gas in Albania.  In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in Stream to GBC Oil.  Stream’s wholly owned 
subsidiary, TransAtlantic Albania, owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC Oil, 
TransAtlantic Albania entered into an assignment and assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will assign its 
Delvina natural gas assets and the Delvina Gas Liabilities to Delvina Gas to be effective immediately upon receipt of required
33
contractual consents. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain the required contractual consents.  We are currently negotiating a 
joint venture with a third party for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a joint 
venture for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  See “Item 1. Business—Recent Developments.”
Commercial Terms. The following description of the commercial terms in Albania is limited to the Delvina gas field.  The Delvina
gas field is subject to a License Agreement between Agjencia Kombëtare e Burimeve Natyrore, the Albanian National Agency of Natural 
Resources (“AKBN”), and Albpetrol, the state owned oil company in Albania, and a Petroleum Agreement with Albpetrol, which together 
give the owner the right to access and develop the onshore gas field. The License Agreement has a 25-year term, with unlimited five-year 
renewal options.
The operator is required to submit annual work programs and budgets to Albpetrol each year, including the nature and amount of
capital expenditures, which is required to be consistent with the plans of development (“PODs”) for the Delvina gas field approved by 
AKBN.  Significant deviations from the PODs are subject to the approval of AKBN and Albpetrol.
Pursuant to the terms of the Petroleum Agreement, the operator pays a 2% to 7.2% gross over-riding royalty to Albpetrol, which may 
be paid in kind or cash. In addition, the operator is required to pay a royalty to Albpetrol based on the amount of pre-existing production 
(“PEP”) from the wells taken over from Albpetrol.  The PEP royalty is calculated on a well by well basis and is initially equal to 65% to 
70% of the PEP preceding the takeover of the well from Albpetrol.  The PEP royalty declines at a rate of 5% per year.
In 2008, a new 10% mineral tax was enacted by the Albanian Ministry of Finance. The new mineral tax is equal to 10% of gross sales 
after deducting any PEP royalties paid.  Under the Petroleum Agreement, any new financial burdens (including new mineral taxes) are to 
be neutralized by amendments to the Petroleum Agreement. The operator is working with officials from Albpetrol and AKBN to finalize 
amendments to the Petroleum Agreement to neutralize the 10% mineral tax.
Delvina Field. The Delvina natural gas field was discovered in 1987 and produces natural gas and natural gas liquids from reservoirs at
a depth of 2,800 to 3,500 meters from fractured carbonates of Cretaceous-Paleocene age. The Delvina natural gas field is connected to 
potential markets by an existing pipeline, but needs additional downstream capacity. The field has two previously producing vertical wells, 
the Delvina D4 and D12 wells.
34
Summary of Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
The following table summarizes our net proved, probable and possible reserves at December 31, 2015.
Oil and Condensate
(Mbbl)
Reserves
Natural Gas
(Mmcf)
Total
(Mboe)
Reserves Category
Turkey (continuing operations)
Proved reserves
Albania (discontinued operations)(1)
Proved reserves
Proved developed
Proved undeveloped
Total proved
Probable reserves
Probable developed
Probable undeveloped
Total probable
Possible reserves
Possible developed
Possible undeveloped
Total possible
Proved developed
Proved undeveloped
Total proved
Probable reserves
Probable developed
Probable undeveloped
Total probable
Possible reserves
Possible developed
Possible undeveloped
Total possible
Total
Proved reserves
Proved developed
Proved undeveloped
Total proved
Probable reserves
Probable developed
Probable undeveloped
Total probable
Possible reserves
Possible developed
Possible undeveloped
Total possible
5,598
5,217
10,815
1,062
9,869
10,931
1,249
9,956
11,205
4,085
173
4,258
12,391
671
13,062
8,533
1,087
9,620
9,683
5,390
15,073
13,453
10,540
23,993
9,782
11,043
20,825
8,776
7,071
15,847
2,931
17,322
20,253
2,832
67,907
70,739
935
4,592
5,527
1,233
13,023
14,256
2,421
21,463
23,884
9,711
11,663
21,374
4,164
30,345
34,509
5,253
89,370
94,623
7,061
6,396
13,457
1,551
12,756
14,307
1,721
21,274
22,995
4,241
938
5,179
12,597
2,842
15,439
8,937
4,664
13,601
11,302
7,334
18,636
14,148
15,598
29,746
10,658
25,938
36,596
(1)
In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in Stream to GBC Oil.  Stream’s wholly owned subsidiary, 
TransAtlantic Albania, owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC Oil, 
TransAtlantic Albania entered into an assignment and assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will 
assign its Delvina natural gas assets and the Delvina Gas Liabilities to Delvina Gas to be effective immediately upon receipt of 
required contractual consents. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain the required contractual consents.  We are 
currently negotiating a joint venture with a third party for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no assurance that 
we will be able to complete a joint venture for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  As of December 31, 2015, our 
Albanian assets and liabilities were classified as held for sale and presented within discontinued operations for all periods 
presented in our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
35
Value of Proved Reserves
The following table shows our estimated future net revenue, PV-10 and Standardized Measure as of December 31, 2015:
Future net revenue(1)
Total PV-10(1)(2)
Total Standardized Measure(1)
Turkey
Albania
Total
$
$
$
340,243
222,497
199,227
$
$
$
(in thousands)
62,738
26,887
26,887
$
$
$
402,981
249,384
226,114
(1)
Includes amounts related to our Albanian assets that were sold in February 2016  As of December 31, 2015, our Albanian assets 
and liabilities were classified as held for sale and presented within discontinued operations for all periods presented in our 
consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) The PV-10 value of the estimated future net revenue is not intended to represent the current market value of the estimated oil
and natural gas reserves we own. Management believes that the presentation of PV-10, while not a financial measure in 
accordance with U.S. GAAP, provides useful information to investors because it is widely used by professional analysts and 
sophisticated investors in evaluating oil and natural gas companies. Because many factors that are unique to each individual 
company impact the amount of future income taxes estimated to be paid, the use of a pre-tax measure is valuable when 
comparing companies based on reserves. PV-10 is not a measure of financial or operating performance under U.S. GAAP. PV-
10 should not be considered as an alternative to the Standardized Measure as defined under U.S. GAAP. The Standardized 
Measure represents the PV-10 after giving effect to income taxes. The following table provides a reconciliation of our PV-10 to 
our Standardized Measure:
Total PV-10(1)
Future income taxes
Discount of future income taxes at 10% per annum
Standardized Measure
Turkey
$
$
222,497
(28,900)
5,630
199,227
$
$
Albania
(in thousands)
26,887
-
-
26,887
Total
249,384
(28,900)
5,630
226,114
$
$
(1)
Includes amounts related to our Albanian assets that were sold in February 2016.  As of December 31, 2015, our Albanian 
assets and liabilities were classified as held for sale and presented within discontinued operations for all periods presented in our 
consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following discussion of our proved reserves, proved undeveloped reserves, probable reserves and possible reserves as of December
31, 2015 has not been adjusted to reflect the sale of our Albanian assets in February 2016.
Proved Reserves
Estimates of proved developed and undeveloped reserves are inherently imprecise and are continually subject to revision based on
production history, results of additional exploration and development, price changes and other factors. See “—Oil and Natural Gas 
Reserves under U.S. Law.”
At December 31, 2015, our estimated proved reserves were 18,636 Mboe, a decrease of 14,113 Mboe, or 43.1%, compared to 32,749 
Mboe at December 31, 2014.  This decrease was primarily attributable to the substantial decline in oil prices which caused developed and 
undeveloped reserves to become uneconomic at an earlier time, and technical revisions on Albanian reserves based on actual performance 
following the 2015 work program.
At December 31, 2015, we recorded a decrease in proved reserves due to technical revisions of 12,303 Mbbl and 638 Mmcf (12,409 
Mboe total).  The revision in oil of 12,303 Mbbls was mostly attributable to pricing and economics due to the substantial decline in oil 
prices.  As Brent oil price drops, wells become uneconomic at an earlier time thus reducing future reserves.  Approximately 75% of these 
reductions were attributable to the Albania properties.  There were no material revisions due to performance in Turkey.  The revision in 
natural gas of 638 Mmcf was primarily attributable to a reduction in Delvina natural gas reserves of 2,722 Mmcf due to market constraints 
and a reduced realized price, which was partially offset by an increase in proved natural gas reserves for our Turkey assets of 2,084 Mmcf 
due to improved performance.  The decrease in proved reserves also consisted of sales volumes of 2,066 Mboe in 2015, consisting of 
1,651 Mbbls of oil and 2,491 Mmcf of natural gas.  The estimated undiscounted capital costs associated with our proved reserves in 
Turkey is $167.9 million.
At December 31, 2015, we recorded an increase in proved reserves of 362 Mboe through extensions and discoveries.  These increases
were due to the discovery of productive pay in the Hazro formation in the Bahar oil field.
36
Proved Undeveloped Reserves
At December 31, 2015, our estimated proved undeveloped reserves were 7,334 Mboe, a decrease of 3,066 Mboe, or 29.5%, compared 
to 10,400 Mboe at December 31, 2014. Of this decrease in proved undeveloped reserves, 2,566 Mboe was due to lower pricing and capital 
constraints forcing a slower development of these locations.  All of our proved undeveloped reserves as of December 31, 2015 will be 
developed within five years of the date the reserve was first disclosed as a proved undeveloped reserve.  The estimated undiscounted 
capital costs associated with our proved undeveloped reserves in Turkey is $163.1 million of which $1.5 million is expected to be incurred 
in 2016.  In addition, during 2015, we converted 500 Mboe from proved undeveloped to proved developed reserves and incurred $8.6 
million of capital expenditures during 2015 to convert such reserves.
The proved undeveloped reserves assume development costs will be funded from future cash flows from operations and financing 
activities, which may not be sufficient or available at commercially economic terms and could impact the timing of these development 
activities.
Probable Reserves
Estimates of probable reserves are inherently imprecise. When producing an estimate of the amount of oil and natural gas that is
recoverable from a particular reservoir, an estimated quantity of probable reserves is an estimate of those additional reserves that are less 
certain to be recovered than proved reserves but which, together with proved reserves, are as likely as not to be recovered. Estimates of 
probable reserves are also continually subject to revisions based on production history, results of additional exploration and development, 
price changes and other factors. See “—Oil and Natural Gas Reserves under U.S. Law.”
When deterministic methods are used, it is as likely as not that actual remaining quantities recovered will exceed the sum of estimated 
proved plus probable reserves. When probabilistic methods are used, there should be at least a 50% probability that the actual quantities 
recovered will equal or exceed the proved plus probable reserves estimates. Probable reserves may be assigned to areas of a reservoir 
adjacent to proved reserves where data control or interpretations of available data are less certain, even if the interpreted reservoir 
continuity of structure or productivity does not meet the reasonable certainty criterion. Probable reserves may be assigned to areas that are 
structurally higher than the proved area if these areas are in communication with the proved reservoir. Probable reserves estimates also 
include potential incremental quantities associated with a greater percentage recovery of the hydrocarbons in place than assumed for 
proved reserves.
Possible Reserves
Estimates of possible reserves are also inherently imprecise. When producing an estimate of the amount of oil and natural gas that is 
recoverable from a particular reservoir, an estimated quantity of possible reserves is an estimate that might be achieved, but only under 
more favorable circumstances than are likely. Estimates of possible reserves are also continually subject to revisions based on production 
history, results of additional exploration and development, price changes and other factors. See “—Oil and Natural Gas Reserves under 
U.S. Law.”
When deterministic methods are used, the total quantities ultimately recovered from a project have a low probability of exceeding
proved plus probable plus possible reserves. When probabilistic methods are used, there should be at least a 10% probability that the total 
quantities ultimately recovered will equal or exceed the proved plus probable plus possible reserves estimates. Possible reserves may be 
assigned to areas of a reservoir adjacent to probable reserves where data control and interpretations of available data are progressively less 
certain. Frequently, this will be in areas where geoscience and engineering data are unable to define clearly the area and vertical limits of 
commercial production from the reservoir by a defined project. Possible reserves also include incremental quantities associated with a 
greater percentage recovery of the hydrocarbons in place than the recovery quantities assumed for probable reserves.
Possible reserves may be assigned where geoscience and engineering data identify directly adjacent portions of a reservoir within the 
same accumulation that may be separated from proved areas by faults with displacement less than formation thickness or other geological 
discontinuities and that have not been penetrated by a wellbore, and the registrant believes that such adjacent portions are in 
communication with the known (proved) reservoir. Possible reserves may be assigned to areas that are structurally higher or lower than the 
proved area if these areas are in communication with the proved reservoir.
37
Internal Controls
Management has established, and is responsible for, a number of internal controls designed to provide reasonable assurance that the 
estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves are computed and reported in accordance with rules and regulations provided by the 
SEC as well as established industry practices used by independent engineering firms and our peers. These internal controls consist of 
documented process workflows and qualified professional engineering and geological personnel with specific reservoir experience. We 
also retain an outside independent engineering firm to prepare estimates of our proved, probable and possible reserves. We work closely 
with this firm, and management is responsible for providing accurate operating and technical data to it. Management has tested the 
processes and controls regarding our reserves estimates for 2015. Senior management reviews and approves our reserves estimates, 
whether prepared internally or by third parties. In addition, our audit committee serves as our reserves committee and is composed of three 
outside directors, all of whom have experience in the review of energy company reserves evaluations. The audit committee reviews the 
final reserves estimate and also meets with representatives from the outside engineering firm to discuss their process and findings.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves under U.S. Law
In the United States, we are required to disclose proved reserves, and we are permitted to disclose probable and possible reserves, using
the standards contained in Rule 4-10(a) of the SEC’s Regulation S-X. The estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves presented 
as of December 31, 2015 have been prepared by DeGolyer and MacNaughton, our external engineers. The technical person at DeGolyer 
and MacNaughton that is primarily responsible for overseeing the preparation of our reserves estimates is a Registered Professional 
Engineer in the State of Texas and has a Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering from Kansas State University. He has 
over 32 years of experience in oil and natural gas reservoir studies and evaluations and is a member of the Society of Petroleum Engineers.
We maintain an internal staff of petroleum engineers and geoscience professionals who work closely with DeGolyer and MacNaughton 
to ensure the integrity, accuracy and timeliness of data furnished to them for the preparation of their reserves estimates. Our vice president 
of engineering has over 13 years of experience in oil and natural gas reservoir studies and evaluations. He has a Bachelor of Science 
degree in Petroleum Engineering from Texas Tech University.
Estimates of oil and natural gas reserves are projections based on a process involving an independent third-party engineering firm’s
collection of all required geologic, geophysical, engineering and economic data, and such firm’s complete external preparation of all 
required estimates and are forward-looking in nature. These reports rely upon various assumptions, including assumptions required by the 
SEC, such as constant oil and natural gas prices, operating expenses and future capital costs. We also make assumptions relating to 
availability of funds and timing of capital expenditures for development of our proved undeveloped, probable and possible reserves. These 
reports should not be construed as the current market value of our reserves. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is also 
dependent on geological, engineering and economic data for each reservoir. Because of the uncertainties inherent in the interpretation of 
this data, we cannot ensure that the reserves will ultimately be realized. Our actual results could differ materially. See “Supplemental 
Information —Supplemental oil and natural gas reserves information (unaudited)” to our consolidated financial statements for additional 
information regarding our oil and natural gas reserves.
The technologies and economic data used in the estimation of our proved, probable and possible reserves include, but are not limited
to, electrical logs, radioactivity logs, core analyses, geologic maps and available downhole and production data, seismic data and well test 
data. Reserves attributable to producing wells with sufficient production history were estimated using appropriate decline curves or other 
performance relationships. Reserves attributable to producing wells with limited production history were estimated using performance 
from analogous wells in the surrounding area and geologic data to assess the reservoir continuity. These wells were considered to be 
analogous based on production performance from the same formation and completion using similar techniques.
The estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves prepared by DeGolyer and MacNaughton for the year ended December 31, 
2015 included a detailed evaluation of our Selmo, Arpatepe, Bakuk, Molla and Thrace Basin properties in Turkey, our Cakran, Gorisht, 
Ballsh and Delvina properties in Albania and our West Koynare field in Bulgaria. DeGolyer and MacNaughton determined that their 
estimates of reserves conform to the guidelines of the SEC, including the criteria of “reasonable certainty,” as it pertains to expectations 
about whether proved reserves are economically producible from a given date forward, under existing economic conditions, operating 
methods and government regulations, consistent with the definition in Rule 4-10(a)(24) of SEC Regulation S-X.
38
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves under Canadian Law
As a reporting issuer under Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario securities laws, we are required under Canadian law to comply with
National Instrument 51-101 “Standards of Disclosure for Oil and Gas Activities” (“NI 51-101”) implemented by the members of the 
Canadian Securities Administrators in all of our reserves related disclosures. DeGolyer and MacNaughton evaluated the Company’s 
reserves as of December 31, 2015, in accordance with the reserves definitions of NI 51-101 and the Canadian Oil and Gas Evaluators 
Handbook (“COGEH”). Our annual oil and natural gas reserves disclosures prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and COGEH and filed 
in Canada are available at www.sedar.com.
Oil and Natural Gas Sales Volumes
The following table sets forth our sales volumes of oil and natural gas (including by field for any field that contained 15% or more of
our total proved reserves at December 31, 2015) for 2015, 2014 and 2013:
Year
2015
2014
2013
Total Turkey
Selmo field
Bahar field
Total Albania
Total Turkey
Selmo field
Total Albania
Total Turkey
Selmo field
Gorisht-Kocul field
Oil (1)
(Bbls)
Sales Volumes
Natural Gas
(Mcf)
Total
(Boe)
1,420,035
933,925
431,199
230,855
1,302,439
1,023,877
36,200
19,306
932,463
665,025
2,491,017
–
–
–
3,258,537
–
–
–
3,495,698
–
1,835,205
933,925
431,199
230,855
1,845,529
1,023,877
36,200
19,306
1,515,079
665,025
(1) “Oil” volumes include condensate (light oil) and medium crude oil.
Average Sales Price and Production Costs
The following table sets forth the average sales price per Bbl of oil and Mcf of natural gas and the average production cost, not
including ad valorem and severance taxes, per unit of production for each of 2015, 2014 and 2013:
Turkey:
Albania:
Average Sales Price Oil ($/Bbl)
Natural Gas ($/Mcf)
Unit Costs Production ($/Boe)
Average Sales Price Oil ($/Bbl)
Unit Costs Production ($/Boe)
2015
2014
2013
44.69
7.73
6.10
37.10
26.02
$
$
$
$
$
82.92
8.67
8.56
52.43
31.15
$
$
$
$
$
101.05
9.43
10.62
–
–
$
$
$
$
$
39
Drilling Activity
The following table sets forth the number of net productive and dry exploratory wells and net productive and dry development wells we
drilled in 2015, 2014 and 2013:
Turkey:
2015
2014
2013
Bulgaria:
2015
2014
2013
Albania:
2015
2014
2013
Development Wells
Dry
Productive
Exploratory Wells
Productive
Dry
2.4
14.7
10.5
–
–
–
–
–
–
-
2.0
0.5
–
–
–
–
–
–
-
4.6
3.5
–
–
–
–
–
–
1.4
0.4
4.4
0.3
–
–
–
–
–
Oil and Natural Gas Properties, Wells, Operations and Acreage
The following discussion of our productive wells, developed acreage and undeveloped acreage as of December 31, 2015 has not been
adjusted to reflect the sale of our Albanian assets in February 2016.
Productive Wells. The following table sets forth the number of productive wells (wells that were producing oil or natural gas or were
capable of production) in which we held a working interest as of December 31, 2015:
Turkey
Bulgaria
Albania
Oil
Gross (1)
84.0
–
215.0
Net (2)
79.9
–
215.0
Natural Gas
Gross (1)
164.0
–
1.0
Net (2)
76.2
–
1.0
(1) “Gross wells” means the wells in which we held a working interest (operating or non-operating). 
(2) “Net wells” means the sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross wells.
Developed Acreage. The following table sets forth our total gross and net developed acreage as of December 31, 2015:
Turkey
Albania
Total
Developed Acres
Gross (1)
278,000
20,000
298,000
Net (2)
148,000
20,000
168,000
(1) “Gross” means the total number of acres in which we had a working interest. 
(2) “Net” means the sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross acres.
Undeveloped Acreage. The following table sets forth our undeveloped land position as of December 31, 2015:
Turkey
Bulgaria
Albania
Total
(1) “Gross” means the total number of acres in which we had a working interest. 
(2) “Net” means the sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross acres.
40
Undeveloped Acres
Gross (1)
1,105,000
567,000
56,000
1,728,000
Net (2)
732,000
567,000
56,000
1,355,000
Undeveloped Acreage Expirations. The following table summarizes by year our undeveloped acreage as of December 31, 2015 that is
scheduled to expire in the next five years:
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Undeveloped Acres (1)
Gross (2)
Net (3)
506,290
152,006
–
152,107
294,761
% of Total
Undeveloped Acres
Net (3)
25.0
7.0
–
7.0
15.0
343,490
92,361
–
95,067
200,889
(1) Excludes the Stefenetz Concession Area for which we have applied for a production concession. 
(2) “Gross” means the total number of acres in which we had a working interest. 
(3) “Net” means the sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross acres.
We anticipate that we will be able to extend the license terms for substantially all of our undeveloped acreage in Turkey scheduled to
expire in 2016 through the execution of our current work commitments.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
TEMI Litigation. TEMI has been involved in a number of lawsuits with a group of villagers living around the Selmo oil field who 
claim ownership of a portion of the surface at Selmo. These cases are being vigorously defended by TEMI and Turkish government 
authorities. We do not have enough information to estimate the potential additional operating costs we could incur in the event the 
purported surface owners’ claims are ultimately successful. The following is a summary of these cases.
In 2003, the villagers applied to the Kozluk Civil Court of First Instance in Turkey with seven title survey certificates dating back to
Ottoman times. These villagers were granted title registration certificates, and in 2005, these villagers applied to the Kozluk Civil Court of 
First Instance to enlarge the areas covered by the certificates to approximately 20 square kilometers. Neither we nor, to our knowledge, 
any ministry in the Turkish government received notice of this court proceeding. Almost all of our production wells at the Selmo oil field 
lie within this enlarged area. In 2009, the Supreme Court overruled the Kozluk Civil Court of First Instance and directed it to re-examine 
the case (the “Surface Litigation”).
In 2006, the Turkish Forestry Authority filed a claim in the Kozluk Cadastre Court against the villagers for attempting to register land 
that is registered with the Turkish government as forest. TEMI joined the Turkish government as a plaintiff in that case. In February 2011, 
the Kozluk Cadastre Court decided to suspend the case until there is a resolution of the Surface Litigation.
In addition, TEMI is a defendant in two nuisance cases filed in the Kozluk Cadastre Court and one claim for damages filed in the
Kozluk Civil Court of First Instance. The plaintiffs in each of these cases are the same villagers in the Surface Litigation. The Turkish 
Treasury Department and the Turkish Forestry Authority have joined TEMI as defendants in each of these cases. The Kozluk Cadastre 
Court has decided to suspend each of these nuisance cases until there is a resolution of the Surface Litigation. On December 27, 2012, the 
Kozluk Civil Court of First Instance dismissed the damages case, and the plaintiffs appealed that decision.
On June 27, 2012, the Kozluk Civil Court of First Instance dismissed the Surface Litigation. The court issued its formal decision on
August 8, 2012, and the plaintiffs filed an appeal with the Court of Appeal. The file was reversed by the Court of Appeal and sent back to 
the Kozluk Civil Court of First Instance in August 2014. The Court of Appeals ruled that the Kozluck Civil Court of First Instance 
investigate the merits of the dispute to determine the ownership position of the parties, that TPAO should be added as a party to the 
litigation, and that the cadastral map sheet depicting the real properties at issue must be investigated.  The parties then appealed to the 
Court of Appeals for correction of judgment.
We continue to operate on the surface at Selmo, and have paid surface damages for locations at Selmo from the time we began
operating the Selmo lease to present.
Direct Petroleum. In December 2014, Direct Petroleum LLC (“Direct”) filed suit against the Company alleging that it was due
liquidated damages of $5.0 million worth of common shares of the Company pursuant to the second amendment of the purchase 
agreement between the Company and Direct. On March 15, 2016, the Company entered into a settlement agreement pursuant to which we 
agreed to issue 225,000 common shares of the Company to Direct in exchange for a mutual release of all current and future claims against 
the other party in connection with the purchase agreement.
41
Bulgarian Ministry of Energy and Economy. In October 2015, the Bulgarian Ministry of Energy and Economy filed a suit against
Direct Bulgaria, claiming a $200,000 penalty for Direct Bulgaria’s alleged failure to fulfill the work program associated with the Aglen 
exploration permit. Direct Bulgaria received a force majeure recognition in 2012 from the Bulgarian Ministry of Energy and Economy, 
and the force majeure event has not been rectified. We believe that Direct Bulgaria is not under any obligation to fulfill the work program 
until the force majeure event is rectified, and continue to vigorously defend this claim.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
42
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
Canada
Our common shares are traded in Canada on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) under the trading symbol “TNP”. The following
table sets forth the quarterly high and low sales prices per common share in Canadian dollars on the TSX for the periods indicated. The 
high and low sales prices per common share for each quarterly period within the two most recent fiscal years indicated below have been 
adjusted to reflect our 1-for-10 reverse stock split effected March 6, 2014.
2015
2014:
Fourth Quarter
Third Quarter
Second Quarter
First Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Third Quarter
Second Quarter
First Quarter
High
Low
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
4.30
6.79
7.50
6.80
9.85
13.29
12.04
9.80
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1.41
3.22
5.78
5.30
6.00
10.10
8.62
7.80
United States
Our common shares are traded in the United States on the NYSE MKT exchange under the trading symbol “TAT”. The following table
sets forth the high and low sales price per common share in U.S. Dollars on the NYSE MKT for the periods indicated. The high and low 
sales prices per common share for each quarterly period within the two most recent fiscal years indicated below have been adjusted to 
reflect our 1-for-10 reverse stock split effected March 6, 2014.
2015:
2014:
Fourth Quarter
Third Quarter
Second Quarter
First Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Third Quarter
Second Quarter
First Quarter
High
Low
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
3.31
5.40
6.18
5.65
8.65
12.48
11.39
8.84
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1.02
2.38
4.81
4.04
5.15
8.99
7.89
7.00
Common Shares and Dividends
As of March 29, 2016, we had 41,106,194 common shares issued and outstanding and held by 88 record holders, including nominee
holders such as banks and brokerage firms who hold shares for beneficial owners.
We have not declared any dividends to date on our common shares. We have no present intention of paying any cash dividends on our
common shares in the foreseeable future, as we intend to use cash flow from operations to invest in our business.
Foreign Exchange Control Regulations
We have been designated as a non-resident for Bermuda exchange control purposes by the Bermuda Monetary Authority. Because of
this designation, there are no restrictions on our ability to transfer funds in and out of Bermuda.
43
The transfer of shares between persons regarded as residents outside Bermuda for exchange control purposes and the sale of our 
common shares to or by such persons may take place without specific consent under the Exchange Control Act 1972. Issuances and 
transfers of shares involving any person regarded as a resident in Bermuda for exchange control purposes require specific approval under 
the Exchange Control Act 1972.
As an “exempted company,” we are exempt from Bermuda laws which restrict the percentage of share capital that may be held by non-
Bermuda residents, but as an exempted company, we may not participate in certain business transactions, including: (1) the acquisition or 
holding of land in Bermuda (except that required for our business and held by way of lease or tenancy for terms of not more than 50 years) 
without the express authorization of the Bermuda legislature, (2) the taking of mortgages on land in Bermuda to secure an amount in 
excess of $50,000 without the consent of the Minister of Finance, (3) the acquisition of any bonds or debentures secured by any land in 
Bermuda, other than certain types of Bermuda government securities or (4) the carrying on of business of any kind in Bermuda, except in 
furtherance of our business carried on outside Bermuda.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following table summarizes the Company’s repurchase of common shares during the fourth quarter of 2015:
October 2015
November 2015
December 2015
Total Number of Shares
Average Price Paid per
Publicly Announced Plan
share
or Programs
Total Number of Shares
Purchased as Part of
Maximum Number of 
Shares that May Yet be 
Purchased under Plan or
Programs (1)
1,666,722
1,666,722
1,666,722
10,199
-
-
10,199
Purchases
10,199
-
-
10,199
$
$
$
2.64
-
-
(1)
In March 2015, the Company’s board of directors approved a share repurchase plan which authorized the Company to 
repurchase up to 2.0 million common shares (the “Share Repurchase Program”). Under the Share Repurchase Program, the 
Company may purchase common shares from time to time through December 31, 2015 in the open market or through privately 
negotiated transactions. Purchases under the Share Repurchase Program must be in accordance with the guidelines specified in 
Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b-18 (to the extent applicable) under the Exchange Act.
44
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
The following table summarizes selected consolidated financial information from continuing operations for each of the five years in the
period ended December 31, 2015. All periods presented have been adjusted to reflect our oilfield services business segment, Moroccan 
segment, and the Albanian segment as discontinued operations. You should read the information set forth below in conjunction with “Item 
7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and the consolidated financial statements 
and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Year Ended December 31,
$
Total revenues
Seismic and other exploration
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Net (loss) income from discontinued operations
Comprehensive (loss) income
Basic net (loss) income per common share from
   continuing operations
Basic weighted average number of shares
   outstanding
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
(amounts in thousands, except per share amounts)
85,064
370
(26,665)
(80,873)
(149,818)
$138,830
4,285
29,214
(138)
14,751
$130,827
14,009
(13,271)
(442)
(50,686)
$143,908
5,040
(6,373)
22,619
38,470
$ 128,905
11,542
(77,574)
(43,369)
(173,012)
(0.65)
0.77
(0.36)
(0.17)
(2.18)
40,841
37,829
37,069
36,742
35,597
As of December 31,
Total assets
Long-term liabilities
Shareholders' equity
Capital expenditures, including acquisitions(1)
(1) Excludes seismic and other exploration expenditures.
2015
$ 299,449
103,537
58,922
22,466
45
2014
2013
2012
2011
(amounts in thousands)
$546,236
185,782
211,464
111,501
$346,586
63,619
167,317
99,951
$358,258
72,819
213,827
81,824
$448,802
112,904
171,273
152,440
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We are an international oil and natural gas company engaged in acquisition, exploration, development and production. We have
focused our operations in countries that have established, yet underexplored, petroleum systems, are net importers of petroleum, have an 
existing petroleum transportation infrastructure and provide favorable commodity pricing, royalty rates and tax rates to exploration and 
production companies. As of December 31, 2015, we held interests in approximately 880,000 and 567,000 net acres of developed and 
undeveloped oil and natural gas properties in Turkey and Bulgaria, respectively. As of March 29, 2016, approximately 36% of our 
outstanding common shares were beneficially owned by N. Malone Mitchell 3rd, the chairman of our board of directors and our chief 
executive officer.
Decline in Oil Prices, Effect on Liquidity and Going Concern
Due to the significant decline in Brent crude oil prices during 2015, the borrowing base under the Company’s senior credit facility (the 
“Senior Credit Facility”) with BNP Paribas (Suisse) SA (“BNP Paribas”) and the International Finance Corporation (“IFC”) was decreased 
to $16.6 million effective December 30, 2015. The decline in the borrowing base resulted in a $15.5 million borrowing base deficiency 
under the Senior Credit Facility as of December 30, 2015.
On December 30, 2015, the lenders granted us a waiver of certain defaults under the Senior Credit Facility that existed as of December
30, 2015, including, among other things, the borrowing base deficiency.  The waiver is conditioned upon, among other things, no 
borrowing base deficiency existing as of March 31, 2016.
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had $32.1 million outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility and no availability and was not 
in compliance with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility.  As of March 30, 2016, the borrowing base deficiency 
was $14.2 million.
We have negotiated a preliminary waiver of the existing defaults under the Senior Credit Facility and an extension of the borrowing
base deficiency repayment obligation until at least September 30, 2016.  This preliminary waiver and extension is subject to the approval 
of the lenders’ respective credit committees.  The lenders have advised us that they will seek credit committee approval of the preliminary 
waiver and extension in early April 2016.  We cannot guarantee that this waiver and extension will be approved by our lenders.  Because 
we are currently in default under the Senior Credit Facility and will be unable to repay the borrowing base deficiency by March 31, 2016, 
the lenders could declare all outstanding principal and interest to be due and payable, could freeze our accounts, could foreclose against 
the assets securing their borrowings, and we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.  In addition, a payment default under the 
Senior Credit Facility could result in a cross default under our Convertible Notes.
Given the unfavorable market conditions and our limited access to capital, we are focused on the following near-term business
strategies: (i) curing, waiving or extending the deadline to repay the borrowing base deficiency repayment obligation, (ii) the sale of assets 
to raise cash (iii) a significantly reduced development plan focused on maintaining our acreage position by drilling obligation wells and 
performing low cost, high return well optimizations, (iv) continued cost reduction measures to reduce our operating costs and general and 
administrative expenses and (v) restructuring or repaying our debt obligations, including the Senior Credit Facility and our Convertible 
Notes.  During 2015, our cost reduction efforts included: (i) staff reductions, (ii) office relocations, (iii) negotiations with several key 
vendors to reduce exploration and development expenses and operating costs, and (iv) optimization of well designs.  Notwithstanding 
these measures, there can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully sell assets or cure, waive or extend the deadline to repay the 
borrowing base deficiency repayment obligation.
These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements included in
this report do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts of 
liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Recent Developments
Sale of Albania Oil Operations. In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in our wholly-owned subsidiary, Stream Oil &
Gas Ltd. (“Stream”), to GBC Oil Company Ltd. (“GBC Oil”) in exchange for (i) the future payment of $2.3 million to Raiffeisen Bank 
Sh.A (“Raiffeisen”) to pay down a term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) dated as of September 17, 2014 between Stream’s wholly-
owned subsidiary, TransAtlantic Albania Ltd. (“TransAtlantic Albania”), and Raiffeisen, and (ii) the assumption of $29.2 million of 
liabilities owed by Stream, consisting of $23.1 million of accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $6.1 million of debt.  TransAtlantic 
Albania owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  In addition, GBC Oil issued us a warrant pursuant to which we have the 
option to acquire up to 25% of the fully diluted equity interests in TransAtlantic Albania for nominal consideration at any time on or 
before March 1, 2019.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC Oil, TransAtlantic Albania entered into an assignment and assumption 
agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will assign its Delvina natural gas assets and
46
$12.9 million of associated liabilities (the “Delvina Gas Liabilities”) to Delvina Gas Company, Ltd. (“Delvina Gas”), our newly formed, 
wholly-owned subsidiary, to be effective immediately upon receipt of required contractual consents. There is no assurance that we will be 
able to obtain the required contractual consents.  In addition, we agreed to indemnify GBC Oil and Stream for the Delvina Gas 
Liabilities.  We are currently negotiating a joint venture with a third party for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no 
assurance that we will be able to complete a joint venture for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.
For additional information on our recent developments, see “Item 1. Business—Recent Developments.”
2015 Financial and Operational Performance
(cid:120) We derived 74.6% of our revenues from the production of oil, 22.6% of our revenues from the production of natural gas and
2.8% of our revenues from other sources during the year ended December 31, 2015.
(cid:120) Total oil and natural gas sales revenues decreased 39.3% to $82.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, from $136.3
million in 2014. The decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in the average sales price of $28.75 per Boe, and a decrease 
in sales volumes of 11 Mboe.
(cid:120) Wellhead production was 1,426 Mbbls of oil and 2,674 Mmcf of natural gas for the year ended December 31, 2015, as compared
to 1,345 Mbbls of oil and 3,567 Mmcf of natural gas for 2014.
(cid:120) In 2015, we incurred $22.8 million in total capital expenditures, including license acquisition, seismic and corporate
expenditures, from continuing operations, as compared to $115.8 million in 2014.
(cid:120) As of December 31, 2015, we had $55.0 million in long-term debt and $41.9 million in short-term debt (excluding liabilities held
for sale of $6.1 million), as compared to $100.9 million in long-term debt and $34.8 million in short-term debt (excluding 
liabilities held for sale of $22.9 million) as of December 31, 2014.
Discontinued Operations in Albania
On November 16, 2015, we decided to launch a marketing process for our Albania assets and operations. As of December 31, 2015 we
have classified our Albania segment assets and liabilities as held for sale and presented the operating results within discontinued 
operations for all periods presented. We recorded an impairment charge of $73.0 million to write down the net book value of the Albanian 
assets held for sale to their fair value as of December 31, 2015.
2015 Operations
During 2015, we pursued a reduced development plan that consisted of maintaining our acreage position by drilling obligation wells
and performing low cost, high return well optimizations. We also launched an auction process for the sale of our Albanian assets and 
operations and repaid $36.2 million on our Senior Credit Facility. For additional information on our current operations, see “Item 1. 
Business—Current Operations.”
Planned Operations
Assuming we have access to sufficient capital, we plan to satisfy license earning obligations for our core properties in Turkey and to
pursue the sale of certain assets during 2016. For more information on our planned 2016 operations, see “Item 1. Business—Planned 
Operations.”
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements,
which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires 
management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related 
disclosures. Our significant accounting policies are described in “Note 3—Significant accounting policies” to our consolidated financial 
statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have identified below policies that are of particular importance to the 
portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and which require the application of significant judgment by management. 
These estimates are based on historical experience, information received from third parties, and on various other assumptions that are 
believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of 
assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different 
assumptions or conditions.
47
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect the significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our
consolidated financial statements.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties. In accordance with the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties, 
costs of productive wells, developmental dry holes and productive leases are capitalized into appropriate groups of properties based on 
geographical and geological similarities. Acquisition costs of proved properties are amortized using the unit-of-production method based 
on total proved reserves, and exploration well costs and additional development costs are amortized using the unit-of-production method 
based on proved developed reserves. Proceeds from the sale of properties are credited to property costs, and a gain or loss is recognized 
when a significant portion of an amortization base is sold or abandoned. Exploration costs, such as exploratory geological and geophysical 
costs, delay rentals and exploration overhead, are charged to expense as incurred. Exploratory drilling costs, including the cost of 
stratigraphic test wells, are initially capitalized but charged to exploration expense if and when the well is determined to be non-
productive. The determination of an exploratory well’s ability to produce generally must be made within one year from the completion of 
drilling activities. The acquisition costs of unproved acreage are initially capitalized and are carried at cost, net of accumulated impairment 
provisions, until such leases are transferred to proved properties or charged to exploration expense as impairments of unproved properties.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We follow the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 360, Property, Plant 
and Equipment (“ASC 360”). ASC 360 requires that our long-lived assets be assessed for potential impairment of their carrying values 
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate such impairment may have occurred. Proved oil and natural gas properties are 
evaluated by field for potential impairment. An impairment on proved properties is recognized when the estimated undiscounted future net 
cash flows of a field are less than its carrying value. If an impairment occurs, the carrying value of the impaired field is reduced to its 
estimated fair value, which is generally estimated using a discounted cash flow approach.
Unproved oil and natural gas properties do not have producing properties and are valued on acquisition by management, with the
assistance of an independent expert when necessary. As reserves are proved through the successful completion of exploratory wells, the 
cost is transferred to proved properties. The cost of the remaining unproved basis is periodically evaluated by management to assess 
whether the value of a property has diminished. To do this assessment, management considers (i) estimated potential reserves and future 
net revenues from an independent expert, (ii) the Company’s history in exploring the area, (iii) the Company’s future drilling plans per its 
capital drilling program prepared by the Company’s reservoir engineers and operations management, and (iv) other factors associated with 
the area. Impairment is taken on the unproved property value if it is determined that the costs are not likely to be recoverable. The 
valuation is subjective and requires management to make estimates and assumptions which, with the passage of time, may prove to be 
materially different from actual results.
Business Combinations. We follow ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”), and ASC 810-10-65, Consolidation (“ASC 810-
10-65”). ASC 805 requires most identifiable assets, liabilities, non-controlling interests, and goodwill acquired in a business combination 
to be recorded at “fair value.” The statement applies to all business combinations, including combinations among mutual entities and 
combinations by contract alone. Under ASC 805, all business combinations will be accounted for by applying the acquisition method.
Foreign Currency Translation and Remeasurement. We follow ASC 830, Foreign Currency Matters (“ASC 830”) which requires
the assets, liabilities, and results of operations of a foreign operation to be measured using the functional currency of that foreign 
operation. The functional currency for each of our subsidiaries in Turkey and Bulgaria is the local currency and is the U.S. Dollar in 
Albania. For certain entities, translation adjustments result from the process of translating the functional currency of the foreign 
operation’s financial statements into our U.S. Dollar reporting currency, which is a non-cash transaction. These translation adjustments are 
reported separately and accumulated in the consolidated balance sheets as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss.
ASC 830 requires the assets, liabilities, and results of operations of a foreign operation to be measured using the functional currency of
that foreign operation. Exchange gains or losses from re-measuring transactions and monetary accounts in a currency other than the 
functional currency are included in earnings.
Goodwill. In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”), goodwill is not amortized, but is tested for 
impairment on an annual basis at December 31, or more frequently as impairment indicators arise. ASC 350 permits an entity to first 
assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying 
amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.  At December 31, 2015, we 
performed our annual assessment of goodwill and determined it was necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.  In 
accordance with GAAP, we performed step one of the goodwill impairment test and determined that the estimated fair value of the 
reporting unit was less than its carrying amount based on our reserves report, dated December 31, 2015.  The decline in our Turkey 
reserve report values was primarily due to the decline in the Brent oil price during the three months ended December 31, 2015.
48
Therefore, we performed step two of the impairment test, which indicated that the entire balance of goodwill was impaired.  As a result, 
we recorded an impairment equal to the carrying amount of goodwill, or $5.5 million, at December 31, 2015 which is included in 
exploration, abandonment and impairment in the accompanying consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended 
December 31, 2015.
Oil and Gas Reserves. The estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves utilized in the preparation of the consolidated and
combined financial statements are estimated in accordance with the rules established by the Securities and Exchange and the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). These rules require that reserve estimates be prepared under existing economic and operating 
conditions using a trailing 12-month average price with no provision for price and cost escalations in future years except by contractual 
arrangements. We engaged DeGolyer and MacNaughton, our independent reserve engineers, to independently evaluate our properties that 
result in estimates for all of our estimated proved reserves at December 31, 2015.
Reserve estimates are inherently imprecise. Accordingly, the estimates are expected to change as more current information becomes 
available. It is possible that, because of changes in market conditions or the inherent imprecision of reserve estimates, the estimates of 
future cash inflows, future gross revenues, the amount of oil and natural gas reserves, the remaining estimated lives of oil and natural gas 
properties, or any combination of the above may be increased or decreased. Increases in recoverable economic volumes generally reduce 
per unit depletion rates while decreases in recoverable economic volumes generally increase per unit depletion rates.
Income Taxes.  We follow the asset and liability method prescribed by ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under this method of 
accounting for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences 
between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and 
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are 
expected to be recovered or settled. Under ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in enacted tax rates is 
recognized in earnings in the period that includes the enactment date.
Other Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Reporting Rules
In August 2014, the FASB issued ASU 2014-15, Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
(“ASU 2014-15”), an amendment to FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205, Presentation of Financial 
Statements.  This update provides guidance on management’s responsibility in evaluating whether there is a substantial doubt about an 
entity’s ability to continue as a going concern and to provide related footnote disclosures.  ASU 2014-15 is effective for annual periods 
ending after December 15, 2016, and for annual and interim periods thereafter.  Early adoption is permitted.  We have adopted ASU 2014-
15 for the year ended December 31, 2015.  See disclosure in Note 2, “Going concern” to our consolidated financial statements.
In April 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-03, Interest - Imputation of Interest (Subtopic 835-30): Simplifying the Presentation of Debt
Issuance Costs ("ASU 2015-03"). ASU 2015-03 requires that debt issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability be presented in the 
balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of that debt liability, consistent with debt discounts. We currently recognize 
debt issuance costs as assets on our consolidated balance sheet. The recognition and measurement guidance for debt issuance costs are not 
affected by ASU 2015-03. ASU 2015-03 is effective for annual periods, and interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after 
December 15, 2015 and early adoption is permitted.  Currently, we do not expect the adoption of ASU 2015-03 to have a material impact 
on our consolidated financial statements or results of operations.
In July 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-11, Simplifying the Measurement of Inventory (“ASU 2015-11”), an amendment to ASC
Subtopic 330-10.  The amendment states that entities should measure inventory at the lower of cost and net realizable value.  The 
amendment does not apply to inventory that is measured using last-in, first-out (LIFO) or the retail inventory method.  The amendment 
applies to all other inventory, which includes inventory that is measure using first-in, first-out (FIFO) or average cost.  ASU 2015-11 is 
effective for fiscal years beginning after December 31, 2016, including interim periods within those fiscal years.  We are currently 
assessing the potential impact of ASU 2015-11 on our consolidated financial statements and results of operations.
In September 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-16, Business Combinations (Topic 805) Simplifying the Accounting for Measurement-
Period Adjustments (“ASU 2015-16”).  ASU 2015-16 requires that an acquirer recognize adjustments to provisional amounts that are 
identified during the measurement period in the reporting period in which the adjustment amounts are determined.  ASU 2015-16 is 
effective for annual periods, and interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2015.  The amendments in the 
update should be applied prospectively to adjustments to provisional amounts that occur after the effective date of ASU 2015-16 with 
earlier application permitted for financial statements that have not been issued.  As of December 31, 2015, we adopted ASU 2015-16 and 
have disclosed adjustments to our provisional amounts in Note 18, “Acquisitions” to our consolidated financial statements.
49
In November 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-17, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred Taxes (“ASU
2015-17”).  ASU 2017-17 requires entities with a classified balance sheet to present all deferred tax assets and liabilities as 
noncurrent.  ASU 2015-17 is effective for annual periods and interim periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2016.  As of 
December 31, 2015, we have adopted ASU 2015-17 and have adjusted the amounts in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 
2015 and 2014.
We have reviewed other recently issued, but not yet adopted, accounting standards in order to determine their effects, if any, on our 
results of operations, financial position and cash flows. Based on that review, we believe that none of these recent pronouncements will 
have a significant effect on our current or future earnings or operations.
Results of Continuing Operations—Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2014
Sales volumes:
Oil (Mbbl)
Natural gas (Mmcf)
Total production (Mboe)
Average daily sales volumes (Boepd)
Average prices:
Oil (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Oil equivalent (per Boe)
Revenues:
Oil and natural gas sales
Sales of purchased natural gas
Other
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production
Exploration, abandonment and impairment
Cost of purchased natural gas
Seismic and other exploration
Revaluation of contingent consideration
General and administrative
Depletion
Depreciation and amortization
Interest and other expense
Foreign exchange loss
Deferred income tax expense
Gain (loss) on commodity derivative contracts:
Cash settlements on commodity derivative contracts
Change in fair value on commodity derivative contracts
Total gain on commodity derivative contracts
Oil and natural gas costs per Boe:
Production
Depletion
Year Ended December 31,
2015
2014
Change
2015-2014
(in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except per
unit amounts and production volumes)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,420
2,491
1,835
5,028
44.69
7.73
45.07
82,716
2,189
159
85,064
12,873
21,544
2,082
370
-
24,138
35,093
2,614
13,077
5,653
18,642
57,076
(29,619)
27,457
$
$
$
$
1,303
3,262
1,846
5,058
82.93
8.66
73.82
136,276
2,127
427
138,830
18,193
19,864
2,055
4,285
(2,500)
31,071
46,479
2,115
6,044
6,523
11,875
(2,100)
39,554
37,454
$
$
6.14
16.73
$
$
8.62
22.03
$
$
117
(771)
(11)
(30)
(38.24)
(0.93)
(28.75)
(53,560)
62
(268)
(53,766)
(5,320)
1,680
27
(3,915)
2,500
(6,933)
(11,386)
499
7,033
(870)
6,767
59,176
(69,173)
(9,997)
(2.48)
(5.30)
Oil and Natural Gas Sales. Excluding sales of purchased natural gas, total oil and natural gas sales decreased to $82.7 million in 
2015, from $136.3 million in 2014. Of this decrease, $52.8 million resulted from a lower average realized price per Boe in 2015.  Our 
average price received decreased $28.75 to $45.07 per Boe in 2015, compared to $73.82 per Boe in 2014.  Additionally, sales volumes 
decreased 11 Mboe which resulted in lower revenues of $0.8 million.
50
Production. Production expenses for the year ended December 31, 2015, decreased to $12.9 million or $6.14 per Boe (WI), from $18.2 
million or $8.62 per Boe (WI) for the year ended December 31, 2014.  This decrease was primarily due to a higher devaluation of the New 
Turkish Lira (“TRY”) compared to the U.S. Dollar in 2015, fewer workovers, reduced headcount and successful cost-cutting measures in 
our field operations for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Exploration, Abandonment and Impairment. Exploration, abandonment and impairment costs increased to $21.5 million in 2015, 
compared to $19.9 million for 2014.  The increase was primarily due to $5.5 million of goodwill impairment, partially offset by a $3.9 
million decrease in proved property impairment and impairment of exploratory well costs in 2015.
Seismic and Other Exploration. Seismic and other exploration costs decreased to $0.4 million for 2015, compared to $4.3 million for
2014. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in seismic activities, which were conducted on our West Molla license during 2014.
Revaluation of Contingent Consideration. We completed the drilling and testing requirements pursuant to an amendment to the
purchase agreement with Direct Petroleum LLC (“Direct”), which resulted in the reversal in 2014 of a $2.5 million contingent liability that 
was originally recorded in 2011.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense decreased $6.9 million to $24.1 million for 2015, compared to
$31.1 million for 2014. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in legal, accounting and other services of $2.6 million, a decrease in 
office expense of $1.7 million, a decrease in bad debt expense of $1.2 million, a decrease in personnel expenses of $0.9, decrease in travel 
expense of $0.6 million and a decrease in vehicle expense of $0.2 million.  In addition, severance expense was $1.3 million for 2015 
compared to $0.3 million for 2014.
Depletion. Depletion expense decreased to $35.1 million or $16.73 per Boe for 2015, compared to $46.5 million or $22.03 per Boe for 
2014. The decrease was due primarily to fewer additions to proved properties on our Selmo and Bahar fields, a 25.4% devaluation of the 
TRY compared to the U.S. Dollar in 2015 compared to an 8.6% devaluation during 2014 and a decrease in production volumes during 
2015.
Interest and Other Expense. Interest and other expense increased to $13.1 million in 2015, compared to $6.0 million in 2014. The 
increase was primarily due to interest expense on $55.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes, which were issued in 
December 2014 and January 2015.
Foreign Exchange Loss. We recorded a foreign exchange loss of $5.7 million in 2015, compared to $6.5 million in 2014. The change 
in foreign exchange is primarily unrealized (non-cash) in nature and results from the re-measuring of specific transactions and monetary 
accounts in a currency other than the functional currency. For example, a U.S. Dollar transaction which occurs in Turkey is re-measured at 
the period-end to the TRY amount if it has not been settled previously. The decrease in foreign exchange loss in 2015 was due to a 25.4% 
devaluation of the TRY compared to the U.S. Dollar in 2015, compared to an 8.6% devaluation during 2014 and is offset by fluctuations 
in our U.S. Dollar denominated balances in Turkey.
Deferred Income Tax Expense. Deferred income tax expense increased to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2015,
compared to $11.9 million for 2014.  The increase was primarily due to changes in our deferred tax liabilities related to our permanent 
reinvestment assertion in Turkey and increases in uncertain tax positions, which were partially offset by changes in temporary differences 
between our U.S. GAAP and statutory balances in Turkey.
Gain (Loss) on Commodity Derivative Contracts. During 2015, we recorded a net gain on commodity derivative contracts of $27.5
million, compared to a net gain of $37.5 million for 2014.  In 2015, we recorded a $57.1 million gain on settled contracts and a $29.6 
million loss to mark our commodity derivative contracts to their fair value.  In 2014, we recorded a $39.6 million gain to mark our 
commodity derivative contracts to their fair value and a $2.1 million loss on settled contracts. We are required under our Senior Credit 
Facility to hedge between 30% and 75% of our anticipated oil production volumes in our oil fields in Turkey.
51
Discontinued Operations. All revenues and expenses associated with our Albanian and Moroccan operations have been classified as
discontinued operations.  Our operating results from discontinued operations in Albania and Morocco are summarized as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Total revenues
Production
Exploration, abandonment and impairment
Total costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
For the year ended December 31, 2014(1)
Total revenues
Total costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
$
$
$
$
$
$
Albania
Morocco
(in thousands)
Total
$
8,565
11,615
86,577
9,229
1,819
(97,037) $
16,169
(80,868) $
$
1,898
2,984
356
(730) $
612
(118) $
$
–
–
–
5
–
(5) $
–
(5) $
$
–
20
–
–
(20) $
(20) $
8,565
11,615
86,577
9,234
1,819
(97,042)
16,169
(80,873)
1,898
3,004
356
(750)
612
(138)
(1) Our Albanian segment was acquired on November 18, 2014.  Actual results include revenues and expenses from November 18,
2014 to December 31, 2014.
52
Results of Continuing Operations—Year Ended December 31, 2014 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2013
Sales volumes:
Oil (Mbbl)
Natural gas (Mmcf)
Total production (Mboe)
Average daily sales volumes (Boepd)
Average prices:
Oil (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Oil equivalent (per Boe)
Revenues:
Oil and natural gas sales
Sales of purchased natural gas
Other
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production
Exploration, abandonment and impairment
Cost of purchased natural gas
Seismic and other exploration
Revaluation of contingent consideration
General and administrative
Depletion
Depreciation and amortization
Interest and other expense
Foreign exchange loss
Deferred income tax expense
Gain (loss) on commodity derivative contracts:
Cash settlements on commodity derivative contracts
Change in fair value on commodity derivative contracts
Total gain (loss) on commodity derivative contracts
Oil and natural gas costs per Boe:
Production
Depletion
Year Ended December 31,
2014
2013
Change
2014-2013
(in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except per
unit amounts and production volumes)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,303
3,262
1,846
5,058
82.93
8.66
73.82
136,276
2,127
427
138,830
18,193
19,864
2,055
4,285
(2,500)
31,071
46,479
2,115
6,044
6,523
11,875
(2,100)
39,554
37,454
$
$
$
$
933
3,512
1,518
4,159
101.02
9.40
83.84
127,270
2,581
976
130,827
18,602
27,333
2,247
14,009
(5,000)
29,020
38,996
2,326
3,929
9,663
979
(3,521)
823
(2,698)
$
$
8.62
22.03
$
$
10.72
22.48
$
$
370
(250)
328
899
(18.09)
(0.74)
(10.02)
9,006
(454)
(549)
8,003
(409)
(7,469)
(192)
(9,724)
2,500
2,051
7,483
(211)
2,115
(3,140)
10,896
1,421
38,731
40,152
(2.10)
(0.45)
Oil and Natural Gas Sales. Excluding sales of purchased natural gas, total oil and natural gas sales increased to $136.3 million in
2014, from $127.3 million in 2013. Of this increase, $27.5 million resulted from an increase in sales volumes of 328 Mboe. Sales volumes 
increased primarily on our southeast Turkey oil wells due to our successful horizontal drilling program in 2014.  This increase was 
partially offset by a decrease of $18.5 million, attributable to a lower average realized prices per Boe in 2014.  Our average price received 
decreased $10.02 to $73.82 per Boe in 2014, compared to $83.84 per Boe in 2013.
Production. Production expenses for 2014 decreased to $18.2 million, or $8.62 per Boe (WI) from $18.6 million, or $10.72 per Boe
(WI) in 2013. The decrease of $2.10 per Boe was primarily attributable to an increase in our production volumes during 2014 compared to 
2013.
Exploration, Abandonment and Impairment. Exploration, abandonment and impairment costs decreased to $19.9 million in 2014, 
compared to $27.3 million for 2013. The decrease was primarily due to a $15.5 million decrease in impairment of our exploratory well 
costs offset by a $6.5 million increase in other impairment and abandonment.  The majority of our impairment and abandonment charges 
of $17.5 million in 2014 related to three exploratory wells in Turkey.
53
Seismic and Other Exploration. Seismic and other exploration costs decreased to $4.3 million for 2014, compared to $14.0 million
for 2013. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in seismic acquisition activities conducted on our West Molla license during 2013.
Revaluation of Contingent Consideration. We completed the drilling and testing requirements pursuant to an amendment to the
purchase agreement with Direct, which resulted in the reversal in 2014 of a $2.5 million contingent liability that was originally recorded in 
2011.  During 2013, we recognized the reversal of a $5.0 million contingent liability that was originally recorded in 2011 as a result of 
entering into the amendment to the purchase agreement with Direct.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense increased $2.1 million to $31.1 million for 2014, compared to $29.0
million for 2013. The increase was primarily due to a $1.5 million charge to bad debt expense for an uncollectible receivable and $1.1 
million of acquisition expenses related to the acquisition of Stream.  This was partially offset by a decrease in office rent expense of $0.3 
million and personnel expenses of $0.3 million during 2014.
Depletion. Depletion expense increased to $46.5 million or $22.03 per Boe for 2014, compared to $39.0 million or $22.48 per Boe for
2013. The increase was due primarily to additions to proved properties on our Selmo and Bahar fields and an increase in production 
volumes during 2014.
Interest and Other Expense. Interest and other expense increased to $6.0 million in 2014, compared to $3.9 million in 2013. The
increase was primarily due to an increase in our average level of debt outstanding during 2014 compared to 2013.  Excluding debt 
assumed in the Stream acquisition, at December 31, 2014, we had $135.7 million of total debt outstanding, compared to $69.8 million at 
December 31, 2013.  Also contributing to the increase was a $0.5 million write-off of loan financing costs related to our prior amended 
and restated credit facility, which was repaid in May 2014.
Foreign Exchange Loss. We recorded a foreign exchange loss of $6.5 million in 2014, compared to a loss of $9.7 million in 2013. The
change in foreign exchange is primarily unrealized (non-cash) in nature and results from the re-measuring of specific transactions and 
monetary accounts in a currency other than the functional currency. For example, a U.S. Dollar transaction which occurs in Turkey is re-
measured at the period-end to the TRY amount if it has not been settled previously. The decrease in foreign exchange loss in 2014 was due 
to an 8.6% devaluation of the TRY compared to the U.S. Dollar in 2014, compared to a 19.7% devaluation during 2013.
Deferred Income Tax Expense. Deferred income tax expense increased to $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2014, 
compared to $1.0 million for 2013.  The increase was primarily due to changes in temporary differences between our U.S. GAAP and 
statutory balances in Turkey.
Gain (Loss) on Commodity Derivative Contracts. During 2014, we recorded a net gain on commodity derivative contracts of $37.5
million, compared to a net loss of $2.7 million for 2013. In 2014, we recorded a $39.6 million gain to mark our commodity derivative 
contracts to their fair value and a $2.1 million loss on settled contracts. In 2013, we recorded a $0.8 million gain to mark our commodity 
derivative contracts to their fair value and a $3.5 million loss on settled contracts. We are required under our Senior Credit Facility to 
hedge between 30% and 75% of our anticipated oil production volumes in our oil fields in Turkey.
54
Discontinued Operations. All revenues and expenses associated with our Albanian and Moroccan operations have been classified as
discontinued operations.  Our operating results from discontinued operations in Albania and Morocco are summarized as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2014(1)
Total revenues
Total costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
For the year ended December 31, 2013
Total revenues
Total costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
Albania
Morocco
(in thousands)
Total
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,898
2,984
356
(730) $
612
(118) $
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
$
$
–
20
–
–
(20) $
(20) $
$
$
–
505
63
–
(442) $
(442) $
1,898
3,004
356
(750)
612
(138)
–
505
63
(442)
–
(442)
(1) Our Albanian segment was acquired on November 18, 2014.  Actual results include revenues and expenses from November 18,
2014 to December 31, 2014.
Capital Expenditures
For 2015, we incurred $22.8 million in total capital expenditures, including license acquisition, seismic and corporate expenditures
from continuing operations, compared to $115.8 million for 2014.
We expect our net field capital expenditures for 2016 to range between $5.0 million and $15.0 million.  Given the market conditions 
and our limited access to capital, our 2016 development plan may be limited to drilling obligation wells and performing low cost, high 
return well optimizations.  We expect net field capital expenditures during 2016 to include approximately $5.0 million of drilling and 
completion expense for gross obligation wells to hold one of our most promising licenses in Turkey. We expect cash on hand and cash 
flow from operations will be sufficient to fund our 2016 net field capital expenditures. If not, we will either curtail our discretionary 
capital expenditures or seek other funding sources. Our projected 2016 capital expenditure budget is subject to change.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity for 2015 were our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, proceeds from the issuance of
our Convertible Notes, borrowings under our convertible and promissory notes and unwinding of oil hedges. At December 31, 2015, we 
had cash and cash equivalents of $7.5 million, $55.0 million in long-term debt, $41.9 million in short-term debt and a working capital 
deficit of $30.1 million (excluding assets and liabilities held for sale), compared to cash and cash equivalents of $34.7 million, $100.9 
million in long-term debt, $34.8 million in short-term debt and working capital of $11.2 million (excluding assets and liabilities held for 
sale) at December 31, 2014. Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations during 2015 was $86.5 million, an 
increase from net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations of $77.9 million in 2014, due primarily to an increase 
in cash settlements on our commodity derivative contracts, which was partially offset by a decrease in our oil revenues.
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations during 2015 decreased to $31.7 million, compared to net cash used in 
investing activities from continuing operations of $115.5 million in 2014, due primarily to a decrease in drilling operations in light of the 
low oil price environment.  Additionally, net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $40.3 million in 2015, 
compared to net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations of $63.2 million in 2014, due primarily to higher loan 
repayments and a decrease in our borrowings in 2015.
As of December 31, 2015, the outstanding principal amount of our debt was $96.9 million (excluding liabilities held for sale). In
addition to cash, cash equivalents and cash flow from operations, at December 31, 2015, we had a Senior Credit Facility, a credit facility 
with a Turkish bank, Convertible Notes, promissory notes, and a term loan facility (held for sale), all of which are discussed below.
55
Senior Credit Facility. On May 6, 2014, DMLP, TEMI, Talon Exploration, TransAtlantic Turkey Ltd., Amity and Petrogas
(collectively the “Borrowers”) entered into the Senior Credit Facility with BNP Paribas and the IFC. Each of the Borrowers is our wholly 
owned subsidiary. The Senior Credit Facility is guaranteed by us and each of TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and TransAtlantic 
Worldwide Ltd. (each, a “Guarantor”).
The amount drawn under the Senior Credit Facility may not exceed the lesser of (i) $150.0 million, (ii) the borrowing base amount at
such time, (iii) the aggregate commitments of all lenders at such time, and (iv) any amount borrowed from an individual lender to the 
extent it exceeds the aggregate amount of such lender’s individual commitment. As of December 31, 2015, the lenders had an aggregate 
commitment of $40.0 million, with individual commitments of $20.0 million each. On the first day of each fiscal quarter commencing 
April 1, 2016, the lenders’ commitments are subject to reduction in an amount equal to 7.69% of the aggregate commitments in effect on 
April 1, 2016.
The borrowing base amount is re-determined semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st of each year.  The October 2015
redetermination decreased the borrowing base to $16.6 million effective December 30, 2015, which resulted in a $15.5 million borrowing 
base deficiency under the Senior Credit Facility as of December 30, 2015.  The borrowing base amount equals, for any calculation date, 
the lowest of:
(cid:120) the debt value which results in the field life coverage ratio for such calculation date being 1.50 to 1.00; and 
(cid:120) the debt value which results in the loan life coverage ratio for such calculation date being 1.30 to 1.00.
The Senior Credit Facility matures on the earlier of (i) March 31, 2019, or (ii) the last date of the borrowing base calculation period that 
immediately precedes the date that the semi-annual banking case of BNP Paribas and the Borrowers determines that the aggregate amount 
of hydrocarbons to be produced from the borrowing base assets in Turkey are less than 25% of the amount of hydrocarbons to be produced 
from the borrowing base assets shown in the initial banking case prepared by BNP Paribas and the Borrowers. The Senior Credit Facility 
bears various letter of credit sub-limits, including among other things, sub-limits of up to (i) $10.0 million, (ii) the aggregate available 
unused and uncancelled portion of the lenders’ commitments or (iii) any amount borrowed from an individual lender to the extent it 
exceeds the aggregate amount of such lender’s individual commitment.
Loans under the Senior Credit Facility accrue interest at a rate of three-month LIBOR plus 5.00% per annum (5.61% at December 31, 
2015). The Borrowers are also required to pay (i) a commitment fee payable quarterly in arrears at a per annum rate equal to (a) 2.00% per 
annum of the unused and uncancelled portion of the aggregate commitments that is less than or equal to the maximum available amount 
under the Senior Credit Facility, and (b) 1.00% per annum of the unused and uncancelled portion of the aggregate commitments that 
exceed the maximum available amount under the Senior Credit Facility and is not available to be borrowed, (ii) on the date of issuance of 
any letter of credit, a fronting fee in an amount equal to 0.25% of the original maximum amount to be drawn under such letter of credit 
and (iii) a per annum letter of credit fee for each letter of credit issued equal to the face amount of such letter of credit multiplied by 
(a) 1.0% for any letter of credit that is cash collateralized or backed by a standby letter of credit issued by a financial institution acceptable 
to BNP Paribas or (b) 5.00% for all other letters of credit.
The Senior Credit Facility is secured by a pledge of (i) the local collection accounts and offshore collection accounts of each of the
Borrowers, (ii) the receivables payable to each of the Borrowers, (iii) the shares of each Borrower and (iv) substantially all of the present 
and future assets of the Borrowers.
The Borrowers are required to comply with certain financial and non-financial covenants under the Senior Credit Facility, including 
maintaining the following financial ratios during the four most recently completed fiscal quarters occurring on or after March 31, 2014:
(cid:120) ratio of combined current assets to combined current liabilities of not less than 1.10 to 1.00; 
(cid:120) ratio of EBITDAX (less non-discretionary capital expenditures) to aggregate amounts payable under the Senior Credit Facility of
not less than 1.50 to 1.00;
(cid:120) ratio of EBITDAX (less non-discretionary capital expenditures) to interest expense of not less than 4.00 to 1.00; and 
(cid:120) ratio of total debt to EBITDAX of less than 2.50 to 1.00.
The Senior Credit Facility defines EBITDAX as net income (excluding extraordinary items) plus, to the extent deducted in calculating
such net income, (i) interest expense (excluding interest paid-in-kind, or non-cash interest expense and interest incurred on certain 
subordinated intercompany debt or interest on equity recapitalized into subordinated debt), (ii) income tax expense, (iii) depreciation, 
depletion and amortization expense, (iv) amortization of intangibles and organization costs, (v) any extraordinary, unusual or non-
recurring non-cash expenses or losses, (vi) any other non-cash charges (including dry hole expenses and seismic
56
expenses, to the extent such expenses would be capitalized under the “full cost” accounting method), (vii) expenses incurred in connection 
with oil and gas exploration activities entered into in the ordinary course of business (including related drilling, completion, geological and 
geophysical costs), and (viii) transaction costs, expenses and fees incurred in connection with the negotiation, execution and delivery of 
the Senior Credit Facility and the related loan documents, minus, to the extent included in calculating net income, (a) any extraordinary, 
unusual or non-recurring income or gains (including, gains on the sales of assets outside of the ordinary course of business) and (b) any 
other non-cash income or gains.
Pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Facility, until amounts under the Senior Credit Facility are repaid, each of the Borrowers
shall not, and shall cause each of its subsidiaries not to, in each case subject to certain exceptions (i) incur indebtedness or create any liens, 
(ii) enter into any agreements that prohibit the ability of any Borrower or its subsidiaries to create any liens, (iii) enter into any merger, 
consolidation or amalgamation, liquidate or dissolve, (iv) dispose of any property or business, (v) pay any dividends, distributions or 
similar payments to shareholders, (vi) make certain types of investments, (vii) enter into any transactions with an affiliate, (viii) enter into 
a sale and leaseback arrangement, (ix) engage in any business or business activity, own any assets or assume any liabilities or obligations 
except as necessary in connection with, or reasonably related to, its business as an oil and natural gas exploration and production company 
or operate or carry on business in any jurisdiction outside of Turkey or its jurisdiction of formation, (x) change its organizational 
documents, (xi) permit its fiscal year to end on a day other than December 31st or change its method of determining fiscal quarters, or 
alter the accounting principles it uses, (xii) modify certain hydrocarbon licenses and agreements or material contracts, (xiii) enter into any 
hedge agreement for speculative purposes, (xiv) open or maintain new deposit, securities or commodity accounts, (xv) use the proceeds 
from any loan in the territories of any country that is not a member of the World Bank, (xvi) incur any expenditure that is not covered by 
the projections in the most recent corporate cashflow projection, (xvii) modify its social and environmental action plans as determined in 
conjunction with IFC, (xviii) enter into any transaction or engage in any activity prohibited by the United Nations Security Council, or 
(xix) engage in any corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, collusive or obstructive practice.
An event of default under the Senior Credit Facility includes, among other events, failure to pay principal or interest when due, breach 
of certain covenants and obligations, cross default to other indebtedness, bankruptcy or insolvency, failure to meet the required financial 
covenant ratios and the occurrence of a material adverse effect. In addition, the occurrence of a change of control is an event of default. A 
change of control is defined as the occurrence of any of the following: (i) our failure to own, of record and beneficially, all of the equity of 
the Borrowers or any Guarantor or to exercise, directly or indirectly, day-to-day management and operational control of any Borrower or 
Guarantor; (ii) the failure by the Borrowers to own or hold, directly or indirectly, all of the interests granted to Borrowers pursuant to 
certain hydrocarbon licenses designated in the Senior Credit Facility; or (iii) (a) Mr. Mitchell ceases for any reason to be the executive 
chairman of our board of directors at any time, (b) Mr. Mitchell and certain of his affiliates cease to own of record and beneficially at least 
35% of our common shares; or (c) any person or group, excluding Mr. Mitchell and certain of his affiliates, shall become, or obtain rights 
to become, the beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of more than 35% of our outstanding common shares entitled to vote for members 
of our board of directors on a fully-diluted basis; provided, that, if Mr. Mitchell ceases to be executive chairman of our board of directors 
by reason of his death or disability, such event shall not constitute an event of default unless we have not appointed a successor reasonably 
acceptable to the lenders within 60 days of the occurrence of such event.
Pursuant to the Senior Credit Facility, at least one of the Borrowers is required to maintain commodity derivative contracts with BNP 
Paribas that hedge between 30% and 75% of our anticipated oil production volumes in our oil fields in Turkey. As of December 31, 2015, 
TEMI had put contracts with BNP Paribas, which hedge the price of oil through March 2019.
At December 31, 2015, we had borrowings of $32.1 million under the Senior Credit Facility, a borrowing base deficiency of $15.5
million, and we were not in compliance with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility.  In December 2015, we were 
not in compliance with certain covenants under our Senior Credit Facility and the lenders declared an event of default and locked the 
Borrowers’ collection accounts. On December 30, 2015, we entered into a Waiver and Consent Agreement with the lenders whereby the 
lenders provided a conditional waiver of the defaults including a waiver of cross-default under the Term Loan Facility, and permitted the 
Borrowers to make certain transfers and withdrawals under the collection accounts. Such waiver included certain conditions, including the 
following:
The borrowing base deficiency must be repaid by March 31, 2016;
(i)
(ii) All monthly hedge settlement proceeds shall be used to pay down debt outstanding;
(iii) Net proceeds from certain asset sales shall be used to prepay loans outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility;
57
(iv) By June 30, 2016, the lenders shall be granted a security interest over all of the equity interests in Thrace Basin Natural Gas
(Turkiye) Corporation (“TBNG”) and all of the assets or property of TBNG; and
(v) On or before June 30, 2016, all holders of the Convertible Notes shall either (a) convert their debt interests under the
Convertible Notes into equity interests, or (b) agree to extend the maturity of the Convertible Notes to April 1, 2019 or later 
on substantially identical terms.
In addition, we have negotiated a preliminary waiver of the existing defaults under the Senior Credit Facility and an extension of the
borrowing base deficiency repayment obligation until at least September 30, 2016.  This preliminary waiver and extension is subject to the 
approval of the lenders’ respective credit committees.  The lenders have advised us that they will seek credit committee approval of the 
preliminary waiver and extension in early April 2016.  We cannot guarantee that this waiver and extension will be approved by our 
lenders.  See “—Decline in Oil Prices, Effect on Liquidity and Going Concern.”
At March 30, 2016, we had borrowings of $30.8 million under the Senior Credit Facility and a borrowing base deficiency of $14.2
million.  We have classified all borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility as short-term debt as of December 31, 2015 due to the 
uncertainty regarding our ability to comply with the covenants in the Senior Credit Facility for the next twelve months.
TBNG Credit Facility. TBNG has a fully-drawn credit facility with a Turkish bank.  During the fourth quarter of 2015, the facility was
amended and now bears interest at a rate of 7.0% per annum and the monthly principal installments were deferred until March 29, 
2016.  The facility is due by June 29, 2016. The facility may be prepaid without penalty. The facility is secured by a lien on a Turkish real 
estate property owned by Gundem Turizm Yatirim ve Isletme A.S. (“Gundem”), which is 97.5% beneficially owned by Mr. Mitchell and 
his children. At December 31, 2015, TBNG had a balance of $5.2 million under the credit facility and no availability.
Convertible Notes. As of December 31, 2015, we had $55.0 million aggregate principal amount of outstanding Convertible Notes.  The
Convertible Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of February 20, 2015 (the “Indenture”), between us and U.S. Bank 
National Association, as trustee (the “Trustee”).
The Convertible Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 13.0%, payable semi-annually, in arrears, on January 1 and July 1 of each
year.  The Convertible Notes mature on July 1, 2017, unless earlier redeemed or converted.
Holders may from time to time at such holder’s option, convert, subject to certain terms and conditions, any or all of the principal of 
any Convertible Note into fully paid and nonassessable common shares at the conversion price.  The initial conversion price is $6.80 per 
common share, subject to adjustment as described in the Indenture.  Prior to or contemporaneously with the conversion of any of the 
principal of a Convertible Note, all accrued but unpaid interest on the principal amount being converted will be paid in cash.  The 
Convertible Notes may not be converted into common shares on the maturity date or the redemption date.
We may redeem all or part of the Convertible Notes at the redemption prices specified below (expressed in percentages of principal
amount on the redemption date), plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date.
Period Beginning
January 1, 2016
July 1, 2016
January 1, 2017
Redemption Price
105.0%
102.5%
100.0%
If we experience a fundamental change (as defined in the Indenture), we will be required to make an offer to repurchase the Convertible
Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to but excluding the date of 
repurchase.  Additionally, if we sell certain assets for $50.0 million or more in cash consideration, in certain circumstances, we will be 
required to use a portion of the net cash proceeds of such sale to make an offer to repurchase Convertible Notes at a price equal to the price 
we would be required to pay for an optional redemption at such time, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, up to but excluding the date of 
repurchase.  The Indenture provides for customary events of default.  The Indenture contains limited covenants.
Term Loan Facility.  As of December 31, 2015, TransAtlantic Albania had $6.1 million outstanding under the Term Loan Facility with 
Raiffeisen and no availability.  As of December 31, 2015, TransAtlantic Albania was in default under the Term Loan Facility for failure to 
repay $1.1 million due on December 31, 2015.  On February 29, 2016, we sold all the equity interests in Stream, the parent of 
TransAtlantic Albania, to GBC Oil who assumed the Term Loan Facility.
West Promissory Notes. In August 2015, TransAtlantic USA entered into promissory notes (the “Promissory Notes”) with each of
Mary West CRT 2 LLC and Gary West CRT 2 LLC, shareholders of the Company (collectively, the “Holders”), whereby TransAtlantic 
USA could borrow up to $1.5 million under each Promissory Note to fund a share repurchase program. The Holders are managed by 
Randy Rochman, an observer of our board of directors.
58
On August 21, 2015, TransAtlantic USA borrowed $500,000 under each Promissory Note. Pursuant to the terms of the Promissory
Notes, the Holders are granted a first priority lien and security interest in all of our common shares purchased under our share repurchase 
program. Loans under the Promissory Notes accrue interest at a rate of 9.00% per annum and mature on October 1, 2016. The Promissory 
Notes are guaranteed by us, and no advances can be made under the notes after December 31, 2015. As of December 31, 2015, we had 
borrowed $1.0 million under the Promissory Notes and had no availability. The funds were used to purchase shares of our common stock 
pursuant to our share repurchase program.
Convertible Promissory Note. On December 30, 2015, TransAtlantic USA entered into a $5.0 million draw down convertible
promissory note (the “Note”) with ANBE Holdings, L.P. (“ANBE”), an entity owned by the children of the Company’s chairman and 
chief executive officer, N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd, and controlled by an entity managed by Mr. Mitchell and his wife. The Note bears 
interest at a rate of 13.0% per annum and matures on June 30, 2016.  On December 30, 2015, the Company borrowed $3.6 million under 
the Note (the “Initial Advance”). The Initial Advance will be used for general corporate purposes. The Company can request subsequent 
advances (each, a “Subsequent Advance”) under the Note prior to June 15, 2016. Each Subsequent Advance must be in a multiple of 
$500,000, or if the amount remaining for advance under the Note is less than $500,000, such lesser amount.
Advances under the Note may be converted, at the election of ANBE, any time after the NYSE MKT approves the Company’s
application to list the additional common shares issuable pursuant to the conversion feature of the Note and prior to the maturity of the 
Note.  The conversion price per common share for each advance is equal to 105% of the closing price of the Company’s common shares 
on the NYSE MKT on the trading date immediately prior to such advance.  The conversion price of the Initial Advance is $1.3755 per 
share.
The Note is a senior unsecured obligation of the Company and is structurally subordinated to all indebtedness of the Company’s
subsidiaries.  Each of the following is an “Event of Default” under the Note:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the Company fails to pay when due any principal of, or interest upon the Note;
the Note ceases to be a legal, valid, binding agreement enforceable against any party executing the same in accordance with 
the respective terms thereof or is in any way terminated declared ineffective or inoperative or in any way whatsoever ceases 
to give or provide the respective rights, interests, remedies, powers or privileges intended to be created thereby;
the Company (i) applies for or consents to the appointment of a receiver, trustee, inventor, custodian or liquidator of the 
Company or of all or a substantial part of its assets, as applicable, (ii) is adjudicated as bankrupt or insolvent or files a 
voluntary petition for bankruptcy or admits in writing that it is unable to pay its debts as they become due, (iii) makes a 
general assignment for the benefit of creditors, (iv) files a petition or answer seeking reorganization or an arrangement with 
creditors or to take advantage of any bankruptcy or insolvency laws, or (v) files an answer admitting the material allegations 
of, or consents to, or defaults in answering, a petition filed against it in any bankruptcy, reorganization or insolvency 
proceeding, or takes corporate action for the purpose of effecting any of the foregoing; or
an order, judgment or decree is entered by any court of competent jurisdiction or other competent authority approving a 
petition seeking reorganization of the Company or appointing a receiver, trustee, inventor or liquidator of any such person, or 
of all or substantially all of its assets, and such order, judgment or decree continues unstayed and in effect for a period of sixty 
(60) days.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents a summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2015:
Payments Due By Year
(in thousands)
2018
Debt
Interest
Leases
Total
Total
$ 96,859
11,934
5,595
$ 114,388
2016
$ 41,859
8,359
823
$ 51,041
2017
$ 55,000
3,575
518
$ 59,093
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2015.
59
2019
2020
$
$
–
–
446
446
$
$
–
–
–
–
$
$
Thereafter
–
$
–
3,808
3,808
$
–
–
–
–
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
We are exposed to market risk from changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange and hedging contracts. A discussion of the
market risk exposures follows. Our market risk sensitive instruments were entered into for hedging and investment purposes, not for 
trading purposes.
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2015, our exposure to interest rate changes related primarily to floating rate borrowings under our Senior Credit
Facility. At December 31, 2015, we had $32.1 million in outstanding borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility. The interest we pay on 
borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility is equal to three-month LIBOR plus 5.00% per annum (5.61% at December 31, 2015). A 
hypothetical 10% change in the interest rates we pay on the Senior Credit Facility as of December 31, 2015 would result in an increase or 
decrease in our interest costs of approximately $0.2 million per year.
Foreign Currency Risk
We are subject to changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of our operations in foreign countries. The assets, liabilities 
and results of operations of our foreign operations are measured using the functional currency of such foreign operation. The functional 
currency for each of our subsidiaries in Turkey and Bulgaria is the local currency. As a result, translation adjustments will result from the 
process of translating the functional currency of our foreign operation’s financial statements into the U.S. Dollar reporting currency, which 
is a non-cash transaction. Such non-cash translation adjustments accumulate on our consolidated balance sheets as a component of 
accumulated other comprehensive loss and are recorded in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss).
The functional currency of our operations in Turkey and Bulgaria is the TRY and the Bulgarian Lev, respectively. The exchange rates 
used to translate the financial position of our Turkish and Bulgarian operations at December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are shown below:
New Turkish Lira per $1.00 U.S Dollar
Bulgarian Lev per $1.00 U.S. Dollar
2015
2.9076
1.7901
Year Ended December 31,
2014
2.3189
1.6084
2013
2.1343
1.4216
We are also subject to foreign currency exposures as a result of our operations in the other foreign countries in which we operate. We
record foreign exchange (gain) loss on our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) as a component of other (expense) 
income for gains and losses which result from re-measuring transactions and monetary accounts into our functional currency in earnings. 
The change in foreign exchange (gain) loss is primarily unrealized (non-cash) in nature and results from the re-measuring of specific 
transactions and monetary accounts in a currency other than the functional currency. For example, a U.S. Dollar transaction which occurs 
in Turkey is re-measured at the period-end to the TRY amount if it has not been settled previously. For 2015 and 2014, we recorded a 
foreign exchange loss of $5.7 million and $6.5 million, respectively. We estimate that a 10% change in the exchange rates would impact 
our cash balances and our net loss by approximately $0.4 million. We have not used foreign currency forward contracts to manage 
exchange rate fluctuations.
Commodity Price Risk
Our revenues are derived from the sale of oil and natural gas. The prices for oil and natural gas are extremely volatile and sometimes 
experience large fluctuations as a result of relatively small changes in supplies, weather conditions, economic conditions and government 
actions.
Pursuant to our Senior Credit Facility, at least one of the Borrowers is required to maintain commodity derivative contracts with BNP
Paribas. As a result, TEMI has entered into put contracts with BNP Paribas to hedge the price of oil. The purchased put establishes a lower 
limit “floor” price.  Pursuant to our Senior Credit Facility, we cannot enter into hedge agreements that, when aggregated with any other 
hydrocarbon hedge agreement then in effect, covers notional volumes in excess of 75% of the reasonably projected production volumes 
attributable to our proved developed reserves. The derivative contracts economically hedge against the variability in cash flows associated 
with the forecasted sale of our future oil production. While the use of the hedging arrangements will limit the downside risk of adverse 
price movements, it may also limit future gains from favorable movements.
We have elected not to designate our derivative financial instruments as hedges for accounting purposes, and accordingly, we record
such contracts at fair value and recognize changes in such fair value in current earnings as they occur. We recognize gains and
60
losses related to these contracts on a mark-to-market basis in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) under the 
caption “Loss on commodity derivative contracts.” Cash settlements of derivative contracts are included in operating activities on our 
consolidated statements of cash flows. All of our oil derivative contracts are settled based upon Brent crude oil pricing. If commodity 
prices decrease, this commodity price change could have a positive impact to our earnings. Conversely, if commodity prices increase, this 
commodity price change could have a negative effect on our earnings. Each derivative contract is evaluated separately to determine its 
own fair value. During 2015 and 2014, we recorded a net gain on commodity derivative contracts of $27.5 million and $37.5 million, 
respectively.
On September 14, 2015, October 14, 2015 and November 17, 2015, we unwound all volumes of our crude oil hedge collars and three-
way collars for the periods September 14, 2015 through March 31, 2019, October 14, 2015 through March 31, 2019 and December 1, 
2015 through March 31, 2019, respectively, and purchased puts with a $50.00 strike price in replacement of the unwound volumes.  The 
puts with a $50.00 strike price were purchased pursuant to the requirements of the Senior Credit Facility at a cost of $4.6 million.  The 
unwound hedges resulted in gross proceeds of $41.8 million, of which $37.2 million was used to repay indebtedness under the Senior 
Credit Facility.
The following tables summarize our outstanding commodity derivatives contracts with respect to our future oil production as of
December 31, 2015:
Type
Put
Put
Put
Put
Total Estimated Fair Value of
   Asset
Period
January 1, 2016—
December 31, 2016
January 1, 2017—
December 31, 2017
January 1, 2018—
December 31, 2018
January 1, 2019—
March 31, 2019
Quantity
(Bbl/day)
808
610
494
443
$
$
$
$
Puts
Weighted
Average
Minimum
Price
(per Bbl)
Estimated Fair
Value of
Asset
(in thousands)
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00
$
3,235
1,798
1,292
280
6,605
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
See Index to Financial Statements on page F-1.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Disclosure controls and procedures are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports filed or submitted under
the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. 
Disclosure controls and procedures include, without limitation, controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be 
disclosed in our reports filed or submitted under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to management, including our chief 
executive officer and our chief financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
As of December 31, 2015, management carried out an evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of our chief
executive officer and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures. Based upon the evaluation, our 
chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that, as of December 31, 2015, our disclosure controls and procedures were 
effective.
61
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Internal control over
financial reporting, as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act, is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, 
the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the board of directors, 
management and other personnel, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of 
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with U.S. GAAP and includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the 
maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of assets, (ii) provide reasonable 
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, 
(iii) provide reasonable assurance that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with appropriate authorizations of 
management and the board of directors, and (iv) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use or disposition of assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of
any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in 
conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Our management, under the supervision and with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, conducted
an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework and criteria established in 
Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. 
Based on its evaluation, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 
2015.
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015 has been audited by KPMG LLP, the
independent registered public accounting firm that audited our consolidated financial statements, as stated in their reports on pages F-2 
and F-3 of this Form 10-K.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
During the quarter ended December 31, 2015, we incorporated our Albanian segment within our internal control over financial 
reporting.  Except for incorporating our Albanian segment, there were no additional changes in our internal control over financial 
reporting that occurred during the quarter ended December 31, 2015 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially 
affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information.
On March 30, 2016, we entered into an agreement to amend the $11.5 million promissory note (the “Dalea Note”) that was originally 
issued by Dalea to the Company pursuant to the Company’s sale of its subsidiaries, Viking International Limited and Viking Geophysical 
Services Ltd., to a joint venture owned by Dalea and Abraaj Investment Management Limited in June 2012.  Pursuant to the agreed upon 
terms, the Company and Dalea acknowledged that the sale of Dalea’s interest in Viking Services B.V. was not intended to trigger 
acceleration of the repayment of the Dalea Note as long as certain oilfield services were provided by Viking Services B.V. to the 
Company in Turkey, which services will now be provided pursuant to a master services agreement between Production Solutions 
International Petrol Arama Hizmetleri Anonim Sirketi (“PSIL”) and the Company (the “PSIL MSA”).  PSIL is beneficially owned by 
Dalea Investment Group, LLC, which is controlled by Mr. Mitchell.  As a result, the amendment will revise the events triggering 
acceleration of the repayment of the Dalea Note to the following: (i) a reduction of ownership by Dalea and its affiliates of PSIL to less 
than 50%; (ii) disposal by Dalea or PSIL of all or substantially all of its assets to any person that does not own a controlling interest in 
Dalea or PSIL and is not controlled by Mr. Mitchell; (iii) acquisition by any person not controlled by Mr. Mitchell and that does not own a 
controlling equity interest in Dalea or PSIL of more than 50% of the voting interests of Dalea or PSIL; (iv) termination of the PSIL MSA 
other than as a result of an uncured default thereunder by the Company (or its subsidiary); (v) default by PSIL under the PSIL MSA, 
which default is not remedied within a period of 30 days after notice thereof to PSIL; and (vi) insolvency or bankruptcy of PSIL.
In addition, the amendment will reduce the principal amount of the Dalea Note to $8.0 million in exchange for the cancellation of a
payable of approximately $3.5 million owed by TransAtlantic Albania to Viking International, which is part of the Delvina Gas Liabilities 
and for which the Company has indemnified GBC Oil.  The amendment will also require Dalea to pledge as security for the Dalea Note 
the approximately $2.1 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes held by Dalea, including any securities exchanged or 
converted from the Convertible Notes. The amendment will provide that interest payable to Dalea under the Convertible Notes (or any 
future securities for which the Convertible Notes are converted or exchanged) will be credited against the outstanding principal balance of 
the Dalea Note. The maturity date of the Dalea Note was extended to June 13, 2019.  The interest rate on the Dalea Note remains at 3.0% 
per annum and continues to be guaranteed by Mr. Mitchell.
62
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Certain information required in response to this Item 10 is contained under the heading “Executive Officers of the Registrant” in Part I
of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Other information required in response to this Item 10 is incorporated herein by reference to our 
definitive proxy statement to be filed with the SEC pursuant to Regulation 14A promulgated under the Exchange Act, not later than 120 
days after the end of the fiscal year covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Code of Business Conduct
We have adopted a code of ethics that applies to all our officers, directors and employees, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer and controller. The full text of our Code of Conduct is published on our website at 
www.transatlanticpetroleum.com, on the Corporate Governance page under the About tab. We intend to disclose future amendments to 
certain provisions of the Code of Conduct, or waivers of such provisions granted to executive officers and directors, on our website within 
four business days following the date of such amendment or waiver.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The information required in response to this Item 11 is incorporated herein by reference to our definitive proxy statement to be filed 
with the SEC pursuant to Regulation 14A promulgated under the Exchange Act not later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year 
covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information required in response to this Item 12 is incorporated herein by reference to our definitive proxy statement to be filed 
with the SEC pursuant to Regulation 14A promulgated under the Exchange Act not later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year 
covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required in response to this Item 13 is incorporated herein by reference to our definitive proxy statement to be filed 
with the SEC pursuant to Regulation 14A promulgated under the Exchange Act not later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year 
covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
The information required in response to this Item 14 is incorporated herein by reference to our definitive proxy statement to be filed 
with the SEC pursuant to Regulation 14A promulgated under the Exchange Act not later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year 
covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
63
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 
(a) Documents filed as part of the Report.
PART IV
1.
2.
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Consolidated Statements of Equity for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Exhibits required to be filed by Item 601 of Regulation S-K
The exhibits required to be filed by this Item 15 are set forth in the Exhibit Index accompanying this report.
64
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to
be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
March 30, 2016
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on
behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
/S/ N. MALONE MITCHELL 3rd
N. Malone Mitchell 3rd
Chief Executive Officer
Signature
Capacity
/S/ N. MALONE MITCHELL 3rd
N. Malone Mitchell 3rd
/S/ WIL F. SAQUETON
Wil F. Saqueton
/S/ BOB G. ALEXANDER
Bob G. Alexander
/S/ BRIAN E. BAYLEY
Brian Bayley
/S/ CHARLES J. CAMPISE
Charles J. Campise
/S/ MARLAN W. DOWNEY
Marlan W. Downey
/S/ GREGORY K. RENWICK
Gregory K. Renwick
/S/ MEL G. RIGGS
Mel G. Riggs
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
(Principal Executive Officer)
Chief Financial Officer 
(Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting
Officer/Controller)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
65
Date
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
March 30, 2016
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Consolidated Statements of Equity for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Page
F-2
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7
F-8
F-1
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
TransAtlantic Petroleum, Ltd.:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of TransAtlantic Petroleum, Ltd. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 
2015 and 2014, and the related consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss), equity and cash flows for each of the years in the 
three-year period ended December 31, 2015. These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s 
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of 
material misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial 
statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as 
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of 
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, and the results of their operations and their cash flows 
for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2015 in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As 
discussed in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company has significant debt obligations and non-compliance with certain 
debt covenants that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters 
are also described in note 2. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of 
this uncertainty.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), 
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal 
Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), 
and our report dated March 30, 2016 expressed an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over 
financial reporting.
Dallas, Texas
March 30, 2016
/s/ KPMG LLP
F-2
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.:
We have audited TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, based on criteria 
established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO)”. TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial 
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying 
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s 
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial 
reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial 
reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal 
control based on the assessed risk. Our audit also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the 
circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of 
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance 
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide 
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations 
of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of 
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of 
any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in 
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of 
December 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the 
consolidated balance sheets of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, and the related 
consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss), equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended 
December 31, 2015, and our report dated March 30, 2016 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements.
Dallas, Texas
March 30, 2016
/s/ KPMG LLP
F-3
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
As of December 31, 2015 and 2014
(in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except share data)
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable, net
Oil and natural gas sales
Joint interest and other
Related party
Prepaid and other current assets
Derivative asset
Restricted cash
Assets held for sale
Total current assets
Property and equipment:
Oil and natural gas properties (successful efforts method)
Proved
Unproved
Equipment and other property
Less accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Property and equipment, net
Other long-term assets:
Other assets
Note receivable - related party
Derivative asset
Deferred income taxes
Goodwill
Assets held for sale
Total other assets
Total assets
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accounts payable - related party
Accrued liabilities
Asset retirement obligations
Loans payable
Loan payable - related party
Liabilities held for sale - related party
Liabilities held for sale
Total current liabilities
Long-term liabilities:
Asset retirement obligations
Accrued liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Loans payable
Loan payable - related party
Liabilities held for sale
Total long - term liabilities
Total liabilities
Commitments and contingencies
Shareholders' equity:
Common shares, $0.10 par value, 100,000,000 shares authorized; 41,017,777 shares and 40,708,120 shares issued and
   outstanding as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, respectively
Treasury stock
Additional paid-in-capital
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
Accumulated deficit
Total shareholders' equity
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity
2015
2014
$
7,480
$
14,169
5,885
414
2,807
3,235
3,758
51,511
89,259
271,080
31,135
36,708
338,923
(148,218)
190,705
4,615
11,500
3,370
–
–
–
19,485
299,449
12,675
2,684
10,583
–
38,266
3,593
3,540
65,649
136,990
9,237
11,940
27,360
34,400
20,600
–
103,537
240,527
4,102
(970)
569,365
(121,590)
(391,985)
58,922
299,449
$
$
$
$
$
$
34,740
25,456
19,918
602
5,823
12,518
–
7,744
106,801
323,994
47,137
41,445
412,576
(141,644)
270,932
10,753
11,500
19,069
1,343
6,935
118,903
168,503
546,236
19,545
13,872
21,238
323
34,833
–
11,416
47,763
148,990
10,220
7,736
24,946
80,089
20,800
41,991
185,782
334,772
4,071
–
571,150
(79,310)
(284,447)
211,464
546,236
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) 
For the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
(U.S. Dollars and shares in thousands, except per share amounts)
Revenues:
Oil and natural gas sales
Sales of purchased natural gas
Other
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production
Exploration, abandonment and impairment
Cost of purchased natural gas
Seismic and other exploration
Revaluation of contingent consideration
General and administrative
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligations
Total costs and expenses
Operating (loss) income
Other income (expense):
Interest and other expense
Interest and other income
Gain (loss) on commodity derivative contracts
Foreign exchange loss
Total other income (expense)
Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
Current income tax expense
Deferred income tax expense
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Loss from discontinued operations before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Net loss from discontinued operations
Net (loss) income
Other comprehensive (loss) income:
Foreign currency translation adjustment
Comprehensive (loss) income
Net (loss) income per common share:
Basic net income (loss) per common share
Continuing operations
Discontinued operations
Weighted average common shares outstanding
Diluted net income (loss) per common share
Continuing operations
Discontinued operations
Weighted average common and common equivalent shares outstanding
2015
2014
2013
82,716
2,189
159
85,064
12,873
21,544
2,082
370
–
24,138
37,707
368
99,082
(14,018)
(13,077)
855
27,457
(5,653)
9,582
(4,436)
(3,587)
(18,642)
(26,665)
(97,042)
16,169
(80,873)
(107,538)
(42,280)
(149,818)
(0.65)
(1.98)
40,841
(0.65)
(1.98)
40,841
$
$
$
$
$
$
136,276
2,127
427
138,830
18,193
19,864
2,055
4,285
(2,500)
31,071
48,594
406
121,968
16,862
(6,044)
1,124
37,454
(6,523)
26,011
42,873
(1,784)
(11,875)
29,214
(750)
612
(138)
29,076
(14,325)
14,751
0.77
–
37,829
0.77
–
38,031
$
$
$
$
$
$
127,270
2,581
976
130,827
18,602
27,333
2,247
14,009
(5,000)
29,020
41,322
508
128,041
2,786
(3,929)
1,340
(2,698)
(9,663)
(14,950)
(12,164)
(128)
(979)
(13,271)
(442)
–
(442)
(13,713)
(36,973)
(50,686)
(0.36)
(0.01)
37,069
(0.36)
(0.01)
37,069
$
$
$
$
$
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-5
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
Consolidated Statements of Equity
For the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
(U.S. Dollars and shares in thousands)
Shares Warrants Shares (at par)
Common
Common Treasury
Shares
36,875
351
114
–
–
–
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive Accumulated Shareholders'
Income (Loss)
Equity
Deficit
(28,012) $ (299,810) $
Treasury
Stock
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
– $ 537,962 $
–
–
2,465
(12)
3,687 $
35
12
–
–
–
–
3,734 $
322
–
–
15
– $
–
–
–
–
–
–
– $
–
–
233
–
–
–
233 $
–
–
–
–
466
–
–
–
(40)
1,716
–
–
–
–
(36,973)
–
–
(13,713)
(64,985) $ (313,523) $
–
–
–
–
– $ 542,091 $
–
–
–
–
23,528
4,188
–
(15)
–
–
–
–
(76)
1,434
–
–
–
–
4,071 $
–
–
–
–
–
31
–
–
–
–
– $ 571,150 $
–
–
–
–
–
(4,188)
–
1,106
(14,325)
–
–
29,076
(79,310) $ (284,447) $
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Total
213,827
2,500
–
(40)
1,716
(36,973)
(13,713)
167,317
23,850
4,188
–
–
(76)
1,434
(14,325)
29,076
211,464
–
(4,188)
–
1,137
(391)
(970)
1,688
(42,280)
(107,538)
58,922
Balances at December 31, 2012
Issuance of common shares
Issuance of restricted stock units
Tax withholding on restricted stock 
units
Share-based compensation
Foreign currency translation 
adjustment
Net loss
Balances at December 31, 2013
Issuance of common shares
Contingent payment event
Issuance of warrants
Issuance of restricted stock units
Tax withholding on restricted stock 
units
Share-based compensation
Foreign currency translation 
adjustment
Net income
Balances at December 31, 2014
Issuance of common shares
Contingent payment event
Issuance of warrants
Issuance of restricted stock units
Tax withholding on restricted stock 
units
Repurchase of treasury stock
Share-based compensation
Foreign currency translation 
adjustment
Net loss
Balances at December 31, 2015
–
–
–
–
37,340
3,219
–
–
149
–
–
–
–
40,708
–
–
–
310
–
–
–
–
–
41,018
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
333
–
–
–
333
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(970)
–
–
–
(391)
–
1,688
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(42,280)
–
–
(107,538)
699 $
4,102 $
(970) $ 569,365 $
(121,590) $ (391,985) $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-6
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
(in thousands of U.S. Dollars)
Operating activities:
Net (loss) income
Adjustment for net loss from discontinued operations
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Share-based compensation
Foreign currency loss
(Gain) loss on commodity derivative contracts
Cash settlement on commodity derivative contracts
Amortization on loan financing costs
Bad debt expense
Deferred income tax expense
Exploration, abandonment and impairment
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligations
Derivative put costs
Revaluation of contingent consideration
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
Prepaid expenses and other assets
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations
Net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations
Net cash provided by operating activities
Investing activities:
Acquisitions, net of cash
Additions to oil and natural gas properties
Additions to equipment and other properties
Restricted cash
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities from discontinued operations
Net cash used in investing activities
Financing activities:
Tax withholding on restricted share units
Treasury stock purchases
Loan proceeds
Loan proceeds - related party
Loan repayment
Loan financing costs
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities from continuing operations
Net cash used in financing activities from discontinued operations
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
Effect of exchange rate on cash flows and cash equivalents
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year
Supplemental disclosures:
Cash paid for interest
Cash paid for taxes
Supplemental non-cash financing activities:
Repayment of the Prepayment Agreement
Issuance of common shares for acquisition
Contingent payment event
Issuance of common shares - amendment to purchase agreement
2015
2014
2013
$
$
(107,538)
80,873
(26,665)
1,688
5,910
(27,457)
57,076
1,677
422
18,642
21,544
37,707
368
(4,638)
–
18,274
1,341
(19,380)
86,509
(14,483)
72,026
–
(22,843)
(3,572)
(5,261)
(31,676)
(12,329)
(44,005)
(391)
(970)
12,378
3,593
(54,834)
(30)
(40,254)
(13,709)
(53,963)
(1,318)
(27,260)
34,740
7,480
9,522
3,044
3,043
–
(4,188)
–
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
29,076
138
29,214
1,434
6,448
(37,454)
(2,100)
1,025
1,487
11,875
19,864
48,594
406
–
(2,500)
(3,326)
(1,777)
4,734
77,924
(264)
77,660
66
(107,353)
(6,318)
(1,917)
(115,522)
(1,174)
(116,696)
(76)
–
73,237
20,800
(28,096)
(2,630)
63,235
(1,674)
61,561
(666)
21,859
12,881
34,740
3,490
–
–
23,850
4,188
–
$
(13,713)
442
(13,271)
1,716
8,620
2,698
(3,521)
510
–
979
27,333
41,322
508
–
(5,000)
(2,353)
(34)
9,269
68,776
(1,426)
67,350
–
(94,266)
(10,653)
(190)
(105,109)
1,016
(104,093)
(40)
–
66,785
–
(29,785)
–
36,960
–
36,960
(2,104)
(1,887)
14,768
12,881
3,091
2,387
–
–
–
2,500
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-7
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
1. General 
Nature of operations 
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. (together with its subsidiaries, “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Company” or “TransAtlantic”) is an international oil 
and natural gas company engaged in acquisition, exploration, development and production. We have focused our operations in countries 
that have established, yet underexplored petroleum systems, have stable governments, are net importers of petroleum, have an existing 
petroleum transportation infrastructure and provide favorable commodity pricing, royalty rates and tax rates to exploration and production 
companies. We hold interests in developed and undeveloped oil and natural gas properties in Turkey and Bulgaria. As of March 29, 2016, 
approximately 36% of our outstanding common shares were beneficially owned by N. Malone Mitchell 3rd, our chief executive officer 
and chairman of our board of directors.
TransAtlantic is a holding company with three operating segments – Turkey, Bulgaria and Albania (presented as assets held for sale).  Its 
assets consist of its ownership interests in subsidiaries that primarily own:
(cid:120) assets in Turkey;
(cid:120) assets in Albania that are classified as held for sale; and
(cid:120) assets in Bulgaria.
Basis of presentation 
Our consolidated financial statements are expressed in U.S. Dollars and have been prepared by management in accordance with 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). All amounts in these notes to the consolidated financial 
statements are in U.S. Dollars unless otherwise indicated. In preparing financial statements, management makes informed judgments and 
estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and affect the reported amounts 
of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management reviews estimates, including those related to fair 
value measurements associated with acquisitions and financial derivatives, the recoverability and impairment of long-lived assets and 
goodwill, contingencies and income taxes. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates and actual results may 
differ from these estimates.
2. Going concern
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the basis of accounting principles applicable to a going concern. These 
principles assume that we will be able to realize our assets and discharge our obligations in the normal course of operations for the 
foreseeable future.
We incurred a net loss of $107.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2015, which includes a net loss from discontinued operations of 
$80.9 million. At December 31, 2015, the outstanding principal amount of our debt was $96.9 million (excluding liabilities held for sale), 
and we had a working capital deficit (excluding assets and liabilities held for sale) of $30.1 million.
Due to the significant decline in Brent crude oil prices during 2015, the borrowing base under the Company’s senior credit facility (the 
“Senior Credit Facility”) with BNP Paribas (Suisse) SA (“BNP Paribas”) and the International Finance Corporation (“IFC”) was decreased 
to $16.6 million effective December 30, 2015. The decline in the borrowing base resulted in a $15.5 million borrowing base deficiency 
under the Senior Credit Facility as of December 30, 2015.
On December 30, 2015, the lenders granted us a waiver of certain defaults under the Senior Credit Facility that existed as of December 30, 
2015, including, among other things, the borrowing base deficiency.  The waiver is conditioned upon, among other things, no borrowing 
base deficiency existing as of March 31, 2016.
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had $32.1 million outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility and no availability and was not in 
compliance with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility.
During the first quarter of 2016, we repaid $1.3 million under the Senior Credit Facility, and as of March 30, 2016, we had a borrowing 
base deficiency of $14.2 million.
F-8
We have negotiated a preliminary waiver of the existing defaults under the Senior Credit Facility and an extension of the borrowing base 
deficiency repayment obligation until at least September 30, 2016.  This preliminary waiver and extension is subject to the approval of the 
lenders’ respective credit committees.  The lenders have advised us that they will seek credit committee approval of the preliminary 
waiver and extension in early April 2016.  We cannot guarantee that this waiver and extension will be approved by our lenders.  Because 
we are currently in default under the Senior Credit Facility and will be unable to repay the borrowing base deficiency by March 31, 2016, 
the lenders could declare all outstanding principal and interest to be due and payable, could freeze our accounts, could foreclose against 
the assets securing their borrowings, and we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.  In addition, a payment default under the 
Senior Credit Facility could result in a cross default under our Convertible Notes.
Even if we obtain the funds to repay our borrowing base deficiency, we should need some form of debt restructuring, capital raising effort 
or asset sale in order to fund our operations and meet our substantial debt service obligations of approximately $41.9 million in 2016 and 
$55.0 million in 2017.  Our management is actively pursuing improving our working capital position and/or restructuring our future debt 
service obligations in order to remain a going concern for the foreseeable future.
As a result there is substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
Management believes the going concern assumption to be appropriate for these consolidated financial statements. If the going concern 
assumption was not appropriate, adjustments would be necessary to the carrying values of assets and liabilities, reported revenues and 
expenses and in the balance sheet classifications used in these consolidated financial statements.
3. Significant accounting policies 
Basis of preparation 
Our reporting standard for the presentation of our consolidated financial statements is U.S. GAAP. The consolidated financial statements 
include the accounts of the Company and all majority-owned, controlled subsidiaries. All significant intercompany balances and 
transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.  During the year ended December 31, 2015, we reclassified certain balance sheet 
amounts previously reported on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2014 to conform to current year presentation.
Cash and cash equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents include term deposits and investments with original maturities of three months or less at the date of acquisition. 
We consider all highly liquid debt instruments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. We 
determine the appropriate classification of our investments in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities at the time of purchase 
and reevaluate such designation at each balance sheet date.
Commodity derivative instruments 
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivatives and Hedging
(“ASC 815”), requires derivative instruments to be recognized as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet at fair value. We do not 
designate our derivative financial instruments as hedging instruments and, as a result, we recognize the change in a derivative contract’s 
fair value currently in earnings as a component of other income (expense).
Fair value measurements 
We follow ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC 820”). This standard defines fair value, establishes a framework 
for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. ASC 820 does not require any new fair value 
measurements, but applies to assets and liabilities that are required to be recorded at fair value under other accounting standards.
ASC 820 characterizes inputs used in determining fair value according to a hierarchy that prioritizes those inputs based upon the degree to 
which they are observable. The three levels of the fair value measurement hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1:
Level 2:
Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets 
or liabilities. 
Quoted prices in markets that are not active, or inputs which are observable, either directly or indirectly, for 
substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
F-9
Level 3: Measured based on prices or valuation models that required inputs that are both significant to the fair value
measurement and less observable for objective sources (i.e., supported by little or no market activity).
As required by ASC 820, financial assets and liabilities are classified based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value 
measurement. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment, which may affect 
the valuation of the fair value of assets and liabilities and their placement within the fair value hierarchy levels. The determination of the 
fair values takes into account the market for our financial assets and liabilities, the associated credit risk and other factors as required by 
ASC 820. We consider active markets as those in which transactions for the assets or liabilities occur in sufficient frequency and volume 
to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
Foreign currency remeasurement and translation 
The functional currency of our subsidiaries in Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Morocco, and Albania is the New Turkish Lira (“TRY”), the 
Bulgarian Lev, the Romanian New Leu, the Moroccan Dirham, and the U.S. Dollar (“USD”) respectively. We follow ASC 830, Foreign 
Currency Matters (“ASC 830”). ASC 830 requires the assets, liabilities, and results of operations of a foreign operation to be measured 
using the functional currency of that foreign operation. Exchange gains or losses from remeasuring transactions and monetary accounts in 
a currency other than the functional currency are included in earnings.
For certain subsidiaries, translation adjustments result from the process of translating the functional currency of subsidiary financial 
statements into the U.S. Dollar reporting currency. These translation adjustments are reported separately and accumulated in the 
consolidated balance sheets as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Oil and natural gas properties 
In accordance with the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties, costs of productive wells, developmental 
dry holes and productive leases are capitalized into appropriate groups of properties based on geographical and geological similarities. 
Acquisition costs of proved properties are amortized using the unit-of-production method based on total proved reserves, and exploration 
well costs and additional development costs are amortized using the unit-of-production method based on proved developed reserves. 
Proceeds from the sale of properties are credited to property costs, and a gain or loss is recognized when a significant portion of an 
amortization base is sold or abandoned.
Exploration costs, such as exploratory geological and geophysical costs, delay rentals and exploration overhead, are charged to expense as 
incurred. Exploratory drilling costs, including the cost of stratigraphic test wells, are initially capitalized but charged to exploration 
expense if and when the well is determined to be non-productive. The determination of an exploratory well’s ability to produce must be 
made within one year from the completion of drilling activities. The acquisition costs of unproved acreage are initially capitalized and are 
carried at cost, net of accumulated impairment provisions, until such leases are transferred to proved properties or charged to exploration 
expense as impairments of unproved properties.
Equipment and other property 
Equipment and other property are stated at cost, and inventory is stated at weighted average cost which does not exceed replacement cost. 
Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives (ranging from 3 to 7 years) of the respective 
assets. The costs of normal maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred. Material expenditures that increase the life of an 
asset are capitalized and depreciated over the estimated remaining useful life of the asset. The cost of equipment sold, or otherwise 
disposed of, and the related accumulated depreciation, are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in current earnings.
Impairment of long-lived assets 
We follow the provisions of ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”). ASC 360 requires that our long-lived assets be 
assessed for potential impairment of their carrying values whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate such impairment may 
have occurred. Proved oil and natural gas properties are evaluated by field for potential impairment. An impairment on proved properties 
is recognized when the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows of a field are less than its carrying value. If an impairment occurs, the 
carrying value of the impaired field is reduced to its estimated fair value, which is generally estimated using a discounted cash flow 
approach.
Unproved oil and natural gas properties do not have producing properties and are valued on acquisition by management, with the 
assistance of an independent expert when necessary. As reserves are proved through the successful completion of exploratory wells, the 
cost is transferred to proved properties. The cost of the remaining unproved basis is periodically evaluated by management to
F-10
assess whether the value of a property has diminished. To do this assessment, management considers (i) estimated potential reserves and 
future net revenues from an independent expert, (ii) the Company’s history in exploring the area, (iii) the Company’s future drilling plans 
per its capital drilling program prepared by the Company’s reservoir engineers and operations management and (iv) other factors 
associated with the area. Impairment is taken on the unproved property value if it is determined that the costs are not likely to be 
recoverable. The valuation is subjective and requires management to make estimates and assumptions which, with the passage of time, 
may prove to be materially different from actual results.
Goodwill 
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”), goodwill is not amortized, but is tested for impairment on an 
annual basis at December 31, or more frequently as impairment indicators arise. ASC 350 permits an entity to first assess qualitative 
factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for 
determining whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.  At December 31, 2015, we performed our annual 
assessment of goodwill and determined it was necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.  In accordance with GAAP, we 
performed step one of the goodwill impairment test and determined that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was less than its 
carrying amount based on our reserves report, dated December 31, 2015.  The decline in our Turkey reserves report values was primarily 
due to the decline in the Brent oil price during the three months ended December 31, 2015.  Therefore, we performed step two of the 
impairment test, which indicated that the entire balance of goodwill was impaired.  As a result, we recorded an impairment equal to the 
carrying amount of goodwill, or $5.5 million, at December 31, 2015 which is included in exploration, abandonment and impairment in the 
accompanying consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2015.
Joint interest activities 
Certain of our exploration, development and production activities are conducted jointly with other entities and, accordingly, the 
consolidated financial statements reflect only our proportionate interest in such activities.
Asset retirement obligations 
We recognize a liability for the fair value of all legal obligations associated with the retirement of tangible, long-lived assets and capitalize 
an equal amount as a cost of the asset. The cost associated with the abandonment obligation is included in the computation of depreciation, 
depletion and amortization. The liability accretes until we settle the obligation. We use a credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate in our 
calculation of asset retirement obligations.
Revenue recognition 
Revenue from the sale of crude oil and natural gas is recognized upon delivery to the purchaser when title passes. During the years ended 
December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, we sold $63.0 million, $102.8 million and $87.2 million, respectively, of oil to Türkiye Petrol 
Rafinerileri A.Ş. (“TUPRAS”), a privately owned oil refinery in Turkey, which represented approximately 74.0%, 74.1% and 66.7% of 
our total revenues, respectively.
Share-based compensation 
We follow ASC 718, Compensation—Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which requires the measurement and recognition of 
compensation expense for all share-based payment awards, including restricted stock units, based on estimated grant date fair values. 
Restricted stock units are valued using the market price of our common shares on the date of grant. We record compensation expense, net 
of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period.
Income taxes 
We follow the asset and liability method prescribed by ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under this method of accounting for income 
taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial 
statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured 
using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered 
or settled. Under ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in enacted tax rates is recognized in earnings in the 
period that includes the enactment date.
In connection with our acquisition of Amity Oil International Pty Ltd (“Amity”) and Petrogas Petrol Gaz ve Petrokimya Ürünleri Inşaat 
Sanayi ve Ticaret A.Ş. (“Petrogas”) in August 2010, at December 31, 2013, we recognized a liability due to an uncertain tax
F-11
position and corresponding asset related to the transfer of Petrogas shares to Amity prior to the acquisition (see Note 11, “Income taxes”). 
As the statute of limitations has expired we have reversed this non-current asset and non-current liability, as of December 31, 2015.
As of December 31, 2015, we recorded a $10.1 million liability due to an uncertain tax position related to the unwinding of all of our 
crude oil hedge collar and three-way contracts, which is included in long-term accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
We do not believe there will be any material changes in our unrecognized tax positions over the next twelve months. Our policy is that we 
recognize interest and penalties accrued on any unrecognized tax positions as a component of income tax expense.
We are a Bermuda exempted company, and under current Bermuda law, we are not subject to tax on profits, income or dividends, nor is 
there any capital gains tax applicable to us in Bermuda.
Comprehensive income 
ASC 220, Comprehensive Income, establishes standards for reporting and displaying comprehensive income and its components (revenue, 
expenses, gains and losses) in a full set of general-purpose financial statements.
Business combinations 
We follow ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”), and ASC 810-10-65, Consolidation (“ASC 810-10-65”). ASC 805 requires 
most identifiable assets, liabilities, non-controlling interests, and goodwill acquired in a business combination to be recorded at “fair 
value.” The statement applies to all business combinations, including combinations among mutual entities and combinations by contract 
alone. Under ASC 805, all business combinations are accounted for by applying the acquisition method.  See Note 18, “Acquisitions”.
Per share information 
Basic per share amounts are calculated using the weighted average common shares outstanding during the year, excluding unvested 
restricted stock units. We use the treasury stock method to determine the dilutive effect of stock options and other dilutive instruments. 
Under the treasury stock method, only “in the money” dilutive instruments impact the diluted calculations in computing diluted earnings 
per share. Diluted calculations reflect the weighted average incremental common shares that would be issued upon exercise of dilutive 
options assuming the proceeds would be used to repurchase shares at average market prices for the period.
4. New accounting pronouncements 
In August 2014, the FASB issued ASU 2014-15, Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
(“ASU 2014-15”), an amendment to FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205, Presentation of Financial 
Statements.  This update provides guidance on management’s responsibility in evaluating whether there is a substantial doubt about an 
entity’s ability to continue as a going concern and to provide related footnote disclosures.  ASU 2014-15 is effective for annual periods 
ending after December 15, 2016, and for annual and interim periods thereafter.  Early adoption is permitted.  We have adopted ASU 2014-
15 for the year ended December 31, 2015.  See disclosure in Note 2, “Going concern”.
In April 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-03, Interest - Imputation of Interest (Subtopic 835-30): Simplifying the Presentation of Debt 
Issuance Costs ("ASU 2015-03"). ASU 2015-03 requires that debt issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability be presented in the 
balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of that debt liability, consistent with debt discounts. We currently recognize 
debt issuance costs as assets on our consolidated balance sheet. The recognition and measurement guidance for debt issuance costs are not 
affected by ASU 2015-03. ASU 2015-03 is effective for annual periods, and interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after 
December 15, 2015 and early adoption is permitted.  Currently, we do not expect the adoption of ASU 2015-03 to have a material impact 
on our consolidated financial statements or results of operations.
In July 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-11, Simplifying the Measurement of Inventory (“ASU 2015-11”), an amendment to ASC 
Subtopic 330-10.  The amendment states that entities should measure inventory at the lower of cost and net realizable value.  The 
amendment does not apply to inventory that is measured using last-in, first-out (LIFO) or the retail inventory method.  The amendment 
applies to all other inventory, which includes inventory that is measured using first-in, first-out (FIFO) or average cost.  ASU 2015-11 is 
effective for the fiscal years beginning after December 31, 2016, including interim periods within those fiscal years.  We are currently 
assessing the potential impact of ASU 2015-11 on our consolidated financial statements and results of operations.
F-12
In September 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-16, Business Combinations (Topic 805) Simplifying the Accounting for Measurement-
Period Adjustments (“ASU 2015-16”).  ASU 2015-16 requires that an acquirer recognize adjustments to provisional amounts that are 
identified during the measurement period in the reporting period in which the adjustment amounts are determined.  ASU 2015-16 is 
effective for annual periods, and interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2015.  The amendments in the 
update should be applied prospectively to adjustments to provisional amounts that occur after the effective date of ASU 2015-16 with 
earlier application permitted for financial statements that have not been issued.  As of December 31, 2015, we adopted ASU 2015-16 and 
have disclosed adjustments to our provisional amounts in Note 18, “Acquisitions”.
In November 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-17, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred Taxes (“ASU 
2015-17”).  ASU 2017-17 requires entities with a classified balance sheet to present all deferred tax assets and liabilities as 
noncurrent.  ASU 2015-17 is effective for annual periods and interim periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2016.  As of 
December 31, 2015, we have adopted ASU 2015-17 and have adjusted the amounts in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 
2015 and 2014.
We have reviewed other recently issued, but not yet adopted, accounting standards in order to determine their effects, if any, on our 
consolidated results of operations, financial position and cash flows. Based on that review, we believe that none of these pronouncements 
will have a significant effect on current or future earnings or operations.
5. Goodwill 
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of a business over the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities 
assumed. We have goodwill on acquisitions where we anticipated access to potential exploration and producing opportunities. All of our 
goodwill is attributable to our Turkey operating segment.  At December 31, 2015, we performed our annual assessment of goodwill and 
determined it was necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.  In accordance with GAAP, we performed step one of the 
goodwill impairment test and determined that the estimated fair value of our Turkey reporting unit was less than its carrying amount based 
on our reserves report dated December 31, 2015.  The decline in our Turkey reserves report values was primarily due to the decline in the 
Brent oil price during the three months ended December 31, 2015.  Therefore, we performed step two of the impairment test, which 
indicated that the entire balance of goodwill was impaired.  As a result, we recorded an impairment equal to the carrying amount of 
goodwill, or $5.5 million, at December 31, 2015.   Goodwill was as follows at December 31, 2015 and 2014:
Goodwill at January 1
Foreign exchange effect
Impairment
Goodwill at December 31
2015
$
$
$
(in thousands)
6,935
(1,404)
(5,531)
–
$
2014
7,535
(600)
–
6,935
6. Property and equipment 
Oil and natural gas properties 
The following table sets forth the capitalized costs under the successful efforts method for oil and natural gas properties:
Oil and natural gas properties, proved:
Total oil and natural gas properties, proved
Oil and natural gas properties, unproved:
Turkey
Bulgaria
Turkey
Bulgaria
Total oil and natural gas properties, unproved
Gross oil and natural gas properties
Accumulated depletion
Net oil and natural gas properties
2015
2014
(in thousands)
$
$
270,591
489
271,080
31,135
–
31,135
302,215
(139,002)
163,213
$
$
323,442
552
323,994
43,090
4,047
47,137
371,131
(132,971)
238,160
F-13
The decline in oil and natural gas properties during the year ended December 31, 2015 was primarily driven by the devaluation of the 
Turkish Lira (“TRY”) versus the U.S. Dollar.  For the year ended December 31, 2015, we have recorded foreign currency translation 
adjustments which reduced oil and natural gas properties and increased accumulated other comprehensive loss within shareholders’ equity 
on our consolidated balance sheet.
At December 31, 2015 and 2014, we excluded $0.7 million and $1.2 million of costs, respectively, from the depletion calculation for 
development wells in progress.
At December 31, 2015, the capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties included $20.0 million relating to acquisition costs of 
proved properties, which are being amortized by the unit-of-production method using total proved reserves, and $111.4 million relating to 
well costs, and additional development costs, which are being amortized by the unit-of-production method using proved developed 
reserves.
At December 31, 2014, the capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties included $29.0 million relating to acquisition costs of 
proved properties, which are being amortized by the unit-of-production method using total proved reserves, and $160.8 million relating to 
well costs, and additional development costs, which are being amortized by the unit-of-production method using proved developed 
reserves.
Impairments of proved properties and impairment of exploratory well costs
Proved oil and natural gas properties are reviewed for impairment when events and circumstances indicate the carrying value of such 
properties may not be recoverable. The factors used to determine fair value include (Level 3 inputs), but are not limited to, estimates of 
proved reserves, future commodity prices, the timing and amount of future production and capital expenditures and discount rates 
commensurate with the risk reflective of the lives remaining for the respective oil and natural gas properties.
Excluding the impairment of goodwill, during the year ended December 31, 2015, we recorded $16.0 million of impairment of proved 
properties and exploratory well costs which are primarily measured using Level 3 inputs. Of the $16.0 million of impairment of proved 
properties and exploratory well costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2015, $5.8 million primarily related to proved property 
impairments on our Goksu, Molla and Bakuk fields in Turkey where we wrote the properties down to their estimated fair value.  The 
impairment on our Goksu and Molla fields was due to the decline in the Brent oil price and reduction in the reserve volumes.
The remaining charges during the year ended December 31, 2015 were due to $3.7 million related to exploratory well impairment on our 
Deventci-R2 well in Bulgaria, $3.5 million related to impairment on our Pinar-1 well and $0.7 million related to the South Goksu-1 well, 
which is part of our joint venture in the Arpatepe field in Turkey.  Approximately $4.9 million of the amount impaired was cash spent 
during the period.
During the year ended December 31, 2014, we recorded $19.9 million in impairment on our proved and unproved properties.  Of the $19.9 
million, approximately $13.8 million relates to unproved exploratory well impairment on the following wells: $3.5 million related to 
impairment on the Catak-1 well, $2.8 million related to the Kazanci-5 well, and $7.5 million related to the Bahar-2 side track well.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, we recorded $27.3 million in impairment on our proved and unproved properties, primarily 
related to $16.0 million of exploratory well impairment, and the remaining amount on impairment of our Senova and Malkara licenses.
Capitalized costs greater than one year 
As of December 31, 2015, we had $1.3 million and $2.2 million of exploratory well costs capitalized for the Hayrabolu-10 and Pinar-1 
wells, respectively, in Turkey, which we spud in February 2013 and December 2014, respectively. The Hayrabolu-10 and Pinar-1 wells 
continue to be held for completion.
F-14
Equipment and other property 
The historical cost of equipment and other property, presented on a gross basis with accumulated depreciation, is summarized as follows:
Other equipment
Inventory
Gas gathering system and facilities
Vehicles
Leasehold improvements, office equipment and software
Net equipment and other property
Gross equipment and other property
Accumulated depreciation
2015
$
$
$
(in thousands)
2,378
21,338
4,798
400
7,794
36,708
(9,216)
27,492
$
2014
2,983
23,411
6,016
488
8,547
41,445
(8,673)
32,772
We have reclassified certain prior year costs of equipment and other property to conform to current period presentation.
We classify our materials and supply inventory, including steel tubing and casing, as a long-term asset because such materials will 
ultimately be classified as a long-term asset when the material is used in the drilling of a well.
At December 31, 2015, we excluded $21.3 million of inventory from depreciation, as the inventory had not been placed into service. At 
December 31, 2014, we excluded $23.4 million of inventory and $3.0 million of software from depreciation as the inventory had not been 
placed into service.
7. Commodity derivative instruments 
We have used collar and put derivative contracts to economically hedge against the variability in cash flows associated with the forecasted 
sale of a portion of our future oil production. We have not designated the derivative contracts as hedges for accounting purposes, and 
accordingly, we record the derivative contracts at fair value and recognize changes in fair value in earnings as they occur.
To the extent that a legal right of offset exists, we net the value of our derivative contracts with the same counterparty in our consolidated 
balance sheets. All of our oil derivative contracts are settled based upon Brent crude oil pricing. We recognize gains and losses related to 
these contracts on a fair value basis in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) under the caption “Gain (loss) on 
commodity derivative contracts.” Settlements of derivative contracts are included in operating activities on our consolidated statements of 
cash flows under the caption “Cash settlement on commodity derivative contracts.” We are required under our Senior Credit Facility to 
hedge between 30% and 75% of our anticipated production volumes in Turkey.
During the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, we recorded a net gain on commodity derivative contracts of $27.5 million, a 
net gain of $37.5 million and net loss of  $2.7 million, respectively.
On September 14, 2015, October 14, 2015 and November 17, 2015, we unwound all volumes of our crude oil hedge collars and three-way 
collars for the periods September 14, 2015 through March 31, 2019, October 14, 2015 through March 31, 2019 and December 1, 2015 
through March 31, 2019, respectively, and purchased puts with a $50.00 strike price in replacement of the unwound volumes.  The puts 
with a $50.00 strike price were purchased pursuant to the requirements of the Senior Credit Facility at a cost of $4.6 million.  The 
unwound hedges resulted in gross proceeds of $41.8 million, of which $37.2 million was used to repay indebtedness under the Senior 
Credit Facility.
F-15
At December 31, 2015, we had outstanding commodity derivative contracts with respect to our future crude oil production as set forth in 
the tables below:
Fair Value of Derivative Instruments as of December 31, 2015
Type
Put
Put
Put
Put
Total Estimated Fair Value of
   Asset
Period
January 1, 2016—
December 31, 2016
January 1, 2017—
December 31, 2017
January 1, 2018—
December 31, 2018
January 1, 2019—
March 31, 2019
Quantity
(Bbl/day)
808
610
494
443
$
$
$
$
Puts
Weighted
Average
Minimum
Price
(per Bbl)
Estimated Fair
Value of
Asset
(in thousands)
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00
$
3,235
1,798
1,292
280
6,605
At December 31, 2014, we had outstanding commodity derivative contracts with respect to our future crude oil production as set forth in 
the tables below:
Fair Value of Derivative Instruments as of December 31, 2014
Type
Collar
Period
January 1, 2015—
December 31, 2015
Weighted
Average
Minimum
Weighted
Average
Maximum Price
Price (per Bbl)
(per Bbl)
Quantity
(Bbl/day)
1,410
$
85.00
$
97.25
Estimated Fair
Value of Asset
(in thousands)
$
$
12,518
12,518
Type
Period
Three-way collar contract
Three-way collar contract
Three-way collar contract
Three-way collar contract
January 1, 2016—
December 31, 2016
January 1, 2017—
December 31, 2017
January 1, 2018—
December 31, 2018
January 1, 2019—
March 31, 2019
Total Estimated Fair Value of Asset
Quantity
(Bbl/day)
1,066
888
726
663
$
$
$
$
F-16
Collars
Weighted
Average
Minimum
Price
(per Bbl)
Weighted
Average
Maximum
Price
(per Bbl)
Additional Call
Weighted
Average
Maximum
Price
(per Bbl)
Estimated Fair
Value of
Asset
(in thousands)
85.00
85.00
85.00
85.00
$
$
$
$
97.25
97.25
97.25
97.25
$
$
$
$
114.25
$
114.25
114.25
114.25
$
7,609
5,748
4,659
1,053
19,069
31,587
Balance sheet presentation
The following table summarizes both: (i) the gross fair value of our commodity derivative instruments by the appropriate balance sheet 
classification even when the commodity derivative instruments are subject to netting arrangements and qualify for net presentation in our 
consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, and (ii) the net recorded fair value as reflected on our 
consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014.
As of December 31, 2015
Underlying Commodity
Location on Balance Sheet
Crude oil
Crude oil
Current assets
Long-term assets
Underlying Commodity
Location on Balance Sheet
Crude oil
Crude oil
Current assets
Long-term assets
$
$
Gross
Amount of
Recognized
Assets
$
3,235
3,370
Gross
Amount
Offset in the
Consolidated
Balance
Sheet
(in thousands)
Net Amount of
Assets
Presented in the
Consolidated
Balance Sheet
$
–
–
3,235
3,370
As of December 31, 2014
Gross
Amount of
Recognized
Assets
12,518
19,069
$
Gross
Amount
Offset in the
Consolidated
Balance
Sheet
(in thousands)
Net Amount of
Assets
Presented in the
Consolidated
Balance Sheet
$
–
–
12,518
19,069
8. Asset retirement obligations
As part of our development of oil and natural gas properties, we incur asset retirement obligations (“ARO”). Our ARO results from our 
responsibility to abandon and reclaim our net share of all working interest properties and facilities. At December 31, 2015, the net present 
value of our total ARO was estimated to be $9.2 million, with the undiscounted value being $15.1 million. Total ARO at December 31, 
2015 shown in the table below consists of amounts for future plugging and abandonment liabilities on our wellbores and facilities based 
on third-party estimates of such costs, adjusted for inflation at a rate of approximately 6.9% per annum for Turkey. These values are 
discounted to present value using our credit-adjusted risk-free rate of 5.6% per annum for Turkey for the year ended December 31, 2015. 
The following table summarizes the changes in our ARO for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014:
Asset retirement obligations at beginning of period
Change in estimates
Liabilities settled
Foreign exchange change effect
Additions
Accretion expense
Asset retirement obligations at end of period
Less: current portion
Long-term portion
2015
$
$
10,543
385
–
(2,137)
78
368
9,237
–
9,237
(in thousands)
2014
10,896
–
(373)
(899)
513
406
10,543
323
10,220
$
$
Our ARO is measured using primarily Level 3 inputs. The significant unobservable inputs to this fair value measurement include estimates 
of plugging costs, remediation costs, inflation rate and well life. The inputs are calculated based on historical data as well as current 
estimated costs.
F-17
9. Loans payable 
As of the dates indicated, our third-party debt consisted of the following:
Fixed and floating rate loans
Convertible Notes
Senior Credit Facility
Convertible Notes - related party
TBNG credit facility
ANBE Promissory Note
West Promissory Notes
Loans payable
Less: current portion
Long-term portion
$
$
December 31,
2015
December 31,
2014
(in thousands)
34,400
32,075
20,600
5,192
3,592
1,000
96,859
41,859
55,000
$
$
26,600
68,297
20,800
20,025
–
–
135,722
34,833
100,889
Senior Credit Facility
On May 6, 2014, DMLP, Ltd. (“DMLP”), TransAtlantic Exploration Mediterranean International Pty Ltd (“TEMI”), Talon Exploration, 
Ltd. (“Talon Exploration”), TransAtlantic Turkey, Ltd. (“TransAtlantic Turkey”) and Petrogas (collectively, and together with Amity, the 
“Borrowers”) entered into the Senior Credit Facility with BNP Paribas and IFC. Each of the Borrowers is our wholly owned subsidiary. 
The Senior Credit Facility is guaranteed by us and each of TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and TransAtlantic Worldwide, Ltd. 
(“TWL”) (each, a “Guarantor”).
The amount drawn under the Senior Credit Facility may not exceed the lesser of (i) $150.0 million, (ii) the borrowing base amount at such 
time, (iii) the aggregate commitments of all lenders at such time, and (iv) any amount borrowed from an individual lender to the extent it 
exceeds the aggregate amount of such lender’s individual commitment. As of December 31, 2015, the lenders had an aggregate 
commitment of $40.0 million, with individual commitments of $20.0 million each.  On the first day of each fiscal quarter commencing 
April 1, 2016, the lenders’ commitments are subject to reduction in an amount equal to 7.69% of the aggregate commitments in effect on 
April 1, 2016.
The borrowing base amount is re-determined semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st of each year.  The October 2015 redetermination 
resulted in a $15.5 million borrowing base deficiency under the Senior Credit Facility as of December 30, 2015.  The borrowing base was 
$16.6 million as of December 30, 2015. The borrowing base amount equals, for any calculation date, the lowest of: 
(cid:120) the debt value which results in the field life coverage ratio for such calculation date being 1.50 to 1.00; and 
(cid:120) the debt value which results in the loan life coverage ratio for such calculation date being 1.30 to 1.00.
The Senior Credit Facility matures on the earlier of (i) March 31, 2019, or (ii) the last date of the borrowing base calculation period that 
immediately precedes the date that the semi-annual banking case of BNP Paribas and the Borrowers determines that the aggregate amount 
of hydrocarbons to be produced from the borrowing base assets in Turkey are less than 25% of the amount of hydrocarbons to be produced 
from the borrowing base assets shown in the initial banking case prepared by BNP Paribas and the Borrowers. The Senior Credit Facility 
bears various letter of credit sub-limits, including among other things, sub-limits of up to (i) $10.0 million, (ii) the aggregate available 
unused and uncancelled portion of the lenders’ commitments or (iii) any amount borrowed from an individual lender to the extent it 
exceeds the aggregate amount of such lender’s individual commitment.
Loans under the Senior Credit Facility accrue interest at a rate of three-month LIBOR plus 5.00% per annum (5.61% at December 31, 
2015). The Borrowers are also required to pay (i) a commitment fee payable quarterly in arrears at a per annum rate equal to (a) 2.00% per 
annum of the unused and uncancelled portion of the aggregate commitments that is less than or equal to the maximum available amount 
under the Senior Credit Facility, and (b) 1.00% per annum of the unused and uncancelled portion of the aggregate commitments that 
exceed the maximum available amount under the Senior Credit Facility and is not available to be borrowed, (ii) on the date of issuance of 
any letter of credit, a fronting fee in an amount equal to 0.25% of the original maximum amount to be drawn under such letter of credit 
and (iii) a per annum letter of credit fee for each letter of credit issued equal to the face amount of such letter of credit multiplied by 
(a) 1.0% for any letter of credit that is cash collateralized or backed by a standby letter of credit issued by a financial institution acceptable 
to BNP Paribas or (b) 5.00% for all other letters of credit.
F-18
The Senior Credit Facility is secured by a pledge of (i) the local collection accounts and offshore collection accounts of each of the 
Borrowers, (ii) the receivables payable to each of the Borrowers, (iii) the shares of each Borrower and (iv) substantially all of the present 
and future assets of the Borrowers.
The Borrowers are required to comply with certain financial and non-financial covenants under the Senior Credit Facility, including 
maintaining the following financial ratios during the four most recently completed fiscal quarters:
(cid:120) ratio of combined current assets to combined current liabilities of not less than 1.10 to 1.00; 
(cid:120) ratio of EBITDAX (less non-discretionary capital expenditures) to aggregate amounts payable under the Senior Credit Facility of
not less than 1.50 to 1.00;
(cid:120) ratio of EBITDAX (less non-discretionary capital expenditures) to interest expense of not less than 4.00 to 1.00; and 
(cid:120) ratio of total debt to EBITDAX of less than 2.50 to 1.00.
The Senior Credit Facility defines EBITDAX as net income (excluding extraordinary items) plus, to the extent deducted in calculating 
such net income, (i) interest expense (excluding interest paid-in-kind, or non-cash interest expense and interest incurred on certain 
subordinated intercompany debt or interest on equity recapitalized into subordinated debt), (ii) income tax expense, (iii) depreciation, 
depletion and amortization expense, (iv) amortization of intangibles and organization costs, (v) any extraordinary, unusual or non-
recurring non-cash expenses or losses, (vi) any other non-cash charges (including dry hole expenses and seismic expenses, to the extent 
such expenses would be capitalized under the “full cost” accounting method), (vii) expenses incurred in connection with oil and gas 
exploration activities entered into in the ordinary course of business (including related drilling, completion, geological and geophysical 
costs), and (viii) transaction costs, expenses and fees incurred in connection with the negotiation, execution and delivery of the Senior 
Credit Facility and the related loan documents, minus, to the extent included in calculating net income, (a) any extraordinary, unusual or 
non-recurring income or gains (including, gains on the sales of assets outside of the ordinary course of business) and (b) any other non-
cash income or gains.
Pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Facility, until amounts under the Senior Credit Facility are repaid, each of the Borrowers shall 
not, and shall cause each of its subsidiaries not to, in each case subject to certain exceptions (i) incur indebtedness or create any liens, 
(ii) enter into any agreements that prohibit the ability of any Borrower or its subsidiaries to create any liens, (iii) enter into any merger, 
consolidation or amalgamation, liquidate or dissolve, (iv) dispose of any property or business, (v) pay any dividends, distributions or 
similar payments to shareholders, (vi) make certain types of investments, (vii) enter into any transactions with an affiliate, (viii) enter into 
a sale and leaseback arrangement, (ix) engage in any business or business activity, own any assets or assume any liabilities or obligations 
except as necessary in connection with, or reasonably related to, its business as an oil and natural gas exploration and production company 
or operate or carry on business in any jurisdiction outside of Turkey or its jurisdiction of formation, (x) change its organizational 
documents, (xi) permit its fiscal year to end on a day other than December 31st or change its method of determining fiscal quarters, or 
alter the accounting principles it uses, (xii) modify certain hydrocarbon licenses and agreements or material contracts, (xiii) enter into any 
hedge agreement for speculative purposes, (xiv) open or maintain new deposit, securities or commodity accounts, (xv) use the proceeds 
from any loan in the territories of any country that is not a member of the World Bank, (xvi) incur any expenditure that is not covered by 
the projections in the most recent corporate cashflow projection, (xvii) modify its social and environmental action plans as determined in 
conjunction with IFC, (xviii) enter into any transaction or engage in any activity prohibited by the United Nations Security Council, or 
(xix) engage in any corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, collusive or obstructive practice.
An event of default under the Senior Credit Facility includes, among other events, failure to pay principal or interest when due, breach of 
certain covenants and obligations, cross default to other indebtedness, bankruptcy or insolvency, failure to meet the required financial 
covenant ratios and the occurrence of a material adverse effect. In addition, the occurrence of a change of control is an event of default. A 
change of control is defined as the occurrence of any of the following: (i) our failure to own, of record and beneficially, all of the equity of 
the Borrowers or any Guarantor or to exercise, directly or indirectly, day-to-day management and operational control of any Borrower or 
Guarantor; (ii) the failure by the Borrowers to own or hold, directly or indirectly, all of the interests granted to Borrowers pursuant to 
certain hydrocarbon licenses designated in the Senior Credit Facility; or (iii) (a) Mr. Mitchell ceases for any reason to be the executive 
chairman of our board of directors at any time, (b) Mr. Mitchell and certain of his affiliates cease to own of record and beneficially at least 
35% of our common shares; or (c) any person or group, excluding Mr. Mitchell and certain of his affiliates, shall become, or obtain rights 
to become, the beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of more than 35% of our outstanding common shares entitled to vote for members 
of our board of directors on a fully-diluted basis; provided, that, if Mr. Mitchell ceases to be executive chairman of our board of directors 
by reason of his death or disability, such event shall not constitute an event of default unless we have not appointed a successor reasonably 
acceptable to the lenders within 60 days of the occurrence of such event.
F-19
Pursuant to the Senior Credit Facility, at least one of the Borrowers is required to maintain commodity derivative contracts with BNP 
Paribas that hedge between 30% and 75% of our anticipated oil production volumes in our oil fields in Turkey. As of December 31, 2015, 
TEMI had put contracts with BNP Paribas, which hedge the price of oil through March 2019.
At December 31, 2015, we had borrowings of $32.1 million under the Senior Credit Facility, a borrowing base deficiency of $15.5 
million, and we were not in compliance with the current ratio financial covenant in the Senior Credit Facility.  In December 2015, we were 
not in compliance with certain covenants under our Senior Credit Facility and the lenders declared an event of default and locked the 
Borrowers’ collection accounts. On December 30, 2015, we entered into a Waiver and Consent Agreement with the lenders whereby the 
lenders provided a conditional waiver of the defaults including a waiver of cross-default under the Term Loan Facility, and permitted the 
Borrowers to make certain transfers and withdrawals under the collection accounts. Such waiver included certain conditions, including the 
following:
The borrowing base deficiency must be repaid by March 31, 2016;
(i)
(ii) All monthly hedge settlement proceeds shall be used to pay down debt outstanding;
(iii) Net proceeds from certain asset sales shall be used to prepay loans outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility;
(iv) By June 30, 2016, the lenders shall be granted a security interest over all of the equity interests in Thrace Basin Natural Gas
(Turkiye) Corporation (“TBNG”) and all of the assets or property of TBNG; and
(v) On or before June 30, 2016, all holders of the 13% convertible notes due 2017 (“Convertible Notes”) shall either (a) convert
their debt interests under the Convertible Notes into equity interests, or (b) agree to extend the maturity of the Convertible 
Notes to April 1, 2019 or later on substantially identical terms.
In addition, we have negotiated a preliminary waiver of the existing defaults under the Senior Credit Facility and an extension of the 
borrowing base deficiency repayment obligation until at least September 30, 2016.  This preliminary waiver and extension is subject to the 
approval of the lenders’ respective credit committees.  The lenders have advised us that they will seek credit committee approval of the 
preliminary waiver and extension in early April 2016.  We cannot guarantee that this waiver and extension will be approved by our 
lenders.
At March 30, 2016, we had borrowings of $30.8 million under the Senior Credit Facility and a borrowing base deficiency of $14.2 
million.  We have classified all borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility as short-term debt as of December 31, 2015 due to the 
uncertainty regarding our ability to comply with the covenants in the Senior Credit Facility for the next twelve months.
Convertible Notes
As of December 31, 2015, we had $55.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes outstanding.  The Convertible Notes 
were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of February 20, 2015 (the “Indenture”), between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as 
trustee (the “Trustee”).  The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 13.0% per annum and mature on July 1, 2017.  The Convertible 
Notes are convertible at any time, at the election of a holder, into our common shares at a conversion price of $6.80 per share.
TBNG credit facility 
TBNG has a fully-drawn credit facility with a Turkish bank.  During the fourth quarter of 2015, the facility was amended and now bears 
interest at a rate of 7.0% per annum and the monthly principal installments were deferred until March 29, 2016.  The facility is due by 
June 29, 2016. The facility may be prepaid without penalty. The facility is secured by a lien on a Turkish real estate property owned by 
Gundem Turizm Yatirim ve Isletme A.S. (“Gundem”), which is 97.5% beneficially owned by Mr. Mitchell and his children. At December 
31, 2015, TBNG had a balance of $5.2 million under the credit facility and no availability.
West Promissory Notes
In August 2015, TransAtlantic USA entered into promissory notes (the “Promissory Notes”) with each of Mary West CRT 2 LLC and 
Gary West CRT 2 LLC, shareholders of the Company (collectively, the “Holders”), whereby TransAtlantic USA could borrow up to $1.5 
million under each Promissory Note to fund our share repurchase program. The Holders are managed by Randy Rochman, an observer of 
our board of directors.
On August 21, 2015, TransAtlantic USA borrowed $500,000 under each Promissory Note. Pursuant to the terms of the Promissory Notes, 
the Holders are granted a first priority lien and security interest in all of our common shares purchased under our share repurchase 
program. Loans under the Promissory Notes accrue interest at a rate of 9.00% per annum and mature on October 1, 2016.
F-20
The Promissory Notes are guaranteed by us, and no advances can be made under the notes after December 31, 2015. As of December 31, 
2015, we had borrowed $1.0 million under the Promissory Notes. The funds were used to purchase shares of our common stock pursuant 
to our share repurchase program.
ANBE Promissory Note
On December 30, 2015, TransAtlantic USA entered into a $5.0 million draw down convertible promissory note (the “Note”) with ANBE 
Holdings, L.P. (“ANBE”), an entity owned by the children of the Company’s chairman and chief executive officer, N. Malone Mitchell, 
3rd, and controlled by an entity managed by Mr. Mitchell and his wife. The Note bears interest at a rate of 13.0% per annum and matures 
on June 30, 2016.  On December 30, 2015, the Company borrowed $3.6 million under the Note (the “Initial Advance”). The Initial 
Advance will be used for general corporate purposes. The Company can request subsequent advances (each, a “Subsequent Advance”) 
under the Note prior to June 15, 2016. Each Subsequent Advance must be in a multiple of $500,000, or if the amount remaining for 
advance under the Note is less than $500,000, such lesser amount.
Advances under the Note may be converted, at the election of ANBE, any time after the NYSE MKT approves the Company’s application 
to list the additional common shares issuable pursuant to the conversion feature of the Note and prior to the maturity of the Note.  The 
conversion price per common share for each advance is equal to 105% of the closing price of the Company’s common shares on the 
NYSE MKT on the trading date immediately prior to such advance.  The conversion price of the Initial Advance is $1.3755 per share.
The Note is a senior unsecured obligations of the Company and is structurally subordinated to all indebtedness of the Company’s 
subsidiaries.  Each of the following is an “Event of Default” under the Note:
a)
b)
c)
d)
the Company fails to pay when due any principal of, or interest upon, the Note;
the Note ceases to be a legal, valid, binding agreement enforceable against any party executing the same in accordance with 
the respective terms thereof or is in any way terminated declared ineffective or inoperative or in any way whatsoever ceases 
to give or provide the respective rights, interests, remedies, powers or privileges intended to be created thereby;
the Company (i) applies for or consents to the appointment of a receiver, trustee, inventor, custodian or liquidator of 
Company or of all or a substantial part of its  assets, as applicable, (ii) is adjudicated as bankrupt or insolvent or files a 
voluntary petition for bankruptcy or admits in writing that it is unable to pay its debts as they become due, (iii) makes a 
general assignment for the benefit of creditors, (iv) files a petition or answer seeking reorganization or an arrangement with 
creditors or to take advantage of any bankruptcy or insolvency laws, or (v) files an answer admitting the material allegations 
of, or consents to, or defaults in answering, a petition filed against it in any bankruptcy, reorganization or insolvency 
proceeding, or takes corporate action for the purpose of effecting any of the foregoing; or
an order, judgment or decree is entered by any court of competent jurisdiction or other competent authority approving a 
petition seeking reorganization of the Company or appointing a receiver, trustee, inventor or liquidator of any such person, or 
of all or substantially all of its assets, and such order, judgment or decree continues unstayed and in effect for a period of sixty 
(60) days.
Unsecured lines of credit
Our wholly-owned subsidiaries operating in Turkey are party to unsecured, non-interest bearing lines of credit with a Turkish bank.  At 
December 31, 2015, we had no outstanding borrowings under these lines of credit.
Loan financing costs
We capitalize certain costs in connection with obtaining our borrowings, such as lender’s fees and related attorney’s fees.  These costs are 
amortized on a straight line basis, which approximates the effective interest method over the term of the loan as a component of interest 
expense. Loan financing costs, which are included in other assets, totaled approximately $1.6 million and $2.7 million as of December 31, 
2015 and 2014, respectively.  Amortization of loan financing costs totaled approximately $1.6 million, $1.0 million and $0.5 million 
during 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
10. Shareholders’ equity 
November 2014 share issuance
In November 2014, we issued 3,218,641 common shares at a deemed price of $7.41 per common share for the acquisition of Stream (see 
Note 18, “Acquisitions”).
F-21
July 2013 share issuance 
In July 2013, we issued 351,074 common shares at a deemed price of $7.12 per common share to Direct Petroleum Inc. (“Direct”) (see 
Note 15, “Contingencies”).
Restricted stock units 
Under our 2009 Long-Term Incentive Plan (the “Incentive Plan”), we award restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and other share-based 
compensation to certain of our directors, officers, employees and consultants. Each RSU is equal in value to one of our common shares on 
the grant date. Upon vesting, an award recipient is entitled to a number of common shares equal to the number of vested RSUs. The RSU 
awards can only be settled in common shares. As a result, RSUs are classified as equity. At the grant date, we make an estimate of the 
forfeitures expected to occur during the vesting period and record compensation cost, net of the estimated forfeitures, over the requisite 
service period. The current forfeiture rate is estimated to be 12.5%.
Under the Incentive Plan, RSUs vest over specified periods of time ranging from immediately to four years. RSUs are deemed full value 
awards and their value is equal to the market price of our common shares on the grant date. ASC 718 requires that the Incentive Plan be 
approved in order to establish a grant date. Under ASC 718, the approval date for the Incentive Plan was February 9, 2009, the date our 
board of directors approved the Incentive Plan.
Share-based compensation of approximately $1.1 million and $1.4 million with respect to awards of RSUs was recorded for the years 
ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. As of December 31, 2015, we had approximately $1.1 million of unrecognized 
compensation expense related to unvested RSUs, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.5 years.  The 
following table sets forth RSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2015:
Unvested RSUs outstanding at December 31, 2014
Granted
Forfeited
Vested
Unvested RSUs outstanding at December 31, 2015
Number of RSUs
(in thousands)
223
586
(48)
(332)
429
$
$
Weighted Average 
Grant Date Fair 
Value Per RSU
8.21
5.06
6.26
6.31
8.21
Stock option plan 
Our Amended and Restated Stock Option Plan (2006) (the “Option Plan”) terminated on June 16, 2009. All outstanding awards issued 
under the Option Plan remained in full force and effect. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014, there were no options outstanding under the 
Option Plan. All options previously outstanding under the Option Plan had a five-year term.
The fair value of stock options was determined using the Black-Scholes Model and was recognized over the service period of the stock 
option. All stock options are fully vested; therefore, no share-based compensation expense for stock option awards was recorded for the 
years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013. We did not grant any stock options during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 
2013.
Details of stock option activity for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are presented below.
Outstanding at beginning of year
Granted
Expired
Exercised
Outstanding at end of year
Exercisable at end of year
Number of 
Options
(in
thousands)
2015
– $
–
–
–
– $
– $
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price Per
share
F-22
–
–
–
–
–
–
Number of 
Options
(in
thousands)
2014
– $
–
–
–
– $
– $
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price Per
share
–
–
–
–
–
–
2013
Number of 
Options
(in
thousands)
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price Per
share
16 $
–
(16)
–
– $
– $
12.30
–
12.30
–
–
–
Earnings per share 
We account for earnings per share in accordance with ASC Subtopic 260-10, Earnings Per Share (“ASC 260-10”). ASC 260-10 requires 
companies to present two calculations of earnings per share: basic and diluted. Basic earnings per common share for the years ended 
December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 equals net income divided by the weighted average shares outstanding during the periods. Weighted 
average shares outstanding are equal to the weighted average of all shares outstanding for the period, excluding RSUs. Diluted earnings 
per common share for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are computed in the same manner as basic earnings per 
common share after assuming the issuance of common shares for all potentially dilutive common share equivalents, which includes stock 
options, RSUs and warrants, whether exercisable or not. The computation of diluted earnings per common share excluded 8.9 million and 
0.8 million antidilutive common share equivalents from the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2013, respectively.  There were no 
antidilutive common share equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2014.
The following table presents the basic and diluted earnings per common share computations:
(in thousands, except per share amounts)
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Net loss from discontinued operations
Basic net (loss) income per common share:
Shares:
Weighted average common shares outstanding
Basic net (loss) income per common share:
Continuing operations
Discontinued operations
Diluted net (loss) income per common share:
Shares:
Weighted average shares outstanding
Dilutive effect of:
Restricted share units
Convertible notes
Weighted average common and common equivalent shares
   outstanding
Diluted net (loss) income per common share:
Continuing operations
Discontinued operations
2015
(26,665) $
(80,873) $
2014
29,214
$
(138) $
2013
(13,271)
(442)
40,841
37,829
37,069
(0.65) $
(1.98) $
0.77
–
$
$
(0.36)
(0.01)
40,841
37,829
37,069
–
–
152
50
–
–
40,841
38,031
37,069
(0.65) $
(1.98) $
0.77
–
$
$
(0.36)
(0.01)
$
$
$
$
$
$
Warrants
On December 31, 2014, the Company issued 134,169 common share purchase warrants (“Warrants”) to Mr. Mitchell and 23,333 common 
share purchase warrants to each of Mr. Mitchell’s children pursuant to warrant agreements. These Warrants were issued to Mr. Mitchell 
and his children as shareholders of the entity Gundem, which agreed to pledge its primary asset, Turkish real estate property, in exchange 
for an extension of the maturity date of a credit agreement between the Company and a Turkish bank. As consideration for the pledge of 
Turkish real estate property, the independent members of the Company’s board of directors approved the issuance of the Warrants to be 
allocated in accordance with each shareholder’s ownership percentage of Gundem. Pursuant to the warrant agreements, the Warrants are 
immediately exercisable, expire 18 months from the date of the release of the pledge on Turkish real estate property, and entitle the holder 
to purchase one common share for each Warrant at an exercise price of $5.99 per share.
On each of April 24, 2015 and August 13, 2015, we issued 233,333 Warrants to Mr. Mitchell and certain other related parties as 
shareholders of Gundem, as consideration for the pledge of Turkish real estate property in exchange for an extension of the maturity of a 
credit agreement between TBNG and a Turkish bank (See Note 9, “Loans payable”).  As consideration for the pledge of the Turkish real 
estate property, the independent members of the Company’s board of directors approved the issuance of the Warrants to be allocated in 
accordance with each shareholder’s ownership percentage of Gundem.  The Warrants were issued pursuant to a warrant agreement, 
whereby the Warrants are immediately exercisable, expire 18 months from the date of the release of the pledge on the Turkish real estate 
property, and entitle the holder to purchase one common share for each Warrant.  The Warrants were issued in April 2015 and August 
2015 at an exercise price of $5.65 and $2.99 per share, respectively.  For the year ended December 31, 2015, we incurred $0.5 million of 
compensation expense for these Warrants.  The fair value of the Warrants was determined using the Black-Scholes Model.
F-23
11. Income taxes 
The income tax provision differs from the amount that would be obtained by applying the Bermuda statutory income tax rate of 0% for 
2015, 2014 and 2013 to income (loss) from continuing operations for the year as follows:
Statutory rate
2015
2014
(in thousands except rates)
0.00%
0.00%
(Loss) income from continuing operations before income taxes
Increase (decrease) resulting from:
Foreign tax rate differentials
Uncertain tax position
Unremitted earnings
Derivative contracts
Change in valuation allowance
Expiration of non-capital tax loss carryovers
Other
Total
$
$
$
(4,436) $
42,873
1,676
10,066
11,561
(5,038)
3,232
1,740
(1,008)
22,229
$
$
9,262
1,260
–
–
228
1,841
1,068
13,659
$
$
$
The components of the net deferred income tax liability at December 31, 2015 and 2014 were as follows:
2013
0.00%
(12,164)
.
(1,443)
–
–
–
982
1,367
201
1,107
Deferred tax assets
Property and equipment
Timing of accruals
Non-capital loss carryovers
Valuation allowance
Total deferred tax assets
Deferred tax liabilities
Property and equipment
Unremitted earnings
Unrealized gains on derivative contracts
Timing of accruals
Total deferred tax liabilities
Net deferred tax liabilities
Components of net deferred tax liabilities
Non-current assets
Non-current liabilities
Net deferred tax liabilities
2015
2014
(in thousands)
$
3,749
344
24,098
(27,870)
321
(15,756)
(11,561)
–
(364)
(27,681)
(27,360) $
$
–
(27,360)
(27,360) $
4,383
692
28,155
(27,391)
5,839
(23,124)
–
(6,318)
–
(29,442)
(23,603)
1,343
(24,946)
(23,603)
$
$
$
$
We have accumulated losses or resource-related deductions available for income tax purposes in Turkey, Romania, Bulgaria and the 
United States. As of December 31, 2015, we had non-capital tax losses in Turkey of approximately $96.9 million TRY (approximately 
$33.3 million), which will begin to expire in 2016; non-capital tax losses in Romania of approximately 7.9 million Romanian New Leu 
(approximately $1.9 million), which will begin to expire in 2018; non-capital losses in Bulgaria of approximately 12.7 million Bulgarian 
Lev (approximately $7.2 million), which will begin to expire in 2016; and non-capital tax losses in the United States of approximately 
$46.9 million, which will begin expiring in 2018.  As of December 31, 2015 and 2014, we reflected a valuation allowance of $27.9 million 
and $27.4 million, respectively, as a reduction of our net operating losses and deferred tax assets.
Effective October 1, 2009, we continued to the jurisdiction of Bermuda. We have determined that no taxes were payable upon the 
continuance. However, our tax filing positions are still subject to review by taxation authorities who may successfully challenge our 
interpretation of the applicable tax legislation and regulations, with the result that additional taxes could be payable by us.
We file income tax returns in the United States, Turkey, Romania, Bulgaria, Morocco and Cyprus, with Turkey being the only jurisdiction 
with significant amounts of taxes due. Income tax returns filed in Turkey for years before 2011 are no longer subject to
F-24
examination. The Turkish Ministry of Finance is currently conducting tax audits on two of our Turkish subsidiaries, Amity for the year 
ended December 31, 2011, and Talon Exploration for the year ended December 31, 2014.
During the year ended December 2015, the Turkish Ministry of Finance completed their audits of Amity, TEMI, and DMLP for the year 
ended December 31, 2010, and TBNG, for the year ended December 31, 2012.
In connection with our acquisition of Amity and Petrogas in August 2010, at December 31, 2013, we recognized a liability due to an 
uncertain tax position and corresponding asset related to the transfer of Petrogas shares to Amity prior to the acquisition. As the statute of 
limitations has expired, we have reversed this non-current asset and non-current liability of $6.1 million, including interest and penalties, 
as of December 31, 2015.
As of December 31, 2015, we recorded a $10.1 million liability due to an uncertain tax position related to the unwinding of all our crude 
oil hedge collar and three-way contracts, which is included in long-term accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
As of December 31, 2015, there were no material uncertain tax positions for which the total amounts of unrecognized tax benefits will 
significantly increase or decrease within the next 12 months.
Unremitted Earnings
Our foreign subsidiaries generate earnings that are not subject to Turkish dividend withholding taxes so long as they are permanently 
reinvested in our operations in Turkey. Pursuant to ASC Topic No. 740-30 (formerly APB 23), undistributed earnings of foreign 
subsidiaries that are no longer permanently reinvested would become subject to Turkish dividend withholding taxes. Prior to fiscal year 
2015, we asserted that the undistributed earnings of our foreign Turkish subsidiaries were permanently reinvested.
Primarily due to the increase in our U.S. debt service obligations resulting from the issuance of the Convertible Notes in the aggregate 
principal amount of $55.0 million in 2015 (see Note 9, “Loans payable”), management concluded that the ability to access certain amounts 
of foreign earnings would provide greater flexibility to meet corporate cash flow needs without constraining foreign objectives. 
Accordingly, in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015, we withdrew the permanent reinvestment assertion on $77.1 million of earnings 
generated by certain of our Turkish foreign subsidiaries through fiscal year 2015. We provided for Turkish dividend withholding taxes on 
the $77.1 million of undistributed foreign Turkish earnings, resulting in the recognition of a deferred tax liability of approximately $11.6 
million.
There is no certainty as to the timing of when such Turkish foreign earnings will be distributed to TWL in whole or in part.
F-25
12. Segment information 
In accordance with ASC 280, Segment Reporting (“ASC 280”), we have three reportable geographic segments: Turkey, Bulgaria and 
Albania (presented as assets held for sale). Summarized financial information from continuing operations concerning our geographic 
segments is shown in the following tables:
Corporate
Turkey
Bulgaria
(in thousands)
Total
(Loss) income from continuing operations before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net loss from continuing operations
Total assets at December 31, 2015
Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2015
For the year ended December 31, 2014
(20,177) $
14,689
163
$ 232,648
$
22,262
(Loss) income from continuing operations before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Total assets at December 31, 2014
Goodwill at December 31, 2014
Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2014
For the year ended December 31, 2013
Total revenues
Production
Exploration, abandonment, and impairment
Cost of purchased gas
(14,410) $
51,919
–
545
–
5
–
–
$ 130,701
18,384
27,116
2,247
F-26
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Total revenues
Production
Exploration, abandonment, and impairment
Cost of purchased gas
Seismic and other exploration
General and administrative
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligations
Total costs and expenses
Operating (loss) income
Interest and other expense
Interest income
Gain on commodity derivative contracts
Foreign exchange loss
Total revenues
Production
Exploration, abandonment, and impairment
Cost of purchased gas
Seismic and other exploration
Revaluation of contingent consideration
General and administrative
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligations
Total costs and expenses
Operating (loss) income
Interest and other expense
Interest income
Gain on commodity derivative contracts
Foreign exchange loss
–
–
–
–
55
12,729
306
–
13,090
(13,090)
(7,383)
354
–
(58)
(20,177)
–
–
–
–
–
178
–
14,418
124
–
14,720
(14,720)
(36)
350
–
(4)
(14,410)
–
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
85,064
85,064
12,873
12,804
21,544
17,778
2,082
2,082
370
264
24,138
11,132
37,707
37,401
368
350
99,082
81,811
(14,018)
3,253
(13,077)
(5,694)
855
500
27,457
27,457
(5,653)
(5,589)
(4,436)
19,927
(22,229)
(22,229)
(2,302) $ (4,186) $ (26,665)
–
69
3,766
–
51
277
–
18
4,181
(4,181)
–
1
–
(6)
(4,186)
–
$ 138,807
18,059
19,820
2,055
4,106
–
14,984
48,452
387
107,863
30,944
(6,007)
770
37,454
(6,497)
56,664
(13,659)
43,005
$ 363,162
$
6,935
$ 109,563
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
601
41
$ 247,938 (1)
$
22,466
23
134
44
–
1
(2,500)
1,669
18
19
(615)
638
(1)
4
–
(22)
619
–
619
4,675
–
1,393
$ 138,830
18,193
19,864
2,055
4,285
(2,500)
31,071
48,594
406
121,968
16,862
(6,044)
1,124
37,454
(6,523)
42,873
(13,659)
29,214
$
$ 419,756 (1)
$
6,935
$ 111,501
126
213
217
–
$ 130,827
18,602
27,333
2,247
Corporate
100
–
12,685
69
–
12,859
(12,859)
–
284
–
(9)
Turkey
Bulgaria
(in thousands)
13,909
–
16,068
41,196
475
119,395
11,306
(3,929)
1,056
(2,698)
(9,664)
–
(5,000)
267
57
33
(4,213)
4,339
–
–
–
10
(12,584)
–
(3,929)
(1,107)
(5,036) $
4,349
–
4,349
$ 10,231
–
$
$
2,742
Total
14,009
(5,000)
29,020
41,322
508
128,041
2,786
(3,929)
1,340
(2,698)
(9,663)
(12,164)
(1,107)
$ (13,271) (1)
$ 346,050
7,535
$
$
99,951
Seismic and other exploration
Revaluation of contingent consideration
General and administrative
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligations
Total costs and expenses
Operating (loss) income
Interest and other expense
Interest income
Loss on commodity derivative contracts
Foreign exchange (loss) gain
(Loss) income loss from continuing operations before income
   taxes
Income tax expense
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Total assets at December 31, 2013
Goodwill at December 31, 2013
Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2013
$
$
$
$
(12,584) $
14,070
–
1,003
$ 321,749
$
7,535
96,206
$
(1) Excludes assets from our discontinued Albanian and Moroccan operations of $51.5 million, $126.6 million, and $0.5 million at
December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
13. Financial instruments 
Interest rate risk 
We are exposed to interest rate risk as a result of our variable rate short-term cash holdings and borrowings under the Senior Credit 
Facility and Term Loan Facility.
Foreign currency risk 
We have underlying foreign currency exchange rate exposure. Our currency exposures relate to transactions denominated in the Bulgarian 
Lev, European Union Euro, Albanian Lek, and TRY. We are also subject to foreign currency exposures resulting from translating the 
functional currency of our subsidiary financial statements into the U.S. Dollar reporting currency. We have not used foreign currency 
forward contracts to manage exchange rate fluctuations. At December 31, 2015, we had 32.8 million TRY (approximately $11.3 million) 
in cash and cash equivalents, which exposes us to exchange rate risk based on fluctuations in the value of the TRY.
Commodity price risk 
We are exposed to fluctuations in commodity prices for oil and natural gas. Commodity prices are affected by many factors, including but 
not limited to, supply and demand. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, we were a party to commodity derivative contracts.
Concentration of credit risk 
The majority of our receivables are within the oil and natural gas industry, primarily from our industry partners and from government 
agencies. Included in receivables are amounts due from Turkiye Petrolleri Anonim Ortakligi (“TPAO”), the national oil company of 
Turkey, Zorlu Dogal Gaz Ithalat Ihracat ve Toptan Ticaret A.S. (“Zorlu”), a privately owned natural gas distributor in Turkey, and 
TUPRAS, which purchase the majority of our oil and natural gas production. The receivables are not collateralized. To date, we have 
experienced minimal bad debts and have no allowance for doubtful accounts. The majority of our cash and cash equivalents are held by 
three financial institutions in the United States and Turkey.
F-27
Fair value measurements 
Cash and cash equivalents, receivables, notes receivable, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, the Note, the Promissory Notes and the 
TBNG credit facility were each estimated to have a fair value approximating the carrying amount at December 31, 2015 and 2014 due to 
the short maturity of those instruments.
The financial assets and liabilities measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2015 and 2014 consisted of our commodity derivative 
contracts. Fair values for options are based on counterparty market prices. The counterparties use market standard valuation 
methodologies incorporating market inputs for volatility and risk free interest rates in arriving at a fair value for each option contract. 
Prices are verified by us using analytical tools. There are no performance obligations related to the put options purchased to hedge our oil 
production.
We utilize independent third-party pricing services to determine the fair values of derivative contracts. The independent third party 
determines fair values using models based on a range of observable market inputs, including pricing models, quoted market prices of 
publicly traded securities with similar duration and yield, time value, yield curve, prepayment spreads, default rates and discounted cash 
flow and the values for these contracts are disclosed in Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Generally, we obtain a single price or quote per 
instrument from independent third parties to assist in establishing the fair value of these contracts. We review prices received from service 
providers for unusual fluctuations to ensure that the prices represent a reasonable estimate of fair value.
At December 31, 2015, the fair values of our Convertible Notes and our Senior Credit Facility were estimated using a discounted cash 
flow analysis based on unobservable Level 3 inputs, including our own credit risk associated with the loans payable.  At December 31, 
2014, the carrying value approximated the fair value for the Convertible Notes and the Senior Credit Facility.  The following table 
summarizes the valuation of our financial assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2015:
Fair Value Measurement Classification
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets or
Liabilities
(Level 1)
Measured on a recurring basis
Assets:
Commodity derivative contracts
Disclosed but not carried at fair value
Liabilities:
Senior Credit Facility
Convertible notes
Total
$
$
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
(in thousands)
Significant
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Total
– $
–
–
– $
6,605 $
– $
6,605
–
–
6,605 $
(30,050)
(44,489)
(74,539) $
(30,050)
(44,489)
(67,934)
The following table summarizes the valuation of our financial assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2014:
Fair Value Measurement Classification
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets or
Liabilities
(Level 1)
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Total
Measured on a recurring basis
Assets:
Commodity derivative contracts
Disclosed but not carried at fair value
Liabilities:
Senior Credit Facility
Convertible notes
Total
$
$
(in thousands)
31,587 $
– $
31,587
(68,297)
(47,400)
(84,110) $
–
–
– $
(68,297)
(47,400)
(84,110)
– $
–
–
– $
F-28
14. Commitments 
Our aggregate annual commitments, other than our loans payable, as of December 31, 2015 were as follows:
Payments Due By Year
Interest
Leases
Total
Total
2016
2017
$
$
11,934
5,595
17,529
$ 8,359
823
$ 9,182
$ 3,575
518
$ 4,093
2018
(in thousands)
–
$
446
446
$
2019
2020
Thereafter
$
$
–
–
–
$
$
–
–
–
$
$
–
3,808
3,808
Normal operations purchase arrangements are excluded from the table as they are discretionary or being performed under contracts which 
are cancelable immediately or with a 30-day notice period.
We lease office space in Dallas, Texas, Bulgaria, and Turkey. We also lease apartments in Turkey, as well as operations yards in Turkey. 
Rent expense for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $1.8 million, $2.2 million and $3.3 million, respectively.
15. Contingencies
Contingencies relating to production leases and exploration permits 
Selmo 
We are involved in litigation with persons who claim ownership of a portion of the surface at the Selmo oil field in Turkey. These cases 
are being vigorously defended by TEMI and Turkish governmental authorities. We do not have enough information to estimate the 
potential additional operating costs we would incur in the event the purported surface owners’ claims are ultimately successful. Any 
adjustment arising out of the claims will be recorded when it becomes probable and measurable.
Morocco 
During 2012, we were notified that the Moroccan government may seek to recover approximately $5.5 million in contractual obligations 
under our Tselfat exploration permit work program. In February 2013, the Moroccan government drew down our $1.0 million bank 
guarantee that was put in place to ensure our performance of the Tselfat exploration permit work program. Although we believe that the 
bank guarantee satisfies our contractual obligations, we recorded $5.0 million in accrued liabilities relating to our Tselfat exploration 
permit during 2012 for this contingency.
Aglen 
During 2012, we were notified that the Bulgarian government may seek to recover approximately $2.0 million in contractual obligations 
under our Aglen exploration permit work program. Due to the Bulgarian government’s January 2012 ban on fracture stimulation and 
related activities, a force majeure event under the terms of the exploration permit was recognized by the government. Although we 
invoked force majeure, we recorded $2.0 million in general and administrative expense relating to our Aglen exploration permit during 
2012 for this contractual obligation.
Direct Petroleum 
In July 2013, we entered into a second amendment (the “Amendment”) to the purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Direct 
Petroleum (“Direct”). The Amendment set forth a new obligation to drill and test the Deventci-R2 well by May 1, 2014. We completed the 
drilling and testing requirements pursuant to the Amendment during April 2014, which resulted in the reversal of a $2.5 million contingent 
liability recorded in 2011. The reversal is recognized in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) under the caption 
“Revaluation of contingent consideration” for the year ended December 31, 2014.
In addition, the Amendment provides that we will issue $7.5 million in common shares if the Deventci-R2 well is a commercial success 
(as defined in the Purchase Agreement) on or prior to May 1, 2016. We will record any provision for this contingent consideration when it 
is estimable and probable. As of December 31, 2015, we had not recorded a contingent liability for this contingent consideration.
Additionally, the Amendment provides that if the Bulgarian government issues a production concession over the Stefenetz concession area 
(the “Stefenetz Concession Area”), Direct will be entitled to a payment of $10.0 million in common shares, or a pro rata amount
F-29
if the production concession is less than 200,000 acres. We do not have enough information to estimate the potential contingent liability 
we would incur in the event the Bulgarian government issues a production concession over the Stefenetz Concession Area. Any provision 
for this contingent consideration will be recorded when it becomes probable and estimable.
In December 2014, Direct Petroleum LLC (“Direct”) filed suit against the Company alleging that it was due liquidated damages of $5.0 
million worth of common shares of the Company pursuant to the second amendment of the purchase agreement between the Company and 
Direct. On March 15, 2016, the Company entered into a settlement agreement pursuant to which we agreed to issue 225,000 common 
shares of the Company to Direct in exchange for a mutual release of all current and future claims against the other party in connection 
with the purchase agreement.
Bulgaria
In October 2015, the Bulgarian Ministry of Energy and Economy filed a suit against our subsidiary, Direct Petroleum Bulgaria EOOD 
(“Direct Bulgaria”), claiming a $200,000 penalty for Direct Bulgaria’s alleged failure to fulfill the work program associated with the 
Aglen exploration permit. Direct Bulgaria received a force majeure recognition in 2012 from the Bulgarian Ministry of Energy and 
Economy, and the force majeure event has not been rectified. We believe that Direct Bulgaria is not under any obligation to fulfill the 
work program until the force majeure event is rectified, and continue to vigorously defend this claim.
16. Related party transactions 
Equity transactions 
On December 31, 2014, the Company issued 134,169 Warrants to Mr. Mitchell and 23,333 Warrants to each of Mr. Mitchell’s children 
pursuant to warrant agreements. These Warrants were issued to Mr. Mitchell and his children as shareholders of the entity Gundem, which 
agreed to pledge its primary asset, Turkish real estate property, in exchange for an extension of the maturity date of a credit agreement 
between the Company and a Turkish bank. As consideration for the pledge of Turkish real estate property, the independent members of the 
Company’s board of directors approved the issuance of the Warrants to be allocated in accordance with each shareholder’s ownership 
percentage of Gundem. Pursuant to the warrant agreements, the Warrants are immediately exercisable, expire 18 months from the date of 
the release of the pledge on Turkish real estate property, and entitle the holder to purchase one common share for each Warrant at an 
exercise price of $5.99 per share.
On each of April 24, 2015 and August 13, 2015, we issued 233,333 Warrants to Mr. Mitchell and certain other related parties as 
shareholders of Gundem, as consideration for the pledge of Turkish real estate property in exchange for an extension of the maturity of a 
credit agreement between TBNG and a Turkish bank (See Note 9, “Loans payable”).  As consideration for the pledge of the Turkish real 
estate property, the independent members of the Company’s board of directors approved the issuance of the Warrants to be allocated in 
accordance with each shareholder’s ownership percentage of Gundem.  The Warrants were issued pursuant to a warrant agreement, 
whereby the Warrants are immediately exercisable, expire 18 months from the date of the release of the pledge on the Turkish real estate 
property, and entitle the holder to purchase one common share for each Warrant.  The Warrants issued in April 2015 and August 2015 an 
exercise price of $5.65 and $2.99 per share, respectively.  For the year ended December 31, 2015, we incurred $0.5 million of 
compensation expense for these Warrants.  The fair value of the Warrants was determined using the Black-Scholes Model.
Sale of oilfield services business
On June 13, 2012, we closed the sale of our oilfield services business, which was substantially comprised of our wholly owned 
subsidiaries Viking International Limited (“Viking International”) and Viking Geophysical Services, Ltd. (“Viking Geophysical”), to a 
joint venture owned by Dalea and funds advised by Abraaj Investment Management Limited for an aggregate purchase price of $168.5 
million, consisting of approximately $157.0 million in cash and a $11.5 million promissory note from Dalea (the “Dalea Note”). The 
Dalea Note was payable five years from the date of issuance or earlier upon the occurrence of certain specified events. The promissory 
note bears interest at a rate of 3.0% per annum and is guaranteed by Mr. Mitchell.  See Note 19, “Subsequent events” for additional 
information.
Service transactions
Effective May 1, 2008, we entered into a service agreement, as amended (the “Service Agreement”), with Longfellow Energy, LP 
(“Longfellow”), Viking Drilling LLC (“Viking Drilling”), MedOil Supply, LLC and Riata Management, LLC (“Riata Management”). 
Mr. Mitchell and his wife own 100% of Riata Management. In addition, Mr. Mitchell, his wife and his children indirectly own 100% of 
Longfellow. Riata Management owns 100% of MedOil Supply, LLC. Dalea owns 85% of Viking Drilling. Under the terms of the
F-30
Service Agreement, we pay, or are paid, for the actual cost of the services rendered plus the actual cost of reasonable expenses on a 
monthly basis.
Effective January 1, 2011, our wholly owned subsidiary, TEMI, entered into an accommodation agreement under which it leased rooms, 
flats and office space at a facility owned by Gundem. Under the accommodation agreement, TEMI leases six rooms and pays the TRY 
equivalent of $6,000 per month.
On August 23, 2011, the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. (“TransAtlantic USA”), entered into 
an office lease with Longfellow to lease approximately 5,300 square feet of corporate office space in Addison, Texas. The initial lease 
term under the lease commenced on July 1, 2013, the date that TransAtlantic USA subleased a portion of its previous office space in 
Dallas, Texas (the “Commencement Date”). The lease expires five years after the Commencement Date, unless earlier terminated in 
accordance with the lease. During the initial lease term, TransAtlantic USA will pay monthly rent of $6,625 to Longfellow, plus utilities, 
real property taxes and liability insurance. Prior to the Commencement Date, no rent, utilities, real property taxes and/or liability insurance 
were required to be paid to Longfellow under the lease.
On June 13, 2012, we entered into separate master services agreements with each of Viking International, Viking Petrol Sahasi Hizmetleri 
AS (“VOS”) and Viking Geophysical in connection with the sale of our oilfield services business to a joint venture owned by Dalea and 
funds managed by Abraaj Investment Management Limited. Pursuant to the master services agreements with Viking International and 
VOS, we are entitled to receive certain oilfield services and materials, including, but not limited to, drilling rigs and fracture stimulation 
that are needed for our operations in Bulgaria and Turkey. Pursuant to the master services agreement with Viking Geophysical, we are also 
entitled to receive geophysical services and materials that are needed for our operations in those countries. Each master services agreement 
is for a five-year term. Currently, we can contract for services and materials on a firm basis and, to the extent that we do not contract for 
all of their services or materials, Viking International, VOS and Viking Geophysical are allowed to contract with third parties for any 
remaining capacity.
On March 3, 2016, Mr. Mitchell closed a transaction whereby he sold his interest in Viking Services B.V., the beneficial owner of Viking 
International, VOS and Viking Geophysical, to a third party. As part of the transaction, Mr. Mitchell acquired certain equipment used in 
the performance of stimulation, wireline, workover and similar services, which equipment will be owned and operated by a new entity, 
Production Solutions International Petrol Arama Hizmetleri Anonim Sirketi (“PSIL”). PSIL is beneficially owned by Dalea Investment 
Group, LLC, which is controlled by Mr. Mitchell. Consequently, on March 3, 2016, TEMI entered into a master services agreement (the 
“PSIL MSA”) with PSIL on substantially similar terms to the Company’s current master services agreements with Viking International, 
VOS and VGS. Pursuant to the PSIL MSA, PSIL will perform the Services on behalf of TEMI and its affiliates.  The master services 
agreements with each of Viking International, VOS and Viking Geophysical will remain in effect through the remainder of the five-year 
term of the agreements.
On April 5, 2013 (the “First Floor Commencement Date”), TransAtlantic USA entered into an office lease with Longfellow to lease 
approximately 4,700 square feet of additional corporate office space in Addison, Texas. The initial lease term commenced on the First 
Floor Commencement Date and expires five years after the First Floor Commencement Date, unless earlier terminated in accordance with 
the lease. For the first year of the lease, TransAtlantic USA will pay monthly rent of $7,533 to Longfellow plus utilities, real property 
taxes and liability insurance.
On March 26, 2014, our wholly owned subsidiaries, TEMI and TBNG, entered into an equipment yard services agreement effective as of 
April 1, 2014 with Viking International for services related to the use of oilfield equipment yards located in Diyarbaki, Tekirdag and 
Muratli, Turkey.  The initial term of the agreement is for twelve months, and the term of the agreement renews automatically for 
additional twelve-month periods unless earlier terminated.  During the initial term, TEMI will pay monthly services fees of $17,250 to 
Viking International for services related to the use of Diyarbakir equipment yard, and TBNG will pay monthly service fees of $17,250 to 
Viking International for services related to the use of Tekirdag and Muratli equipment yards.
For the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, we incurred capital and operating expenditures of $20.0 million and $96.4 million, 
respectively, related to our various related party agreements.
Debt transactions
Between December 2014 and February 2015, we sold $55.0 million of convertible notes in a non-brokered private placement, which were 
exchanged for the Convertible Notes on February 20, 2015. Dalea purchased $2.0 million of the notes; trusts benefitting Mr. Mitchell’s 
four children each purchased $2.0 million of the notes; Pinon Foundation, a non-profit charitable organization directed by Mr. Mitchell’s 
spouse, purchased $10.0 million of the notes; the three children of Brian Bailey, a director of the Company, each purchased $100,000 of 
the notes; Wil Saqueton, the Company’s vice president and chief financial officer, purchased $100,000 of the
F-31
notes; Matthew McCann, the Company’s former general counsel and corporate secretary, purchased $200,000 of the notes; and a trust 
benefitting Barbara and Terry Pope, Mr. Mitchell’s sister-in-law and brother-in-law, purchased $200,000 of the notes.
ANBE Promissory Note
On December 30, 2015, TransAtlantic USA entered into the $5.0 million Note with ANBE, an entity owned by the children of the 
Company’s chairman and chief executive officer, N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd, and controlled by an entity managed by Mr. Mitchell and his 
wife. The Note bears interest at a rate of 13.0% per annum and matures on June 30, 2016.  On December 30, 2015, the Company borrowed 
the Initial Advance of $3.6 million under the Note. The Initial Advance will be used for general corporate purposes. The Company can 
request Subsequent Advances under the Note prior to June 15, 2016. Each Subsequent Advance must be in a multiple of $500,000, or if 
the amount remaining for advance under the Note is less than $500,000, such lesser amount.
Advances under the Note may be converted, at the election of ANBE, any time after the NYSE MKT approves the Company’s application 
to list the additional common shares issuable pursuant to the conversion feature of the Note and prior to the maturity of the Note.  The 
conversion price per common share for each advance is equal to 105% of the closing price of the Company’s common shares on the 
NYSE MKT on the trading date immediately prior to such advance.  The conversion price of the Initial Advance is $1.3755 per share.
The Note is a senior unsecured obligations of the Company and is structurally subordinated to all indebtedness of the Company’s 
subsidiaries.  Each of the following is an “Event of Default” under the Note:
a)
b)
c)
d)
the Company fails to pay when due any principal of, or interest upon, the Note;
the Note ceases to be a legal, valid, binding agreement enforceable against any party executing the same in accordance with 
the respective terms thereof or is in any way terminated declared ineffective or inoperative or in any way whatsoever ceases 
to give or provide the respective rights, interests, remedies, powers or privileges intended to be created thereby;
the Company (i) applies for or consents to the appointment of a receiver, trustee, inventor, custodian or liquidator of 
Company or of all or a substantial part of its  assets, as applicable, (ii) is adjudicated as bankrupt or insolvent or files a 
voluntary petition for bankruptcy or admits in writing that it is unable to pay its debts as they become due, (iii) makes a 
general assignment for the benefit of creditors, (iv) files a petition or answer seeking reorganization or an arrangement with 
creditors or to take advantage of any bankruptcy or insolvency laws, or (v) files an answer admitting the material allegations 
of, or consents to, or defaults in answering, a petition filed against it in any bankruptcy, reorganization or insolvency 
proceeding, or takes corporate action for the purpose of effecting any of the foregoing; or
an order, judgment or decree is entered by any court of competent jurisdiction or other competent authority approving a 
petition seeking reorganization of the Company or appointing a receiver, trustee, inventor or liquidator of any such person, or 
of all or substantially all of its assets, and such order, judgment or decree continues unstayed and in effect for a period of sixty 
(60) days.
Other related party transactions
During the year ended December 31, 2014, we incurred $60,000 of geology consulting services from Roxanna Oil Company, a private oil 
and natural gas exploration and production company (“Roxanna”).  One of our directors is the chairman of the board of Roxanna.
The following table summarizes related party accounts receivable and accounts payable as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014:
Related party accounts receivable:
Viking International master services agreement
Riata Management Service Agreement
Dalea Note
Total related party accounts receivable
Related party accounts payable:
Viking International master services agreement
Riata Management Service Agreement
Total related party accounts payable
F-32
2015
2014
(in thousands)
220
194
–
414
2,300
384
2,684
$
$
$
$
355
159
88
602
12,138
1,734
13,872
$
$
$
$
17. Discontinued operations
Discontinued operations in Albania
On November 16, 2015, we decided to launch a marketing process for our Albanian assets and operations.  As of December 31, 2015 we 
have classified our Albania segment as assets and liabilities held for sale and presented the operating results within discontinued 
operations for all periods presented.
In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in Stream to GBC Oil Company Ltd. (“GBC Oil”) in exchange for (i) the future 
payment of $2.3 million to Raiffeisen to pay down the Term Loan Facility dated as of September 17, 2014 between Stream’s wholly-
owned subsidiary, TransAtlantic Albania, and Raiffeisen, and (ii) the assumption of $29.2 million of liabilities owed by Stream, consisting 
of $23.1 million of accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $6.1 million of debt.  TransAtlantic Albania owns all of our former 
Albanian assets and operations.  In addition, GBC Oil issued us a warrant pursuant to which we have the option to acquire up to 25% of 
the fully diluted equity interests in TransAtlantic Albania for nominal consideration at any time on or before March 1, 2019.  Prior to the 
sale of Stream to GBC Oil, TransAtlantic Albania entered into an assignment and assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic 
Albania will assign its Delvina natural gas assets and $12.9 million of associated liabilities to Delvina Gas Company Ltd. (“Delvina Gas”), 
our newly formed, wholly-owned subsidiary, to be effective immediately upon receipt of required contractual consents. There is no 
assurance that we will be able to obtain the required contractual consents.  In addition, we agreed to indemnify GBC Oil and Stream for 
the $12.9 million of liabilities related to the Delvina gas operations.
An impairment charge of $73.0 million was recorded to write down the net book value of the assets held for sale to their fair value as of 
December 31, 2015.  The assumptions used in our assessment of fair value included the transaction discussed above with GBC Oil.
Discontinued operations in Morocco 
On June 27, 2011, we decided to discontinue our operations in Morocco. We have substantially completed the process of winding down 
our operations in Morocco. We have presented the Moroccan segment operating results as discontinued operations for all periods 
presented.
F-33
The assets and liabilities held for sale at December 31, 2015 and 2014 were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Assets
Cash
Other current assets
Property and equipment, net
Total current assets held for sale
Liabilities
Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
Accounts payable - related party
Loans payable
Loans payable - related party
Deferred tax liability
Total current liabilities held for sale
For the year ended December 31, 2014
Assets
Cash
Other current assets
Total current assets held for sale
Property and equipment, net
Total assets held for sale
Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Accounts payable - related party
Loans payable
Loans payable - related party
Total current liabilities held for sale
Accrued liabilities
Loans payable
Deferred tax liability
Total long-term liabilities held for sale
Total liabilities held for sale
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Albania
Morocco
(in thousands)
Total Held for Sale
1,201
1,853
48,430
51,484
37,888
3,540
6,123
–
15,286
62,837
392
7,324
7,716
118,903
126,619
29,862
4,616
10,973
6,800
52,251
5,433
5,103
31,455
41,991
94,242
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
16
11
–
27
6,352
–
–
–
–
6,352
16
12
28
–
28
6,928
–
–
–
6,928
–
–
–
–
6,928
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,217
1,864
48,430
51,511
44,240
3,540
6,123
–
15,286
69,189
408
7,336
7,744
118,903
126,647
36,790
4,616
10,973
6,800
59,179
5,433
5,103
31,455
41,991
101,170
Loans Payable
As of the dates indicated, TransAtlantic Albania’s third-party debt consisted of the following:
December 31,
2015
December 31,
2014
Fixed and floating rate loans
Term Loan Facility
Viking International note - related party
Prepayment Agreement
Shareholder loan
Loans payable
$
$
(in thousands)
6,123
–
–
–
6,123
$
$
10,453
6,800
3,043
2,580
22,876
Term Loan Facility
TransAtlantic Albania was a party to a Term Loan Facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) with Raiffeisen Bank Sh.A. (“Raiffeisen”).The loan 
matures on December 31, 2016 and bears interest at the rate of LIBOR plus 5.5%, with a minimum interest rate of 7.0%.
F-34
TransAtlantic Albania is required to pay 1/16th of the total commitment each quarter on the last business day of each of March, June, 
September and December each year. The loan is guaranteed by TransAtlantic Albania’s parent company, Stream. TransAtlantic Albania 
may prepay the loan at its option in whole or in part, subject to a 3.0% penalty plus breakage costs.  The Term Loan Facility is secured by 
substantially all of the assets of TransAtlantic Albania.
Under the Term Loan Facility, TransAtlantic Albania may not declare or pay any dividends on any of TransAtlantic Albania’s common 
shares without the consent of the lender, except, provided that no default has occurred and is continuing under the Term Loan Facility, 
TransAtlantic Albania may make payments to Stream from excess cash flow to cover the administrative overhead of Stream, including the 
salary and related employment costs of any employee, officer or director of Stream, up to a total limit in any three-month period of 
$500,000.
Pursuant to the terms of the Term Loan Facility, until amounts under the Term Loan Facility are repaid, TransAtlantic Albania may not, in 
each case subject to certain exceptions (i) incur indebtedness or create any liens, (ii) enter into any agreements that prohibit the ability of 
TransAtlantic Albania to create any liens, (iii) enter into any amalgamation, demerger, merger, or corporate reconstruction or any joint 
venture or partnership agreement, (iv) incorporate any company as a subsidiary, (v) dispose of any asset, (vi) declare or pay any dividends 
to shareholders, (vii) enter into a sale and leaseback arrangement, (viii) make any substantial change to the general nature or scope of its 
business from that carried on at the date of the Term Loan Facility, (ix) use, deposit, handle, store produce, release or dispose of dangerous 
materials, (x) make any loans or grant any credit, and (xi) cancel, terminate amend or waive any default under any export contract or allow 
any buyer to do the same.
In addition, the Term Loan Facility contains financial covenants that require TransAtlantic Albania to maintain as of the end of each fiscal 
year: (i) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) of not less than $10.0 million; (ii) an outstanding loan 
principal of no more than twice its EBITDA; and (iii) EBITDA of at least ten times greater than its accrued interest, commission, fees, 
discounts, prepayment fees, premiums, charges and other finance payments.
An event of default under the Term Loan Facility, includes, among other events, failure to pay principal or interest when due, breach of 
certain covenants and obligations, cross default to other indebtedness, bankruptcy or insolvency, failure to meet the required financial 
covenant ratios and the occurrence of a material adverse effect. In addition, upon the occurrence of a change of control of TransAtlantic 
Albania, TransAtlantic Albania is required to notify Raiffeisen, and Raiffeisen would have the option to cancel loan commitments and 
accelerate all outstanding loans and other amounts payable. A change of control is defined under the Term Loan Facility as Stream ceasing 
to hold more than 75% of the shares in the issued share capital of TransAtlantic Albania carrying the right to vote.
Stream must, upon the request of Raiffeisen when TransAtlantic Albania’s predicted expenditures exceed its predicted revenues for any 
period, inject cash into Stream by means of equity loan or other method acceptable to Raiffeisen to the extent necessary to remedy the 
cashflow shortfall or repay the total amount outstanding under the Term Loan Facility.
As of December 31, 2015, TransAtlantic Albania had $6.1 million outstanding under the Term Loan Facility and no availability.  As of 
December 31, 2015, TransAtlantic Albania was in default under the Term Loan Facility for failure to repay $1.1 million due on December 
31, 2015.  On February 29, 2016, we sold all the equity interest in Stream, the parent company of TransAtlantic Albania to GBC Oil, who 
assumed the Term Loan Facility.
Prepayment Agreement
Stream and TransAtlantic Albania were parties to the prepayment agreement (the “Prepayment Agreement”) with Trafigura PTE Ltd 
(“Trafigura”). In October 2013, Stream received a $7.0 million prepayment under the Prepayment Agreement. The prepayment was repaid 
by Stream’s delivery of oil to Trafigura in accordance with an oil sales contract between Stream and Trafigura and bore interest at a rate 
equal to LIBOR plus 6% (6.43% at December 31, 2015).  On October 30, 2015, Stream repaid the Prepayment Agreement in full, and the 
agreement was terminated.
Viking International note
On September 16, 2014, Stream issued to Viking International a note in the principal amount of $6.8 million.  The note was amended 
monthly to evidence additional advances.  On March 12, 2015, we repaid the note in full.
F-35
Shareholder loan
In March 2014, Stream borrowed CAD $3.0 million from a shareholder of Stream.  The loan bore interest at a fixed rate of 10.0% per 
annum, calculated and compounded monthly.  On January 6, 2015, we repaid the shareholder loan in full with net proceeds from our 
private placement of Convertible Notes.
Our operating results from discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are summarized as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Total revenues
Production and transportation expense
Exploration, abandonment and impairment
Total other costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
For the year ended December 31, 2014
Total revenues
Total costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
For the year ended December 31, 2013
Total revenues
Total costs and expenses
Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income tax benefit
Loss from discontinued operations
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Albania
Morocco
(in thousands)
Total
$
8,565
11,615
86,577
9,229
1,819
(97,037) $
16,169
(80,868) $
$
1,898
2,984
356
(730) $
612
(118) $
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
$
$
F-36
$
–
–
–
5
–
(5) $
–
(5) $
–
20
–
–
(20) $
(20) $
$
$
–
505
63
–
(442) $
(442) $
8,565
11,615
86,577
9,234
1,819
(97,042)
16,169
(80,873)
1,898
3,004
356
(750)
612
(138)
–
505
63
(442)
–
(442)
18. Acquisitions 
Stream
On November 18, 2014, we acquired Stream in exchange for (i) 3.2 million of our common shares issued at closing, and (ii) an additional 
0.6 million of our common shares issuable if certain conditions are met (at a deemed price of $7.41 per common share).  We engaged 
independent valuation experts to assist in the determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired in the acquisition.  We 
have completed our assessment of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, and the values are presented below. The following tables 
summarize the consideration paid in the acquisition and the final amounts of assets acquired and liabilities assumed that have been 
recognized at the acquisition date:
Consideration:
Issuance of 3,218,641 common shares
Fair value of total consideration
Acquisition-Related Costs:
Included in general and administrative expenses on our consolidated statements of
   comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2014
Recognized Amounts of Identifiable Assets Acquired and Liabilities Assumed at Acquisition:
Assets:
Cash
Accounts receivable
Other current assets
Total current assets
Oil and natural gas properties:
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Equipment and other property
Total oil and natural gas properties and other equipment
Total assets
Liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accounts payable - related party
Other current liabilities
Viking International note - related party
Loans payable - current
Other non-current liabilities
Loans payable - non-current
Asset retirement obligations
Deferred income taxes
Total liabilities
Total identifiable net assets
$
$
$
$
$
(in thousands)
23,850
23,850
1,129
66
6,672
1,418
8,156
99,927
12,854
2,386
115,167
123,323
20,673
2,820
13,395
6,800
11,732
5,036
6,123
827
32,067
99,473
23,850
During 2015, we were notified that the Albania government may seek to recover approximately $4.9 million in contractual obligations 
under our Delvina exploration work program. We have recorded $4.9 million in accrued liabilities associated with the acquisition of 
Stream related to this contractual work program liability.
As of and for the year ended December 31, 2015, we have recorded the following purchase accounting adjustments, as allowed under 
ASU 2015-16: (i) reversed the $4.2 million of contingent shares as a result of not achieving the contingent share event within the 
prescribed period, (ii) increased our equipment and oil inventory by $2.5 million based on more accurate values, and (iii) increased our 
accrued liabilities by a net $3.3 million due to better estimates.  These amounts have been adjusted in our December 31, 2015 consolidated 
balance sheet and, on a net basis, reduced our unproved property balance.
The results of operations of Stream are included in our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) beginning November 18, 
2014 and have been classified as discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2015.  The revenues and
F-37
expenses of Stream included in our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2014 were:
Actual from November 18, 2014 through December 31, 2014
$
Revenue
(in thousands)
1,898
$
Loss
(118)
19. Subsequent events 
Sale of Albania Oil Operations
In February 2016, we sold all of the outstanding equity in Stream to GBC Oil in exchange for (i) the future payment of $2.3 million to 
Raiffeisen to pay down the Term Loan Facility dated as of September 17, 2014 between TransAtlantic Albania and Raiffeisen, and (ii) the 
assumption of $29.2 million of liabilities owed by Stream, consisting of $23.1 million of accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $6.1 
million of debt.  TransAtlantic Albania owns all of our former Albanian assets and operations.  In addition, GBC Oil issued us a warrant 
pursuant to which we have the option to acquire up to 25% of the fully diluted equity interests in TransAtlantic Albania for nominal 
consideration at any time on or before March 1, 2019.  Prior to the sale of Stream to GBC Oil, TransAtlantic Albania entered into an 
assignment and assumption agreement pursuant to which TransAtlantic Albania will assign its Delvina natural gas assets and $12.9 
million of associated liabilities (the “Delvina Gas Liabilities”) to Delvina Gas, our newly formed, wholly-owned subsidiary, to be effective 
immediately upon receipt of required contractual consents. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain the required contractual 
consents.  In addition, we agreed to indemnify GBC Oil and Stream for the Delvina Gas Liabilities.  We are currently negotiating a joint 
venture with a third party for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.  There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a joint 
venture for the purchase of a portion of Delvina Gas.
Dalea Promissory Note Modifications
On March 30, 2016, we entered into an agreement to amend the Dalea Note.  Pursuant to the agreed upon terms, the Company and Dalea 
acknowledged that the sale of Dalea’s interest in Viking Services B.V. was not intended to trigger acceleration of the repayment of the 
Dalea Note as long as certain oilfield services were provided by Viking Services B.V. to the Company in Turkey, which services will now 
be provided pursuant to the PSIL MSA.  PSIL is beneficially owned by Dalea Investment Group, LLC, which is controlled by Mr. 
Mitchell.  As a result, the amendment will revise the events triggering acceleration of the repayment of the Dalea Note to the following: (i) 
a reduction of ownership by Dalea and its affiliates of PSIL to less than 50%; (ii) disposal by Dalea or PSIL of all or substantially all of its 
assets to any person that does not own a controlling interest in Dalea or PSIL and is not controlled by Mr. Mitchell; (iii) acquisition by any 
person not controlled by Mr. Mitchell and that does not own a controlling equity interest in Dalea or PSIL of more than 50% of the voting 
interests of Dalea or PSIL; (iv) termination of the PSIL MSA other than as a result of an uncured default thereunder by the Company (or 
its subsidiary); (v) default by PSIL under the PSIL MSA, which default is not remedied within a period of 30 days after notice thereof to 
PSIL; and (vi) insolvency or bankruptcy of PSIL.
In addition, the amendment will reduce the principal amount of the Dalea Note to $8.0 million in exchange for the cancellation of a 
payable of approximately $3.5 million owed by TransAtlantic Albania to Viking International, which is part of the Delvina Gas Liabilities 
and for which the Company has indemnified GBC Oil.  The amendment will also require Dalea to pledge as security for the Dalea Note 
the approximately $2.1 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes held by Dalea, including any securities exchanged or 
converted from the Convertible Notes. The amendment will provide that interest payable to Dalea under the Convertible Notes (or any 
future securities for which the Convertible Notes are converted or exchanged) will be credited against the outstanding principal balance of 
the Dalea Note. The maturity date of the Dalea Note was extended to June 13, 2019.  The interest rate on the Dalea Note remains at 3.0% 
per annum and continues to be guaranteed by Mr. Mitchell.
F-38
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
Supplemental Information
(unaudited)
Supplemental quarterly financial data (unaudited)
The following table summarizes results for each of the four quarters in the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014(1).
For the year ended December 31, 2015:
Revenues
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
Net loss from discontinued operations
Net (loss) income
Comprehensive loss
Basic and diluted net (loss) income per common
   share from continuing operations
Basic and diluted net loss per common share from
   discontinuing operations
Basic and diluted net (loss) income per common
   share
For the year ended December 31, 2014:
Revenues
Net income from continuing operations
Net loss from discontinued operations
Net income (loss)
Comprehensive income (loss)
Basic and diluted net (loss) income per common
   share from continuing operations
Basic and diluted net loss per common share from
   discontinuing operations
Basic and diluted net income (loss) per common
   share
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
March 31,
Three Months Ended
June 30,
September 30,
(in thousands, except per share data)
December 31,
$
25,757
(4,023)
(1,471)
(5,494)
(29,113)
(0.10) $
(0.04) $
(0.13) $
$
33,646
3,993
(20)
3,973
678
0.11
$
(0.00) $
0.11
$
$
25,053
(5,689)
(1,561)
(7,250)
(12,167)
(0.14) $
(0.04) $
(0.18) $
41,061
1,437
–
1,437
6,529
0.04
–
0.04
$
$
$
$
$
18,337
15,633
(10,731)
4,902
(16,841)
0.38
$
(0.26) $
0.12
36,077
8,313
–
8,313
(4,343)
0.22
–
0.22
$
$
$
$
$
15,917
(32,586)
(67,110)
(99,696)
(91,697)
(0.80)
(1.65)
(2.45)
28,046
15,471
(118)
15,353
11,887
0.40
(0.00)
0.39
(1) The sum of the individual quarterly net (loss) income amounts per share may not agree with year-to-date net (loss) income
per share as each quarterly computation is based on the net income or loss for that quarter and the weighted-average number of 
shares outstanding during that quarter.
During the fourth quarter of 2015, we identified an error related to our deferred tax liability and deferred tax benefit that originated in prior 
periods and concluded that the error was not material to any of the previously reported periods or to the period in which the error was 
corrected.  The impact of the error resulted in a decrease to our net loss of $4.7 million for each of the three and nine months ended 
September 30, 2015.  This immaterial error was corrected in our third quarter of 2015 results of operations.
Supplemental oil and natural gas reserves information (unaudited)
As required by the FASB and the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), the standardized measure of discounted future net cash 
flows (the “Standardized Measure”) presented below is computed by applying first-day-of-the-month average prices, year-end costs and 
legislated tax rates and a discount factor of 10% to proved reserves. We do not believe the Standardized Measure provides a reliable 
estimate of the Company’s expected future cash flows to be obtained from the development and production of its oil and natural gas 
properties or of the value of its proved oil and natural gas reserves. The Standardized Measure is prepared on the basis of certain 
prescribed assumptions including first-day-of-the-month average prices, which represent discrete points in time and therefore may cause 
significant variability in cash flows from year-to-year as prices change.
Users of this information should be aware that the process of estimating quantities of proved and proved developed oil and natural gas 
reserves is very complex, requiring significant subjective decisions in the evaluation of all available geological, engineering and economic 
data for each reservoir. The data for a given reservoir also may change substantially over time as a result of numerous
F-39
factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and continual reassessment of the viability of production 
under varying economic conditions. Consequently, revisions to existing reserves estimates may occur from time to time. Although every 
reasonable effort is made to ensure reserves estimates reported represent the most accurate assessments possible, the subjective decisions 
and variances in available data for various reservoirs make these estimates generally less precise than other estimates included in the 
financial statement disclosures.
Proved reserves are those quantities of oil and natural gas that by analysis of geoscience and engineering data can be estimated with 
reasonable certainty to be economically producible—from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic 
conditions, operating methods and government regulations—prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, 
unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the 
estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator must be reasonably certain that it will 
commence the project within a reasonable time. We engaged DeGolyer & MacNaughton to prepare our reserves estimates in Turkey, 
Albania and Bulgaria.  These estimates comprise 100% of our estimated proved reserves (by volume) at December 31, 2015.
The following unaudited schedules are presented in accordance with required disclosures about oil and natural gas producing activities to 
provide users with a common base for preparing estimates of future cash flows and comparing reserves among companies.
All of our proved reserves are located in Turkey and Albania, and all prices are held constant in accordance with SEC rules.  As of 
December 31, 2015, we have classified our Albania segment as assets and liabilities held for sale and presented the operating results 
within discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Oil and natural gas prices used to estimate reserves were computed by applying the un-weighted, arithmetic average of the closing price 
on the first day of each month for the 12-month period prior to December 2015, 2014 and 2013. The oil and natural gas prices used to 
estimate reserves are shown in the table below.
Turkey
2015
2014
2013
Albania
2015
2014
12-Month
Average Price
Natural Gas
per (Mcf)
Oil
per (Bbl)
$
$
$
$
$
48.65
94.53
102.07
38.77
69.55
$
$
$
$
$
7.65
8.71
9.92
7.37
10.00
F-40
The following table sets forth our estimated net proved reserves (natural gas converted to Mboe by dividing Mmcf by six), including 
changes therein, and proved developed reserves:
Disclosure of reserves quantities
Turkey
Albania(1)
Oil (Mbbls)
Total
Total proved reserves
December 31, 2012
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous estimates
Sales volumes
December 31, 2013
Acquisitions
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous estimates
Sales volumes
December 31, 2014
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous estimates
Sales volumes
December 31, 2015
Proved developed reserves
December 31, 2013:
Proved developed producing
Proved developed non-producing
Total
December 31, 2014:
Proved developed producing
Proved developed non-producing
Total
December 31, 2015:
Proved developed producing
Proved developed non-producing
Total
Proved undeveloped reserves
As of December 31, 2013
As of December 31, 2014
As of December 31, 2015
9,520
1,563
(436)
(933)
9,714
–
4,740
1,254
(1,303)
14,405
362
(2,532)
(1,420)
10,815
4,540
335
4,875
6,153
704
6,857
4,382
1,216
5,598
4,839
7,549
5,217
–
–
–
–
–
14,296
–
–
(36)
14,260
–
(9,771)
(231)
4,258
–
–
–
4,630
9,270
13,900
2,096
1,989
4,085
–
359
173
9,520
1,563
(436)
(933)
9,714
14,296
4,740
1,254
(1,339)
28,665
362
(12,303)
(1,651)
15,073
4,540
335
4,875
10,783
9,974
20,757
6,478
3,205
9,683
4,839
7,908
5,390
F-41
Total proved reserves
December 31, 2012
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous estimates
Sales volumes
December 31, 2013
Acquisitions
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous estimates
Sales volumes
December 31, 2014
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous estimates
Sales volumes
December 31, 2015
Proved developed reserves
December 31, 2013:
Proved developed producing
Proved developed non-producing
Total
December 31, 2014:
Proved developed producing
Proved developed non-producing
Total
December 31, 2015:
Proved developed producing
Proved developed non-producing
Total
Proved undeveloped reserves
As of December 31, 2013
As of December 31, 2014
As of December 31, 2015
Turkey
Albania(1)
Gas (Mmcf)
Total
12,463
2,652
3,436
(3,512)
15,039
–
2,809
1,668
(3,262)
16,254
–
2,084
(2,491)
15,847
7,189
3,261
10,450
5,572
3,979
9,551
5,102
3,674
8,776
4,589
6,703
7,071
–
–
–
–
–
8,249
–
–
–
8,249
–
(2,722)
–
5,527
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
935
935
–
8,249
4,592
12,463
2,652
3,436
(3,512)
15,039
8,249
2,809
1,668
(3,262)
24,503
–
(638)
(2,491)
21,374
7,189
3,261
10,450
5,572
3,979
9,551
5,102
4,609
9,711
4,589
14,952
11,663
(1) As of December 31, 2015, we have classified our Albanian segment as assets and liabilities held for sale and presented the
operating results within discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Proved Reserves
At December 31, 2015, our estimated proved reserves were 18,636 Mboe, a decrease of 14,113 Mboe, or 43.1%, compared to 32,749 
Mboe at December 31, 2014.  This decrease was primarily attributable to the substantial decline in oil prices which caused developed and 
undeveloped reserves to become uneconomic at an earlier time and technical revisions on Albanian reserves based on actual performance 
following the 2015 work program.
At December 31, 2015, we recorded a decrease in proved reserves due to technical revisions of 12,303 Mbbl and 638 Mmcf (12,409 Mboe 
total).  The revision in oil of 12,303 Mbbls was mostly attributable to pricing and economics due to the substantial decline in oil 
prices.  As Brent oil price drops, wells become uneconomic at an earlier time thus reducing future reserves.  Approximately 75% of these 
reductions were attributable to the Albania properties.  There were no material revisions due to performance in Turkey.  The revision in 
natural gas of 638 Mmcf was primarily attributable to a reduction in Delvina natural gas reserves of 2,722 Mmcf due to market constraints 
and a reduced realized price, which was partially offset by an increase in proved natural gas reserves for our Turkey assets of 2,084 Mmcf 
due to improved performance.  The decrease in proved reserves also consisted of sales volumes of 2,066 Mboe in 2015, consisting of 
1,651 Mbbls of oil and 2,491 Mmcf of natural gas.  The estimated undiscounted capital costs associated with our proved reserves in 
Turkey is $167.9 million.
F-42
At December 31, 2015, we recorded an increase in proved reserves of 362 Mboe through extensions and discoveries.  These increases 
were due to the discovery of productive pay in the Hazro formation in the Bahar oil field.
Proved Undeveloped Reserves
At December 31, 2015, our estimated proved undeveloped reserves were 7,334 Mboe, a decrease of 3,066 Mboe, or 29.5%, compared to 
10,400 Mboe at December 31, 2014. Of this decrease in proved undeveloped reserves, 2,566 Mboe was due to lower pricing and capital 
constraints forcing a slower development of these locations.  All of our proved undeveloped reserves as of December 31, 2015 will be 
developed within five years of the date the reserve was first disclosed as a proved undeveloped reserve.  The estimated undiscounted 
capital costs associated with our proved undeveloped reserves in Turkey is $163.1 million of which $1.5 million is expected to be incurred 
in 2016.  In addition, during 2015, we converted 500 Mboe from proved undeveloped to proved developed reserves and incurred $8.6 
million of capital expenditures during 2015 to convert such reserves.
The proved undeveloped reserves assume development costs will be funded from future cash flows from operations and financing 
activities, which may not be sufficient or available at commercially economic terms and could impact the timing of these development 
activities.
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows 
The Standardized Measure relating to estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are shown in the table 
below.  In our calculation of Standardized Measure, we have utilized statutory tax rates of 20% and 50% for Turkey and Albania, 
respectively.
As of and for the year ended December 31, 2015
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
   related to proved reserves
As of and for the year ended December 31, 2014
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
   related to proved reserves
As of and for the year ended December 31, 2013
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
   related to proved reserves
$
$
$
$
$
$
Turkey
Albania(1)
(in thousands)
Total
$
$
$
$
$
648,248
(140,091)
(167,914)
(28,900)
311,343
(112,116)
199,227
1,504,369
(309,528)
(234,675)
(148,437)
811,729
(272,649)
539,080
1,141,775
(190,337)
(131,643)
(127,971)
691,824
(196,055)
495,769
$
205,829
(116,617)
(26,474)
–
62,738
(35,851)
26,887
921,237
(239,149)
(123,085)
(243,774)
315,229
(182,227)
133,002
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
$
$
$
$
$
854,077
(256,708)
(194,388)
(28,900)
374,081
(147,967)
226,114
2,425,606
(548,677)
(357,760)
(392,211)
1,126,958
(454,876)
672,082
1,141,775
(190,337)
(131,643)
(127,971)
691,824
(196,055)
495,769
(1) As of December 31, 2015, we have classified our Albanian segment as assets and liabilities held for sale and presented the
operating results within discontinued operations for all periods presented.
F-43
Changes in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows 
The following are the principal sources of changes in the Standardized Measure applicable to proved oil and natural gas reserves for the 
years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Standardized measure, January 1,
Net change in sales and transfer prices and in production
   (lifting) costs related to future production
Changes in future estimated development costs
Sales and transfers of oil and natural gas during the period
Net change due to extensions and discoveries
Net change due to revisions in quantity estimates
Previously estimated development costs incurred during the
   period
Accretion of discount
Other
Net change in income taxes
Standardized measure, December 31,
For the year ended December 31, 2014
Standardized measure, January 1,
Net change in sales and transfer prices and in production
   (lifting) costs related to future production
Changes in future estimated development costs
Sales and transfers of oil and natural gas during the period
Net change due to extensions and discoveries
Net change due to purchases of minerals in place
Net change due to revisions in quantity estimates
Previously estimated development costs incurred during the
   period
Accretion of discount
Other
Net change in income taxes
Standardized measure, December 31,
For the year ended December 31, 2013
Standardized measure, January 1,
Net change in sales and transfer prices and in production
   (lifting) costs related to future production
Changes in future estimated development costs
Sales and transfers of oil and natural gas during the period
Net change due to extensions and discoveries
Net change due to revisions in quantity estimates
Previously estimated development costs incurred during the
   period
Accretion of discount
Other
Net change in income taxes
Standardized measure, December 31,
Turkey
Albania(1)
(in thousands)
Total
$
539,081
$
133,001
$
672,082
(437,347)
44,691
(69,843)
12,219
(73,697)
16,718
51,883
8,769
106,753
199,227
495,769
(75,912)
(151,238)
(118,083)
245,643
-
72,222
63,250
44,439
(19,340)
(17,669)
539,081
477,909
(7,868)
(73,753)
(108,674)
112,814
7,678
47,252
56,376
(12,070)
(3,895)
495,769
$
$
$
$
$
(223,406)
52,914
2,499
–
(96,727)
281
17,689
(1,930)
142,566
26,887
–
–
–
–
–
235,855
–
–
–
–
(102,854)
133,001
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
$
$
$
$
(660,753)
97,605
(67,344)
12,219
(170,424)
16,999
69,572
6,839
249,319
226,114
495,769
(75,912)
(151,238)
(118,083)
245,643
235,855
72,222
63,250
44,439
(19,340)
(120,523)
672,082
477,909
(7,868)
(73,753)
(108,674)
112,814
7,678
47,252
56,376
(12,070)
(3,895)
495,769
$
$
$
$
$
(1) As of December 31, 2015, we have classified our Albanian segment as assets and liabilities held for sale and presented the
operating results within discontinued operations for all periods presented in our consolidated financial statements in this Annual 
Report on Form 10-K.
F-44
Costs incurred in oil and natural gas property acquisition, exploration and development 
Costs incurred in oil and natural gas property acquisition, exploration and development activities for the years ended December 31, 2015, 
2014 and 2013 are summarized as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Acquisitions of properties
Proved
Unproved
Exploration
Development
Total costs incurred
For the year ended December 31, 2014
Acquisitions of properties
Proved
Unproved
Exploration
Development
Total costs incurred
For the year ended December 31, 2013
Acquisitions of properties
Proved
Unproved
Exploration
Development
Total costs incurred
Albania
Bulgaria
(in thousands)
–
–
10,022
285
10,307
99,927
16,140
2,161
110
118,338
–
–
–
–
–
$
$
$
$
$
$
–
–
–
41
41
–
–
1,291
44
1,335
–
–
2,742
–
2,742
$
$
$
$
$
$
Total
–
–
16,334
15,980
32,314
99,927
16,140
42,595
63,404
222,066
–
6,750
43,000
47,252
97,002
$
$
$
$
$
$
Turkey
–
–
6,312
15,654
21,966
–
–
39,143
63,250
102,393
–
6,750
40,258
47,252
94,260
$
$
$
$
$
$
F-45
2.1
2.2
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4†
10.5†
10.6
10.7†
EXHIBIT INDEX
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated March 15, 2012, by and among TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd., TransAtlantic Worldwide, 
Ltd., Longe Energy Limited, TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp., TransAtlantic Petroleum Cyprus Limited, Viking 
International Limited, Viking Geophysical Services, Ltd., Viking Oilfield Services SRL and Dalea Partners, LP. (incorporated 
by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the SEC on May 10, 2012).
Arrangement Agreement, dated as of September 2, 2014, between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Stream Oil & Gas Ltd. 
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated September 2, 2014, filed with 
the SEC on September 8, 2014).
Certificate of Continuance of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd., dated October 1, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 1, 2009, filed with the SEC on October 7, 2009).
Altered Memorandum of Continuance of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd., dated March 4, 2014 (incorporated by reference 
to Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated March 6, 2014, filed with the SEC on March 6, 2014).
Amended Bye-Laws of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd., dated March 4, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated March 6, 2014, filed with the SEC on March 6, 2014).
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement, dated December 30, 2008, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum 
Corp. and Riata Management, LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
dated December 30, 2008, filed with the SEC on January 6, 2009).
Registration Rights Agreement, dated February 18, 2011, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Direct Petroleum 
Exploration, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 
18, 2011, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2011).
Specimen Common Share certificate (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K 
dated March 4, 2014, filed with the SEC on March 6, 2014).
Indenture, dated as of February 20, 2015, between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and U.S. Bank National Association, as 
trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 20, 2015, 
filed with the SEC on February 25, 2015).
Form of 13.0% Convertible Note due 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K dated February 20, 2015, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2015).
Service Agreement, effective as of May 1, 2008, by and among TransAtlantic Petroleum Corp., Longfellow Energy, LP, 
Viking Drilling, LLC, Longe Energy Limited and Riata Management, LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated August 6, 2008, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2009).
Amendment to Service Agreement, effective as of October 1, 2008, by and among TransAtlantic Petroleum Corp., 
Longfellow Energy, LP, Viking Drilling, LLC, Longe Energy Limited, MedOil Supply LLC and Riata Management, LLC 
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated August 6, 2008, filed with the 
SEC on February 12, 2009).
Domestic Crude Oil Purchase/Sale Agreement, dated as of January 26, 2009, by and between Türkiye Petrol Rafinerileri A.Ş. 
and TransAtlantic Exploration Mediterranean International Pty. Ltd. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to the 
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on April 21, 2011).
TransAtlantic Petroleum Corp. 2009 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Appendix B to the Definitive 
Proxy Statement filed by TransAtlantic Petroleum Corp. with the SEC on April 30, 2009).
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report 
on Form 8-K dated June 16, 2009, filed with the SEC on June 22, 2009).
Office Lease, dated August 23, 2011, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and Longfellow Energy, LP 
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated August 23, 2011, filed with 
the SEC on August 25, 2011).
Form of Indemnification Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K, dated July 13, 2011, filed with the SEC on July 19, 2011).
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15†
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.22*
21.1*
Master Services Agreement, dated June 13, 2012, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Viking International 
Limited (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated June 13, 2012, filed 
with the SEC on June 19, 2012).
Master Services Agreement, dated June 13, 2012, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Viking Petrol Sahasi 
Hizmetleri A.S. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated June 13, 
2012, filed with the SEC on June 19, 2012).
Master Services Agreement, dated June 13, 2012, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Viking Geophysical 
Services, Ltd. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated June 13, 2012, 
filed with the SEC on June 19, 2012).
Transition Services Agreement, dated June 13, 2012, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum, Ltd. and Viking Services 
Management, Ltd. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated June 13, 
2012, filed with the SEC on June 19, 2012).
Office Lease, dated April 5, 2013, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and Longfellow Energy, LP 
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated May 8, 2013, filed with the 
SEC on May 14, 2013).
Equipment Yard Services Agreement, by and between TransAtlantic Exploration Mediterranean International Pty Ltd, Thrace 
Basin Natural Gas (Turkiye) Corporation and Viking International Limited, dated as of April 1, 2014 (incorporated by 
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated March 26, 2014, filed with the SEC on 
March 28, 2014).
Credit Agreement, dated as of May 6, 2014, by and between Amity Oil International Pty Ltd, DMLP, Ltd., Petrogas Petrol 
Gaz ve Petrokimya Ürünleri Inşaat Sanayi ve Ticaret A.Ş., Talon Exploration, Ltd., TransAtlantic Exploration Mediterranean 
International Pty. Ltd., TransAtlantic Turkey, Ltd., as borrowers, TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd., TransAtlantic Petroleum 
(USA) Corp., TransAtlantic Worldwide, Ltd., as guarantors, the lenders party thereto from time to time, and BNP Paribas 
(Suisse) SA as coordinating mandated lead arranger, sole bookrunner, letter of credit issuer, administrative agent, collateral 
agent and technical agent and International Finance Corporation, as mandated lead arranger (incorporated by reference to 
Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the SEC on May 8, 2014).
Summary of annual restricted stock award arrangement with Mr. Wil F. Saqueton (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 
to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the SEC on November 6, 2014).
Facility Agreement, dated December 15, 2011, by and among Stream Oil & Gas Ltd., Stream Oil & Gas Ltd. (BC), and 
Raiffeisen Bank Sh.A (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with 
the SEC on March 16, 2016).
Amended and Restated Facility Agreement, dated September 17, 2014, by and among Stream Oil & Gas Ltd., Stream Oil & 
Gas Ltd. (BC), and Raiffeisen Bank Sh.A (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to the Company’s Annual Report on 
Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2016).
Amendment and Restatement Agreement, dated September 17, 2014, by and among Stream Oil & Gas Ltd., Stream Oil & 
Gas Ltd. (BC), and Raiffeisen Bank Sh.A (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.24 to the Company’s Annual Report on 
Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2016).
Promissory Note dated August 21, 2015 between TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and Gary West CRT 2 LLC 
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the SEC on 
November 5, 2015).
Promissory Note dated August 21, 2015 between TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp. and Mary West CRT 2 LLC 
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the SEC on 
November 5, 2015).
Convertible Promissory Note, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and ANBE Holdings, LP, dated December 30, 
2015 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the SEC on 
January 6, 2016).
Amended Promissory Note Term Sheet dated March 30, 2016, by and between TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Dalea 
Partners, LP.
Subsidiaries of the Company.
Consent of KPMG LLP.
Consent of DeGolyer and MacNaughton.
Certification of the Chief Executive Officer of the Company, pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certification of the Chief Financial Officer of the Company, pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certification of the Chief Executive Officer of the Company, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certification of the Chief Financial Officer of the Company, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Report of DeGolyer and MacNaughton, dated February 28, 2016.
23.1*
23.2*
31.1*
31.2*
32.1**
32.2**
99.1*
101.INS* XBRL Instance Document.
101.SCH* XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document.
101.CAL* XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document.
101.DEF* XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document.
101.LAB* XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document.
101.PRE* XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document.
†
*
**
Management contract or compensatory plan arrangement.
Filed herewith.
Furnished herewith.
Exhibit 10.22
Confidential
Amended Promissory Note
Term Sheet
March 30, 2016
This term sheet summarizes certain terms proposed by the Special Committee of the Board of Directors of 
TransAtlantic Petroleum LTD. (the “Company”) regarding the potential amendment of the Promissory Note made by 
Dalea Partners, LP (“Dalea Partners”) on June 13, 2012 in favor of the Company (the “Note”).
Certain Terms of the Note as Currently in Effect
Principal Amount:
$11,500,000.00
Interest Rate and Payment:
3% per annum, with accrued interest paid quarterly on each January 1, April 1, July 
1 and October 1 during the term of the Note
Maturity Date (without 
acceleration):
Certain Events Resulting in 
Acceleration of the Note:
June 13, 2017
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
IPO by Viking Services B.V. (“Viking”) or majority holder of equity 
securities of Viking;
disposal by Viking of majority of equity of subsidiaries of Viking (Viking 
International Ltd. (“VIL”) and Viking Geophysical Services) or 
substantially all of the assets of either subsidiary to a person not an affiliate 
of Viking;
reduction of Dalea Partners’ and its affiliates’ equity interest in Viking 
below 35%;
disposal by Dalea Partners or Viking of all or substantially all of its assets to 
any person that did not own a controlling equity interest in Dalea Partners or 
Viking when the Note was made; or
acquisition by any person that did not own a controlling equity interest in 
Dalea Partners or Viking when the Note was made of more than 50% of the 
voting interests of Dalea Partners or Viking.
Original Collateral:
None, but the Note is subject to a Guaranty, dated June 13, 2012, executed 
by N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd (“NMM”) in favor of the Company.
1
Acceleration; Change of 
Control:
Proposed Terms of Amendment of the Note
The parties would acknowledge that a principal purpose of including the 
events of acceleration in the Note was to insure that the well completion and 
fracking services (the “Services”) provided by Viking in Turkey would 
continue to be available to the Company.
Dalea Partners would represent to the Company that (1) Dalea Partners 
and/or NMM and their affiliates disposed of all of their interest in Viking on 
March 3, 2016, but obtained the Services business in that transaction (the 
“Viking Restructuring”), (2) such Services business is now owned by 
Production Solutions International Petrol Arama Hizmetleri Anonim Sirketi 
(“PSIL”), and (3) PSIL is controlled, directly or indirectly, by Dalea 
Partners and NMM.
The parties would acknowledge that PSIL has entered into a Master 
Services Agreement (the “MSA”) with the Company (or a subsidiary) 
pursuant to which PSIL has agreed to provide the Services to the Company 
(or a subsidiary) on a “most favored nation” pricing basis in accordance 
with the terms of the MSA. PSIL would agree to amend the MSA so that the 
term would not end prior to the maturity of the Note.
In order to insure that PSIL will continue to be able to provide the Services 
to the Company in Turkey, the following events would result in acceleration 
of the Note:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Reduction of ownership by Dalea Partners (and other controlled affiliates of 
NMM) of equity interest in PSIL to below 50%. 
Disposal by Dalea Partners or PSIL of all or substantially all of its assets to 
any person that does not own a controlling interest in Dalea Partners or 
PSIL and is not controlled by NMM.
Acquisition by any person not controlled by NMM and that does not own a 
controlling equity interest in Dalea Partners or PSIL of more than 50% of 
the voting interests of Dalea Partners or PSIL.
Termination of the MSA other than as a result of an uncured default 
thereunder by the Company (or its subsidiary).
Default by PSIL under the MSA, which default is not remedied within a 
period of 30 days after notice thereof to PSIL.
Insolvency or bankruptcy of PSIL.
2
Principal Amount:
Collateral:
Principal Reduction:
Maturity Date:
Interest Rate:
Guaranty:
The principal amount of the Note would be reduced by offsetting the 
principal amount of the Note against and in exchange for the payable owed 
by TransAtlantic Albania Ltd. to VIL and subject to an indemnity obligation 
of the Company  in the amount of $3,535,946.79 (the “Account”), which 
account has been assigned, or is assignable, by VIL to a person designated 
by NMM in connection with the Viking Restructuring.  In connection with 
the foregoing, NMM would cause VIL to assign (and to obtain any third 
party consents necessary to permit the assignment of) the Account to Dalea 
Partners so that it may be exchanged for the reduction in the Note 
contemplated above.
As a result of the foregoing, the principal balance of the Note, as amended, 
would be $7,964,053.21.
Dalea Partners would pledge as security for the Note the 13% Convertible 
Notes of the Company held by Dalea Partners in the principal amount of 
$2,050,000 (the “Dalea Convertible Notes”). NMM may convert or 
exchange the Dalea Convertible Notes into or for other securities of the 
Company. Any newly exchanged or converted security would then be 
pledged as substitute collateral.
Dalea Partners would agree that interest payable to Dalea Partners under the 
Dalea Convertible Notes would not be paid to Dalea Partners and instead 
would be credited against the outstanding principal balance of the Note. If 
the Dalea Convertible Notes are converted or exchanged as contemplated in 
the collateral provision above, any interest or dividends payable to Dalea 
Partners on these other securities of the Company would also be credited 
against the outstanding principal balance of the Note.  Dalea Partners would 
execute an irrevocable instruction to the paying agent for the Dalea 
Convertible Notes (and would agree to execute a similar letter if the Dalea 
Convertible Notes are converted or exchanged as described above) to pay 
any interest otherwise due under the Dalea Convertible Notes to the 
Company and the Company would agree to apply such amounts against the 
outstanding principal of the Note.
The maturity of the Note would be extended by two years to June 13, 2019.
The interest rate and interest payment terms of the Note would remain the 
same.
The Guaranty of the Note by NMM would remain in effect, but be amended 
so that the Guaranty would be deemed applicable to the Note as modified.
3
Documents:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The following operative documents will be prepared in connection with 
these proposed terms:
Note Amendment Agreement outlining the transaction and the obligations 
of the parties thereunder.
Amended and  Restated Note
Pledge Agreement
Assignment Agreement (relating to the assignment of the Account)
Irrevocable Instruction to Paying Agent
The undersigned agree that this Summary of Terms reflects our mutual intentions to enter into definitive agreements 
based on the foregoing terms.
In furtherance of the foregoing, the Company hereby waives any requirement under the Note that Dalea Partners pay 
any amount of the principal of the Note that is or may be otherwise due in connection with the Viking Restructuring; 
provided that not later than April 15, 2016 Dalea Partners shall (1) enter into the Note Amendment Agreement, the 
Amended and Restated Note and the Pledge Agreement, each  in accordance with the terms set forth herein and (2) 
concurrently execute and deliver to the Company an assignment of the Account pursuant to the foregoing agreements 
and in the form of Exhibit A hereto.
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.,
a Bermuda exempted company
By:
/s/ Chad Burkhardt
Name: Chad Burkhardt
Title:
Vice President
4
DALEA PARTNERS, LP, an Oklahoma limited partnership
By:
By:
Dalea Management, LLC, its General Partner
/s/ N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd
Name: N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd
Title:
Manager
/s/ N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd 
N. MALONE MITCHELL, 3rd
Address:
4321 St. Johns Dr
Dallas, Texas 75205
5
ASSIGNMENT AGREEMENT
Exhibit A
THIS  ASSIGNMENT  AGREEMENT  (this  “Agreement”),  dated  as  of  April  ___,  2016,  is  made  by  and 
between DALEA PARTNERS, LP, an Oklahoma limited partnership (“Dalea Partners”), and TRANSATLANTIC 
PETROLEUM  LTD,  an  exempted  company  incorporated  with  limited  liability  under  the  laws  of  Bermuda  (the 
“Company”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, Dalea Partners and the Company are parties to that certain Note Amendment Agreement, dated
as of the date hereof (the “Note Agreement”);
WHEREAS, pursuant to and in accordance with the Note Agreement, as partial payment for the Note, Dalea 
Partners has agreed to assign, transfer and deliver to the Company, free and clear of all liens, charges, claims and 
encumbrances, an account payable of $3,535,946.79 owed by a former subsidiary of the Company, TransAtlantic 
Albania  Ltd.,  to  Dalea  Partners  (as  a  result  of  an  assignment  to  Dalea  Partners  by  the  original  obligee  of  such 
account, Viking International Limited), which account is the subject of an indemnity obligation of the Company (the 
“Account”);
WHEREAS, the parties are entering into this Agreement to accomplish the assignment and transfer of the
Account by Dalea Partners to the Company; and
WHEREAS, any capitalized term used herein and not otherwise defined shall have the meaning assigned to
it in the Note Agreement.
AGREEMENT
NOW, THEREFORE, for good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby 
acknowledged, Dalea Partners hereby assigns, transfers and delivers unto the Company and its successors and assigns 
all right, title and interest in and to the Account.
Dalea Partners hereby represents and warrants to the Company that it is the sole owner of the Account and 
that the Account, and the transfer thereof to the Company in accordance with the preceding paragraph, is free and 
clear of all liens, charges, claims and encumbrances.
This  Agreement  may  be  executed  in  one  or  more  counterparts,  each  of  which  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an
original, and all of which together shall constitute one and the same document.
This Agreement and the legal relations between the parties hereto shall be governed by and construed in 
accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, regardless of the laws that might otherwise govern under applicable 
principles of conflicts of laws thereof.
[Remainder of page intentionally left blank – signature pages follow]
6
EXECUTED AND DELIVERED on the date first written above.
DALEA PARTNER, LP
By:
Dalea Management, LLC, its General Partner
N. Malone Mitchell, 3rd, Manager
TRANSATLANTIC PETROLEUM LTD.
By:
By:
Name:
Title:
7
Subsidiaries of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.
March 29, 2016
Subsidiary
Amity Oil International Pty Ltd
Incremental Petroleum Pty Ltd
TransAtlantic Australia Pty Ltd
TransAtlantic Exploration Mediterranean International Pty Ltd
TransAtlantic (Holdings) Australia Pty Ltd
Anschutz Morocco Corporation
Direct Petroleum Morocco, Inc.
DMLP, Ltd.
Talon Exploration, Ltd.
TransAtlantic Maroc, Ltd.
TransAtlantic Turkey, Ltd.
TransAtlantic Worldwide, Ltd.
TransAtlantic Holdings, Ltd.
TransAtlantic Holdings B.C. Ltd.
Longe Energy Limited
Delvina Gas Company Ltd.
Thrace Basin Natural Gas (Turkiye) Corporation
Direct Petroleum Bulgaria EOOD
TransAtlantic Petroleum Cyprus Limited
Viva Exploration Ventures Ltd.
TransAtlantic Petroleum (USA) Corp.
MOS Viking SARL
TransAtlantic Worldwide Romania SRL
Petrogas Petrol Gaz ve Petrokemya Urunleri Insaat Sanayive Ticaret A.S.
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ukraine LLC
Viva Exploration LLC
Exhibit 21.1
Jurisdiction of Incorporation
Australia
Australia
Australia
Australia
Australia
Bahamas
Bahamas
Bahamas
Bahamas
Bahamas
Bahamas
Bahamas
Bahamas
British Columbia
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
British Virgin Islands
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Cyprus
Delaware
Morocco
Romania
Turkey
Ukraine
Ukraine
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Exhibit 23.1
The Board of Directors
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.:
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements on Form S-8 (Nos. 333-162814 and 333-200705) and 
Form S-3 (Nos. 333-204376 and 333-203696) of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. of our reports dated March 30, 2016, with respect 
to the consolidated balance sheets of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, and the 
related consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss), equity and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year 
period ended December 31, 2015, and all related financial statement schedules, and the effectiveness of internal control over 
financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, which reports appear in the December 31, 2015 annual report on Form 10-K of 
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.
Our report dated March 30, 2016 contains an explanatory paragraph that states that the Company has significant debt obligations 
and non-compliance with certain debt covenants that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern.  The 
consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedules do not include any adjustments that might result from the 
outcome of that uncertainty.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Dallas, Texas
March 30, 2016
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
5001 Spring Valley Road
Suite 800 East
Dallas, Texas 75244
Exhibit 23.2
March 28, 2016
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.
16803 Dallas Parkway
Addison, Texas 75001
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We hereby consent to references to DeGolyer and MacNaughton as an independent petroleum engineering consulting firm under 
the headings “Glossary of Selected Oil and Natural Gas Terms,” “Part I – Item 1. Business,” “Part I – Item 2. Properties,” “Part I 
– Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and “Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements – 18. Subsequent Events – Supplemental Oil and Natural Gas Reserves Information” of the Annual Report 
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. (TransAtlantic) to be filed with the United 
States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on  or  about  March  30,  2016  (the  Annual  Report),  including  any  amendments 
thereto,  and  to  the  inclusion  of  our  third-party  letter  report  dated  February  26,  2016,  containing  our  opinion  on  the  proved, 
probable, and possible reserves attributable to certain properties in Turkey, Albania and Bulgaria owned by TransAtlantic as of 
December 31, 2015.
We hereby further consent to the incorporation by reference of the foregoing in the Registration Statements on Form S-8 (File 
Numbers 333-162814 and 333-200705) of TransAtlantic.
Very truly yours,
/s/ DeGolyer and MacNaughton
DeGOLYER and MacNAUGHTON
Texas Registered Engineering Firm F-716
Exhibit 31.1
I, N. Malone Mitchell 3rd, certify that:
CERTIFICATION
1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.; 
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not 
misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present 
in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods 
presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and
procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a. Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed 
under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, 
is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared; 
b. Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be
designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
c. Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this 
report based on such evaluation; and
d. Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the
registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has 
materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and 
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control 
over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons 
performing the equivalent functions):
a. All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial
reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report 
financial information; and
b. Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
March 30, 2016
/s/ N. Malone Mitchell 3rd 
N. Malone Mitchell 3rd
Chief Executive Officer
Exhibit 31.2
I, Wil F. Saqueton, certify that:
CERTIFICATION
1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.; 
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not 
misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present 
in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods 
presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and
procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a. Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed 
under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, 
is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared; 
b. Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be
designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
c. Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this 
report based on such evaluation; and
d. Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the
registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has 
materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and 
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control 
over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons 
performing the equivalent functions):
a. All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial
reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report 
financial information; and
b. Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
March 30, 2016
/s/ Wil F. Saqueton 
Wil F. Saqueton
Chief Financial Officer
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 
OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Exhibit 32.1
In connection with the Annual Report on Form 10-K of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. (the “Company”) for the year ended
December 31, 2015 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Form 10-K”), I, N. Malone 
Mitchell 3rd, Chief Executive Officer of the Company, hereby certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 
906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that to the best of my knowledge: 
(1) The Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and 
(2) The information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of 
operations of the Company.
Dated:March 30, 2016
/s/ N. Malone Mitchell 3rd
N. Malone Mitchell 3rd
Chief Executive Officer
A signed original of this written statement required by Section 906 has been provided to TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and 
will be retained by TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon 
request.
The foregoing certification is being furnished as an exhibit to the Form 10-K pursuant to Item 601(b)(32) of Regulation S-K
and Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of Section 1350, Chapter 63 of Title 18, United 
States Code) and, accordingly, is not being filed as part of the Form 10-K for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934, as amended, and is not incorporated by reference into any filing of the Company, whether made before or after the 
date hereof, regardless of any general incorporation language in such filing.
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 
OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Exhibit 32.2
In connection with the Annual Report on Form 10-K of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. (the “Company”) for the year ended
December 31, 2015 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Form 10-K”), I, Wil F. 
Saqueton, Chief Financial Officer of the Company, hereby certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that to the best of my knowledge: 
(1) The Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and 
(2) The information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of 
operations of the Company.
Dated:March 30, 2016
/s/ Wil F. Saqueton
Wil F. Saqueton
Chief Financial Officer
A signed original of this written statement required by Section 906 has been provided to TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and 
will be retained by TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. and furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon 
request.
The foregoing certification is being furnished as an exhibit to the Form 10-K pursuant to Item 601(b)(32) of Regulation S-K
and Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of Section 1350, Chapter 63 of Title 18, United 
States Code) and, accordingly, is not being filed as part of the Form 10-K for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934, as amended, and is not incorporated by reference into any filing of the Company, whether made before or after the 
date hereof, regardless of any general incorporation language in such filing.
DeGolyer  an d  MacNau ghton
5001 Spring Valley Road
Suite 800 East
Dallas, Texas 75244
Exhibit 99.1
February 26, 2016
TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd.
16803 Dallas Parkway, Suite 200
Addison, Texas 75001
Gentlemen:
Pursuant to your request, we have conducted an independent evaluation, completed on February 26, 2016, to serve as a 
reserves  audit  of  the  extent  and  value  of  the  proved,  probable,  and  possible  oil,  condensate,  and  sales  gas  reserves,  as  of 
December  31,  2015,  of  certain  properties  owned  by  TransAtlantic  Petroleum  Ltd.  (TransAtlantic)  in  Turkey,  Bulgaria,  and 
Albania.  TransAtlantic  has  represented  that  these  properties  account  for  100  percent,  on  a  net  equivalent  barrel  basis,  of 
TransAtlantic’s net proved, probable, and possible reserves, as of December 31, 2015. The net proved, probable, and possible 
reserves estimates have been prepared in accordance with the reserves definitions of Rules 4–10(a) (1)–(32) of Regulation S–X 
of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) of the United States. This report was prepared in accordance with guidelines 
specified in Item 1202 (a)(8) of Regulation S-K and is to be used for inclusion in certain SEC filings by TransAtlantic.
Gross reserves are defined as the total estimated petroleum to be produced from these properties after December 31, 
2015. Net reserves are defined as that portion of the gross reserves attributable to the interests owned by TransAtlantic after 
deducting interests owned by others. Only net reserves are reported herein.
Gas reserves estimated herein are expressed as sales gas. Sales gas is defined as that portion of the total gas produced 
from the reservoir after reduction for shrinkage resulting from field separation, processing, fuel use, and flare available to be 
delivered into a gas pipeline for sale. Sales gas reserves are expressed at a temperature base of 60 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) and at 
a pressure base of 14.70 pounds per square inch absolute (psia). Oil and condensate reserves estimated herein are those to be 
recovered by conventional lease separation.
Values  of  proved,  probable,  and  possible  reserves  shown  herein  are  expressed  in  terms  of  estimated  future  gross 
revenue, future net revenue, and present worth. Future gross revenue is that revenue which will accrue to the appraised interests 
from  the  production  and  sale  of  the  estimated  net  reserves  adjusted  for  net  profits  (where  applicable).  Future  net  revenue  is 
defined  as  the  future  gross  revenue  less  direct  operating  expenses,  capital  costs,  abandonment  costs,  and  net  profits,  where 
applicable.  Direct  operating  expenses  include  field  operating  expenses,  transportation  expenses,  compression  charges,  and  an 
allocation of overhead that directly relates to production activities. Future income tax expenses were not taken into account in the 
preparation of these estimates. Present worth is defined as future net revenue discounted at a specified arbitrary discount rate 
compounded monthly over the expected period of realization. Present worth should not be construed as fair market value because 
no consideration was given to additional factors that influence the prices at which properties are bought and sold.
Estimates of reserves and future net revenue should be regarded only as estimates that may change as further production 
history and additional information become available. Not only are such reserves and revenue estimates based on that information 
which is currently available, but such estimates are also subject to the uncertainties inherent in the application of judgmental 
factors in interpreting such information.
Data used in this audit were obtained from reviews with TransAtlantic personnel, from TransAtlantic files, from records 
on file with the appropriate regulatory agencies, and from public sources. In the preparation of this report we have relied, without 
independent verification, upon such information furnished by TransAtlantic with respect to property interests, production from 
such properties, current costs of operation and development, current prices for production, agreements relating to current and 
future  operations  and  sale  of  production,  and  various  other  information  and  data  that  were  accepted  as  represented.  A  field 
examination of the properties was not considered necessary for the purposes of this report.
2
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
Methodology and Procedures
Estimates  of  reserves  were  prepared  by  the  use  of  appropriate  geologic,  petroleum  engineering,  and  evaluation 
principles and techniques that are in accordance with practices generally recognized by the petroleum industry as presented in the 
publication of the Society of Petroleum Engineers entitled “Standards Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas 
Reserves Information (Revision as of February 19, 2007).” The method or combination of methods used in the analysis of each 
reservoir was tempered by experience with similar reservoirs, stage of development, quality and completeness of basic data, and 
production history.
When applicable, the volumetric method was used to estimate the original oil in place (OOIP) and the original gas in 
place (OGIP). Structure and isopach maps were constructed to estimate reservoir volume. Electrical logs, radioactivity logs, core 
analyses, and other available data were used to prepare these maps as well as to estimate representative values for porosity and 
water saturation. When adequate data were available and when circumstances justified, material balance and other engineering 
methods were used to estimate OOIP or OGIP.
Estimates of ultimate recovery were obtained after applying recovery factors to OOIP or OGIP. These recovery factors 
were based on consideration of the type of energy inherent in the reservoirs, analyses of the petroleum, the structural positions of 
the properties, and the production histories. When applicable, other engineering methods were used to estimate recovery factors. 
In such case, an analysis of reservoir performance, including production rate, reservoir pressure, and gas-oil ratio behavior, was 
used in the estimation of reserves.
For depletion-type reservoirs or those whose performance disclosed a reliable decline in producing-rate trends or other 
diagnostic  characteristics,  reserves  were  estimated  by  the  application  of  appropriate  decline  curves  or  other  performance 
relationships. In the analyses of production-decline curves and reserves forecasts, reserves were estimated only to the limits of 
economic production or to the limit of the production licenses as appropriate, with extensions if applicable, whichever occurs 
first.
In  certain  cases,  reserves  were  estimated  using  elements  established  by  analogy  with  similar  wells  or  reservoirs  for
which more complete data were available.
The fields have been grouped into four asset groups based on economic considerations: the Thrace Basin Natural Gas 
Company (TBNGC) asset group in Turkey, the core TransAtlantic properties (TAT) asset group (includes Turkey and Bulgaria), 
the Edirne asset group (consisting of the Edirne field in Turkey), and the Albania asset group. All fields in the TBNGC, TAT, 
and Edirne asset groups are subject to a royalty of 12.5 percent. The TBNGC asset group is subject to an additional 1.0-percent 
overriding royalty interest, except for the Alibey field, which has a 0.5-percent overriding royalty interest. Certain wells in TAT 
and Edirne asset groups are also subject to a net profits interest of 5 percent.
Fields  in  the  Albania  asset  group  are  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  Albania  production  sharing  agreement  (PSA). 
TransAtlantic has represented that the PSA with Albpetrol commenced on August 8, 2007, for the Ballsh-Hekal, Cakran-Mollaj, 
Gorisht-Kocul,  and  Delvina  fields.  TransAtlantic  acquired  Stream  Oil  &  Gas  Ltd.  in  November  2014.  Subsequently, 
TransAtlantic took over the Albania PSA with Albpetrol, a public company with the Albanian Government, as the sole owners. 
This agreement gives TransAtlantic complete access to produce and sell their share of the produced petroleum products. The 
agreement  provides  for  an  initial  25-year  development  and  production  period.  Upon  the  expiration  of  the  initial  25-year 
development and production period, the parties have the right to request extensions of successive 5-year increments up to the 
economic life of the fields. Based on TransAtlantic’s representation that TransAtlantic has every intention to extend the terms of 
the  agreement,  reserves  have  been  estimated  beyond  the  25-year  initial  term  to  include  the  extensions  of  the  PSA  up  to  the 
economic life of the fields.
For the fields in Turkey and Bulgaria, net reserves quantities reported herein reflect the appropriate quantity reductions 
for  royalty  interests  and  overriding  royalty  interests,  as  well  as  the  quantity  reduction  yielded  from  the  calculated  revenue 
associated with the net profits payable, where applicable.
The  reserves  estimated  in  Albania  in  this  report  have  been  evaluated  under  the  terms  of  a  PSA.  The  terms  of  this 
contract are summarized in the Valuation of Reserves section of this report. Net reserves are the reserves estimated from the 
future net revenue attributable to TransAtlantic under the terms of the respective PSA. Two components make up the net revenue 
calculation: cost revenue and profit revenue. Cost revenue is the revenue entitlement attributable to the PSA participant for its
share of costs. Profit revenue is the portion of the sales revenue that remains after cost revenue and is contractually apportioned 
to the contractor based on the PSA terms.
3
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
Definition of Reserves
Petroleum reserves included in this report are classified by degree of proof as proved, probable, or possible. Reserves 
classifications used in this report are in accordance with the reserves definitions of Rules 4–10(a) (1)–(32) of Regulation S–X of 
the SEC. Reserves are judged to be economically producible in future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and 
operating  conditions  and  assuming  continuation  of  current  regulatory  practices  using  conventional  production  methods  and 
equipment.  In  the  analyses  of  production-decline  curves,  reserves  were  estimated  only  to  the  limit  of  economic  rates  of 
production under existing economic and operating conditions using prices and costs consistent with the effective date of this 
report,  including  consideration  of  changes  in  existing  prices  provided  only  by  contractual  arrangements  but  not  including 
escalations based upon future conditions. The petroleum reserves are classified as follows:
Proved oil and gas reserves – Proved oil and gas reserves are those quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis 
of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible—
from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, 
and government regulations—prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless 
evidence  indicates  that  renewal  is  reasonably  certain,  regardless  of  whether  deterministic  or  probabilistic 
methods  are  used  for  the  estimation.  The  project  to  extract  the  hydrocarbons  must  have  commenced  or  the 
operator must be reasonably certain that it will commence the project within a reasonable time.
(i) The area of the reservoir considered as proved includes:
(A)  The area identified by drilling  and  limited  by fluid  contacts, if  any, and (B)  Adjacent undrilled 
portions of the reservoir that can, with reasonable certainty, be judged to be continuous with it and to 
contain economically producible oil or gas on the basis of available geoscience and engineering data.
(ii) In the absence of data on fluid contacts, proved quantities in a reservoir are limited by the lowest 
known  hydrocarbons  (LKH)  as  seen  in  a  well  penetration  unless  geoscience,  engineering,  or 
performance data and reliable technology establishes a lower contact with reasonable certainty.
(iii) Where direct observation from well penetrations has defined a highest known oil (HKO) elevation 
and  the  potential  exists  for  an  associated  gas  cap,  proved  oil  reserves  may  be  assigned  in  the 
structurally higher portions of the reservoir only if geoscience, engineering, or performance data and 
reliable technology establish the higher contact with reasonable certainty.
(iv)  Reserves  which  can  be  produced  economically  through  application  of  improved  recovery 
techniques (including, but not limited to, fluid injection) are included in the proved classification when:
(A) Successful testing by a pilot project in an area of the reservoir with properties no more favorable 
than in the reservoir as a whole, the operation of an installed program in the reservoir or an analogous 
reservoir,  or  other  evidence  using  reliable  technology  establishes  the  reasonable  certainty  of  the 
engineering  analysis  on  which  the  project  or  program  was  based;  and  (B)  The  project  has  been 
approved for development by all necessary parties and entities, including governmental entities.
(v)  Existing  economic  conditions  include  prices  and  costs  at  which  economic  producibility  from  a 
reservoir is to be determined. The price shall be the average price during the 12-month period prior to 
the ending date of the period covered by the report, determined as an unweighted arithmetic average of 
the  first-day-of-the-month  price  for  each  month  within  such  period,  unless  prices  are  defined  by 
contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions.
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
4
Probable reserves – Probable reserves are those additional reserves that are less certain to be recovered than 
proved reserves but which, together with proved reserves, are as likely as not to be recovered.
(i) When deterministic methods are used, it is as likely as not that actual remaining quantities recovered 
will exceed the sum of estimated proved plus probable reserves. When probabilistic methods are used, 
there should be at least a 50% probability that the actual quantities recovered will equal or exceed the 
proved plus probable reserves estimates.
(ii) Probable reserves may be assigned to areas of a reservoir adjacent to proved reserves where data 
control or interpretations of available data are less certain, even if the interpreted reservoir continuity 
of structure or productivity does not meet the reasonable certainty criterion. Probable reserves may be 
assigned to areas that are structurally higher than the proved area if these areas are in communication 
with the proved reservoir.
(iii) Probable reserves estimates also include potential incremental quantities associated with a greater 
percentage recovery of the hydrocarbons in place than assumed for proved reserves.
(iv) See also guidelines in paragraphs (iv) and (vi) of the definition of possible reserves.
Possible  reserves  –  Possible  reserves  are  those  additional  reserves  that  are  less  certain  to  be  recovered  than 
probable reserves.
(i) When deterministic methods are used, the total quantities ultimately recovered from a project have a 
low probability of exceeding proved plus probable plus possible reserves. When probabilistic methods 
are used, there should be at least a 10% probability that the total quantities ultimately recovered will 
equal or exceed the proved plus probable plus possible reserves estimates.
(ii) Possible reserves may be assigned to areas of a reservoir adjacent to probable reserves where data 
control and interpretations of available data are progressively less certain. Frequently, this will be in 
areas where geoscience and engineering data are unable to define clearly the area and vertical limits of 
commercial production from the reservoir by a defined project.
(iii) Possible reserves also include incremental quantities associated with a greater percentage recovery 
of the hydrocarbons in place than the recovery quantities assumed for probable reserves.
(iv) The proved plus probable and proved plus probable plus possible reserves estimates must be based 
on  reasonable  alternative  technical  and  commercial  interpretations  within  the  reservoir  or  subject 
project that are clearly documented, including comparisons to results in successful similar projects.
(v) Possible reserves may be assigned where geoscience and engineering data identify directly adjacent 
portions of a reservoir within the same accumulation that may be separated from proved areas by faults 
with displacement less than formation thickness or other geological discontinuities and that have not 
been  penetrated  by  a  wellbore,  and  the  registrant  believes  that  such  adjacent  portions  are  in 
communication with the known (proved) reservoir. Possible reserves may be assigned to areas that are 
structurally higher or lower than the proved area if these areas are in communication with the proved 
reservoir.
(vi) Pursuant to paragraph (iii) of the proved oil and gas reserves definition, where direct observation 
has defined a highest known oil (HKO) elevation and the potential exists for an associated gas cap, 
proved oil reserves should be assigned in the structurally higher portions  of  the reservoir above  the 
HKO  only  if  the  higher  contact  can  be  established  with  reasonable  certainty  through  reliable 
technology.  Portions  of  the  reservoir  that  do  not  meet  this  reasonable  certainty  criterion  may  be 
assigned as probable and possible oil or gas based on reservoir fluid properties and pressure gradient 
interpretations.
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
5
Developed  oil  and  gas  reserves  –  Developed  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  reserves  of  any  category  that  can  be 
expected to be recovered:
(i) Through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the 
required equipment is relatively minor compared to the cost of a new well; and
(ii) Through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the time of the reserves 
estimate if the extraction is by means not involving a well.
Undeveloped  oil  and  gas reserves – Undeveloped  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  reserves  of any  category that are 
expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major 
expenditure is required for recompletion.
(i) Reserves on undrilled acreage shall be limited to those directly offsetting development spacing areas 
that are reasonably certain of production when drilled, unless evidence using reliable technology exists 
that establishes reasonable certainty of economic producibility at greater distances.
(ii) Undrilled locations can be classified as having undeveloped reserves only if a development plan 
has been adopted indicating that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the specific 
circumstances justify a longer time.
(iii) Under no circumstances shall estimates for undeveloped reserves be attributable to any acreage for 
which an application of fluid injection or other improved recovery technique is contemplated, unless 
such techniques have been proved effective by actual projects in the same reservoir or an analogous 
reservoir,  as  defined  in  [section  210.4–10  (a)  Definitions],  or  by  other  evidence  using  reliable 
technology establishing reasonable certainty.
The extent to which probable and possible reserves ultimately may be reclassified as proved reserves is dependent upon 
future drilling, testing, and well performance. The degree of risk to be applied in evaluating probable and possible reserves is 
influenced by economic and technological factors as well as the time element. Probable and possible reserves in this report have 
not been adjusted in consideration of these additional risks and therefore are not comparable with proved reserves.
Primary Economic Assumptions
The following economic assumptions were used for estimating existing and future prices and costs:
Oil, Condensate, and Gas Prices
Prices used in this evaluation were based on a 12-month average price, calculated as the unweighted 
arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within the 12-month period prior 
to the end of the reporting period. An average reference oil price during this period was Brent at 54.25 
United States dollars (U.S.$) per barrel. The oil and condensate prices used to estimate reserves herein 
were as follows: U.S.$50.68 per barrel in the AG field (Turkey), U.S.$48.70 per barrel in the Alibey 
field  (Turkey),  U.S.$48.24  in  the  Arpatepe  field  (Turkey),  U.S.$49.09  per  barrel  in  the  Bahar  field 
(Turkey), U.S.$40.17 per barrel in the Goksu field (Turkey), U.S.$44.86 per barrel in the Molla field 
(Turkey), U.S.$48.70 per barrel in the Selmo field (Turkey), U.S. $40.36 per barrel for the remaining 
fields in the TBNGC asset group (Turkey), U.S.$37.94 per barrel in the Ballsh-Hekal, Cakran-Mollaj, 
and  Gorisht-Kocul  fields  (Albania),  U.S.$55.05  per  barrel  in  the  Delvina  field  (Albania),  and 
U.S.$50.97 in the West Koynare field (Bulgaria). The overall volume-weighted average oil price used 
in  this  report  was  U.S.$46.05  per  barrel.  An  average  reference  gas  price  during  this  period  was  the 
United Kingdom National Balancing Point Index of U.S.$6.06 per thousand cubic feet (Mcf). The gas 
prices  used  in  this  report  were  as  follows:  U.S.$7.96  per  Mcf  for  the  Edirne  asset  group  (Turkey), 
U.S.$3.65  per  Mcf  for  the  Bakuk  field  (Turkey),  U.S.$8.27  per  Mcf  for  fields  in  the  TBNGC  asset 
group (Turkey), U.S.$4.25 per Mcf for the West Koynare field (Bulgaria), U.S.$7.27 per Mcf for the 
remaining fields in the TAT asset group (Turkey), and U.S.$7.37 per

DeGolyer and MacNaughton
6
Mcf for fields in the Albania asset group. The overall volume-weighted average gas price in this report 
was U.S.$7.59 per Mcf. These prices were held constant for the lives of the properties.
Operating Expenses and Capital Costs
Estimates of operating expenses based on current expenses were used for the lives of the properties 
with no increases in the future based on inflation. In certain cases, future expenses, either higher or 
lower  than  current  expenses,  may  have  been  used  because  of  anticipated  changes  in  operating 
conditions. Future capital expenditures were estimated using current values and were not adjusted for 
inflation.
Abandonment Costs
Abandonment costs were provided by TransAtlantic. These costs were estimated using current values 
and were not adjusted for inflation. Abandonment costs herein include well abandonment only. Also, 
TransAtlantic  has  represented  that  it  will  relinquish  operation  of  the  Selmo  field  to  the  Turkish 
Government  at  the  end  of  June  2025,  and  therefore  will  not  be  responsible  for  abandonment  costs 
pertaining to wells in the Selmo field that produce beyond June 2025.
Turkey and Bulgaria
Net Profits Interest
As represented by TransAtlantic, there is a 5-percent net profits interest burden for certain wells in the 
AG, Alpullu, CAB, DAK, Edirne, Karapurcek, and REDY fields in Turkey. Where applicable, the net 
profits reduced TransAtlantic’s ownership of reserves and revenue values.
Royalty
All fields in the TBNGC, TAT, and Edirne asset groups in Turkey and Bulgaria are subject to a royalty 
of 12.5 percent. Fields in the TBNGC asset group are subject to an additional 1.0-percent overriding 
royalty interest, except for the Alibey field, which has a 0.5-percent overriding royalty interest. Certain 
wells in the Edirne field are subject to a third-party carried net revenue interest of 2.625 percent.
Taxes
TransAtlantic has represented that there are no production taxes to be paid in Turkey or Bulgaria. No 
other taxes, including income taxes for Turkey, Bulgaria, or the United States, were considered in this 
evaluation for the TBNGC, TAT, and Edirne asset groups.
Albania
PSA  Terms  –  For  the  Albania  asset  group,  the  PSA  with  Albpetrol,  a  public  company  with  the  Albanian  Government, 
commenced on August 8, 2007, for the Ballsh-Hekal, Cakran-Mollaj, Gorisht-Kocul, and Delvina fields. TransAtlantic acquired 
Stream Oil & Gas Ltd. in November 2014, including a share of the PSA with Albpetrol, as the sole foreign partner. The PSA 
entitles TransAtlantic to complete access to produce and sell its share of the produced petroleum products.
In accordance with the license agreement associated with the PSA, TransAtlantic has the exclusive right to conduct petroleum 
operations in the Ballsh-Hekal, Cakran-Mollaj, Gorisht-Kocul, and Delvina fields. TransAtlantic has the right to receive in kind, 
sell,  and  export  freely  its  share  of  petroleum  from  the  project  area  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  PSA.  The  PSA 
provides for an initial 25-year development and production period. Upon the expiration of the initial 25-year development and 
production period, the parties have the right to request extensions of 5-year increments up to the economic life of the fields. 
Based on TransAtlantic’s representation that TransAtlantic has every intention to extend the terms of the agreement, reserves 
have been estimated beyond the 25-year initial term to include the extension of the PSA up to the economic life of the fields.
7
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
Pre-existing Production (PEP)
As per the license agreement, ownership of any Albpetrol wells in the contract area may be transferred 
to the control of TransAtlantic. When TransAtlantic takes control of these wells, TransAtlantic must 
deliver  in  kind  to  Albpetrol  the  deemed  production  (“pre-existing”  production)  of  such  wells. 
Albpetrol’s share of the PEP is a percentage of the average net petroleum production of the well in the 
6  calendar  months  preceding  the  month  in  which  takeover  occurs,  plus  a  projection  of  monthly 
production (after the takeover date) based on a set annual decline rate of 10 percent. The PEP forecasts 
applied in this report are based on information provided by TransAtlantic.
Cost Recovery
As  per  the  license  agreement,  all  produced  petroleum  in  excess  of  PEP  is  to  be  allocated  between 
Albpetrol  (Albpetrol’s  share)  and  TransAtlantic  (cost  recovery  petroleum)  based  on  the  R-factor 
calculation. The R-factor is the ratio of the sum of TransAtlantic’s revenue, minus tax, to the sum of 
TransAtlantic’s  petroleum  costs  plus  all  costs  projected  to  occur  after  December  31,  2015. 
TransAtlantic is entitled to the cost recovery petroleum to recover all petroleum costs borne by it inside 
or related to the project area. The cost recovery royalty rate varies by R-factor:
Rate
(percent)
Cost Recovery Royalty
R-factor
0-0.99
1.0-1.49
1.5-1.99
2.0+
2.0
2.5
4.0
6.0
Profit Petroleum
After TransAtlantic has recovered its petroleum costs from the cost recovery petroleum, the remaining 
cost recovery petroleum is “profit petroleum.” Albpetrol’s share of the profit petroleum (profit royalty) 
is one-fifth of the cost recovery royalty, which is dependent on the R-factor (shown below) and the 
profit petroleum.
Profit Royalty
Rate
(percent)
R-factor
0-0.99
1.0-1.49
1.5-1.99
2.0+
0.4
0.5
0.8
1.2
Production Tax
A  production  tax  of  10  percent  was  implemented  as  law  after  the  effective  date  of  the  petroleum 
agreements  signed  by  TransAtlantic.  Upon  such  a  change  in  law,  rules,  or  regulations  after  the 
effective  date  of  the  agreements  that  impact  TransAtlantic’s  economic  benefits,  the  petroleum 
agreements can be amended to reduce the negative economic effect that the change in law or regulation 
has caused. However, as of December 31, 2015, the evaluation has included the 10-percent production 
tax, as TransAtlantic and Albpetrol have not agreed to new terms on an amended petroleum agreement. 
Therefore,  the  production  tax  is  applied  to  TransAtlantic’s  gross  revenues  herein  (before  the  cost 
recovery royalty and profit sharing royalty).
8
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
While the oil and gas industry may be subject to regulatory changes from time to time that could affect an industry 
participant’s ability to recover its oil and gas reserves, we are not aware of any such governmental actions which would restrict 
the recovery of the December 31, 2015, oil, condensate, and sales gas reserves estimated herein.
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves and Revenue
The  estimates  of  net  proved,  probable,  and  possible  reserves,  as  of  December 31,  2015,  attributable  to  the  interests 
owned  by  TransAtlantic  in  Turkey,  Bulgaria,  and  Albania,  of  the  properties  evaluated  herein,  are  summarized  as  follows, 
expressed in barrels (bbl) and thousands of cubic feet (Mcf):
Estimated by DeGolyer and MacNaughton
Sales Gas
(Mcf)
Net Reserves as of December 31, 2015
Oil
(bbl)
Condensate
(bbl)
Proved Developed
Producing
Non-Producing
Total Proved Developed
Proved Undeveloped
Total Proved
Probable
Developed
Undeveloped
Total Probable
Possible
Developed
Undeveloped
Total Possible
6,478,113
3,205,437
9,683,550
5,390,459
15,074,009
13,453,183
10,540,080
23,993,263
9,782,368
11,042,958
20,825,326
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,102,407
4,608,671
9,711,078
11,663,453
21,374,531
4,163,451
30,345,668
34,509,119
5,252,719
89,370,702
94,623,421
Note: Probable and possible reserves have not been risk adjusted to make them comparable to proved reserves.
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
The estimated revenue and expenditures attributable to TransAtlantic’s interests in Turkey, Bulgaria, and Albania in the 
proved,  probable,  and  possible  net  reserves,  as  of  December  31,  2015,  of  the  properties  appraised  under  the  aforementioned 
assumptions concerning future prices and costs are summarized as follows, expressed in United States dollars (U.S.$):
9
Future Gross Revenue
Production Taxes
Operating Expenses
Capital Costs
Abandonment Costs
Net Profits 
Future Net Revenue
Present Worth at 10 Percent
Developed
Producing
(U.S.$)
328,706,270
7,884,132
116,734,681
0
4,137,948
(12,803)
199,936,706
151,788,815
Estimated by DeGolyer and MacNaughton as of December 31, 2015
Proved
Developed
Non-Producing
(U.S.$)
Undeveloped
(U.S.$)
Total
(U.S.$)
Probable
(U.S.$)
Possible
(U.S.$)
171,367,022
8,291,748
50,472,213
12,749,624
1,096,764
(167,250)
98,589,423
57,227,780
354,002,836
4,339,145
62,576,301
181,638,083
336,301
(658,379)
104,454,627
40,367,287
854,076,128
20,515,025
229,783,195
194,387,707
5,571,013
(838,432)
402,980,756
249,383,882
1,290,415,820
59,537,405
365,807,576
297,527,844
4,857,892
(780,175)
561,904,928
265,705,880
1,609,207,014
55,356,356
332,999,738
247,660,450
1,209,699
(18,519,324)
953,461,447
436,504,945
Notes:
1. Values for probable and possible reserves have not been risk adjusted to make them comparable to values for proved
reserves.
2. Future income tax expenses were not taken into account in the preparation of these estimates.
3. Net reserves and future net revenue reflect reduction for net profits, where applicable.
4. For the assets in Albania, operating expenses include profit royalty.
10
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
In  our  opinion,  the  information  relating  to  estimated  proved,  probable,  and  possible  reserves,  estimated  future  net 
revenue from proved reserves, and present worth of estimated future net revenue from proved reserves of oil, condensate, natural 
gas liquids, and gas contained in this report has been prepared in accordance with Paragraphs 932-235-50-4, 932-235-50-6, 932-
235-50-7, 932-235-50-9, 932-235-50-30, and 932-235-50-31(a), (b), and (e) of the Accounting Standards Update 932-235-50, 
Extractive  Industries  –  Oil  and  Gas  (Topic  932):  Oil  and  Gas  Reserve  Estimation  and  Disclosures  (January  2010)  of  the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board and Rules 4–10(a) (1)–(32) of Regulation S–X and Rules 302(b), 1201, 1202(a) (1), (2), 
(3), (4), (5), (8), and 1203(a) of Regulation S–K of the Securities and Exchange Commission; provided, however, that (i) future 
income tax expenses have not been taken into account in estimating the future net revenue and present worth values set forth 
herein and (ii) estimates of the proved developed and proved undeveloped reserves are not presented at the beginning of the year.
To the extent the above-enumerated rules, regulations, and statements require determinations of an accounting or legal 
nature,  we,  as  engineers,  are  necessarily  unable  to  express  an  opinion  as  to  whether  the  above-described  information  is  in 
accordance therewith or sufficient therefor.
DeGolyer  and  MacNaughton  is  an  independent  petroleum  engineering  consulting  firm  that  has  been  providing 
petroleum  consulting  services  throughout  the  world  since  1936.  DeGolyer  and  MacNaughton  does  not  have  any  financial 
interest, including stock ownership, in TransAtlantic. Our fees were not contingent on the results of our evaluation. This letter 
report has been prepared at the request of TransAtlantic. DeGolyer and MacNaughton has used all data, assumptions, procedures, 
and methods that it considers necessary to prepare this report.
Submitted,
/s/ DeGolyer and MacNaughton
DeGOLYER and MacNAUGHTON
Texas Registered Engineering Firm F-716
DeGolyer and MacNaughton
CERTIFICATE of QUALIFICATION
I,  Lloyd  W.  Cade,  Petroleum  Engineer  with  DeGolyer  and  MacNaughton,  5001 Spring  Valley  Road,  Suite  800  East,  Dallas, 
Texas, 75244 U.S.A., hereby certify:
1. That  I  am  a  Senior  Vice  President  with  DeGolyer  and  MacNaughton,  which  company  did  prepare  the  letter  report 
addressed  to  TransAtlantic  dated  February  26,  2016,  and  that  I,  as  Senior  Vice  President,  was  responsible  for  the 
preparation of this report.
2. That  I  attended  Kansas  State  University,  and  that  I  graduated  with  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Mechanical 
Engineering in the year 1982; that I am a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Texas; that I am a member of 
the International Society of Petroleum Engineers; and that I have in excess of 33 years of experience in oil and gas 
reservoir studies and evaluations.
3. That DeGolyer and MacNaughton or its officers have no direct or indirect interest, nor do they expect to receive any
direct or indirect interest in any properties or securities of TransAtlantic Petroleum Ltd. or affiliate thereof.
SIGNED: February 26, 2016
[SEAL]
/s/ Lloyd W. Cade 
Lloyd W. Cade, P.E.
Senior Vice President
DeGolyer and MacNaughton