
News Release
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
 
Suncor Energy announces $1.0 billion medium term note offering  
 
Calgary, Alberta (Sept. 8, 2016) – Suncor announced today that it will issue an aggregate of $1.0 
billion of senior unsecured Series 5 Medium Term Notes (the “Offering”).  The Offering will be 
conducted in two tranches consisting of $700 million of senior unsecured Series 5 Medium Term Notes 
maturing on Sept. 14, 2026 (the “2026 Notes) and $300 million of senior unsecured Series 5 Medium 
Term Notes maturing on Sept. 13, 2046 (the “2046 Notes”, and collectively with the 2026 Notes, the 
“Notes”). The 2026 Notes will have a coupon of 3.00% and have been priced at $99.751 per note to 
yield 3.029% and the 2046 Notes will have a coupon of 4.34% and have been priced at $99.900 per 
note to yield 4.346%.  
 
Suncor intends to use the net proceeds from the sale of the Notes to repay existing short-term 
indebtedness.  The Notes are being offered through a syndicate of dealers led by CIBC World Markets 
Inc., BMO Nesbitt Burns Inc. and HSBC Securities (Canada) Inc. under Suncor’s short form base shelf 
prospectus dated June 29, 2016. The Offering is expected to close on Sept.13, 2016.  
 
This news release does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any of the 
Notes in any jurisdiction.  The Notes have not been approved or disapproved by any regulatory 
authority. The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the United States Securities Act of 
1933, as amended (the "U.S. Securities Act"), or any state securities laws, and may not be offered or 
sold within the United States unless an exemption from the registration requirements of the U.S. 
Securities Act is available. 
 
Legal Advisory – Forward Looking Information 
 
This news release contains certain forward-looking information and forward-looking statements (collectively 
referred to herein as “forward-looking statements”) within the meaning of applicable Canadian securities laws. 
Forward-looking statements are based on Suncor’s current expectations, estimates, projections and assumptions 
that were made by the company in light of its information available at the time the statement was made and 
consider Suncor’s experience and its perception of historical trends. In this news release, such forward-looking 
statements can be identified by terminology such as “will”, “intends”, “expected” and similar expressions 
suggesting future events or future performance.  In particular, forward-looking statements in this news release 
include references to the Offering, the expected closing date and size of the Offering and the anticipated use of 
the net proceeds of the Offering.  Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and 
involve a number of risks and uncertainties, some that are similar to other oil and gas companies and some that 
are unique to our company. Suncor’s actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by our 
forward-looking statements and you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on them.  
 
Suncor’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis dated July 27, 2016 and its Annual Information Form, Form 40- 
F and Annual Report to Shareholders, each dated Feb. 25, 2016, Suncor’s short form base shelf prospectus 
dated June 29, 2016 and other documents it files from time to time with securities regulatory authorities describe 
the risks, uncertainties, material assumptions and other factors that could influence actual results and such 
factors are incorporated herein by reference. Copies of these documents are available without charge from 
Suncor at 150 6th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 3E3; by email request to invest@suncor.com; by calling 1-
800-558-9071; or by referring to suncor.com/financialreports or to the company’s profile on SEDAR at sedar.com 
or EDGAR at sec.gov. Except as required by applicable securities laws, Suncor disclaims any intention or
Suncor Energy 
150 6 Avenue S.W. Calgary, Alberta T2P 3E3 
suncor.com
obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, 
future events or otherwise. 
 
 
Suncor Energy is Canada's leading integrated energy company. Suncor's operations include oil sands 
development and upgrading, onshore and offshore oil and gas production, petroleum refining, and product 
marketing under the Petro-Canada brand. A member of Dow Jones Sustainability indexes, FTSE4Good and CDP, 
Suncor is working to responsibly develop petroleum resources while also growing a renewable energy portfolio. 
Suncor is listed on the UN Global Compact 100 stock index and the Corporate Knights’ Global 100. Suncor's 
common shares (symbol: SU) are listed on the Toronto and New York stock exchanges.
-30-
For more information about Suncor Energy visit our web site at suncor.com, follow us on Twitter 
@SuncorEnergy, or come and See what Yes can do. 
 
Media inquiries: 
403-296-4000 
media@suncor.com 
 
Investor inquiries: 
800-558-9071 
invest@suncor.com