
ARGENT MINERALS LIMITED
ACN 124 780 276
PROSPECTUS
For the offer of up to 117,000,000 Listed Options
THIS PROSPECTUS IS BEING ISSUED IN ORDER TO FACILITATE SECONDARY TRADING OF THE
LISTED OPTIONS
THIS PROSPECTUS IS ALSO BEING ISSUED IN ORDER TO FACILITATE SECONDARY TRADING
OF THE UNDERLYING SHARES TO BE ISSUED UPON EXERCISE OF THE LISTED OPTIONS 
PURSUANT TO ASIC CORPORATIONS (SALE OFFERS THAT DO NOT NEED DISCLOSURE)
INSTRUMENT 2016/80
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT DOCUMENT AND REQUIRES YOUR IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.  IT
SHOULD BE READ IN ITS ENTIRETY
IF YOU ARE IN DOUBT ABOUT WHAT TO DO, YOU SHOULD CONSULT YOUR PROFESSIONAL
ADVISER WITHOUT DELAY
THE SECURITIES OFFERED IN CONNECTION WITH THIS PROSPECTUS ARE OF A SPECULATIVE
NATURE
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
This  Prospectus  is  dated  17  August  2016  and  was  lodged  with  the  ASIC  on  that  date  with  the  consent  of  all 
Directors.    Neither  ASIC  nor  ASX  nor  their  respective  officers  take  any  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  this 
Prospectus. 
 
No  Listed  Options  will  be  issued  on  the  basis  of  this  Prospectus  any  later  than  13  months  after  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus (being the expiry date of this Prospectus). 
 
A copy of this Prospectus is available for inspection at the registered office of the Company at Level 2, 66 Hunter 
Street,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales  2000  during  normal  business  hours.  The  Company  will  provide  a  copy  of  this 
Prospectus  to  any  person  on  request.  The Company  will  also  provide  copies  of  other  documents  on  request  (see 
Section 4.4). 
 
The  Listed  Options  offered  by  this  Prospectus  should  be  considered  speculative.    Please  refer  to  Section  3  for 
details relating to investment risks.
The Prospectus will be made available in electronic form.  Persons having received a copy of this Prospectus in its 
electronic  form  may  obtain  an  additional  paper  copy  of  this  Prospectus  (free  of  charge)  from  the  Company's 
principal  place  of  business  by  contacting  the  Company.    The  Offer  contemplated  by  this  Prospectus  is  only 
available in electronic form to persons receiving an electronic version of this Prospectus within Australia. 
 
Applications for the Listed Options under the Offer will only be accepted on an Application Form which is attached 
to, or provided by the Company with a copy of this Prospectus either in paper or electronic form. The Corporations 
Act  prohibits  any  person  from  passing  on  to  another  person  an  Application  Form  unless  it  is  accompanied  by  a 
complete and unaltered copy of this Prospectus. 
 
No person is authorised to give any information or to make any representation in connection with the Offer in this 
Prospectus.  Any information or representation not so contained may not be relied on as having been authorised by 
the Company in connection with the Offer. 
 
No action has been taken to permit the offer of Listed Options under this Prospectus in any jurisdiction other than 
Australia. 
 
The distribution of this Prospectus in jurisdictions outside Australia may be restricted by law and therefore persons 
into whose possession this document comes should seek advice on and observe any such restrictions.  Any failure to 
comply  with  these  restrictions  may  constitute  a  violation  of  those  laws.    This  Prospectus  does  not  constitute  an 
offer  of  Listed  Options  in  any  jurisdiction  where,  or  to  any  person  to  whom,  it  would  be  unlawful  to  issue  this 
Prospectus. 
 
This  document  is  important  and  should  be  read  in  its  entirety  before  deciding  to  participate  in  the  Offer.    This 
does not take into account the investment objectives, financial or taxation or particular needs of any Applicant.  
Before  making  any  investment  in  the  Company,  each  Applicant  should  consider  whether  such  an  investment  is 
appropriate to his/her particular needs, and considering their individual risk profile for speculative investments, 
investment objectives and individual financial circumstances.  Each Applicant should consult his/her stockbroker, 
solicitor,  accountant  or  other  professional  adviser  without  delay.    Some  of  the  risk  factors  that  should  be 
considered by potential investors are outlined in Section 3. 
 
Definitions of certain terms used in this Prospectus are contained in Section 6.  All references to currency are to 
Australian dollars and all references to time are to AEST, unless otherwise indicated.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Directors 
 
Non-Executive Chairman 
Mr Stephen Gemell 
Managing Director 
Mr David Busch 
Mr Peter Nightingale 
Non-Executive Director 
Mr Peter Michael              Non-Executive Director 
 
Company Secretary 
 
Mr Vinod Manikandan 
 
 
Registered Office  
 
Level 2 
66 Hunter Street  
SYDNEY NSW 2000 
Telephone: +61 2 9300 3390 
Facsimile: +61 2 9921 6333 
Email: admin@argentminerals.com.au 
 
 
Share Registry* 
 
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited 
Level 4 
60 Carrington Street 
Sydney NSW 2000
Auditor* 
 
KPMG 
Level 16, Riparian Plaza 
71 Eagle Street 
Brisbane QLD 4000 
 
 
Lawyers 
 
Bellanhouse Legal  
Ground Floor 
11 Ventnor Avenue 
West Perth  WA  6005 
 
 
ASX Code: ARD 
 
 
Website:  www.argentminerals.com.au
*This entity is included for information purposes only. It has not been involved in the preparation of this 
Prospectus and has not consented to being named in this Prospectus.
Section
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No
Details of the Offer ........................................................................ 5
Effect of the Offer ......................................................................... 9
Risk factors ....................................................................................11
Additional information .................................................................15
Directors' Statement and Consent ...............................................23
Glossary of Terms .........................................................................24
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
Details of the Offer
1.1
The Offer
The  Company  is  offering,  pursuant  to  this  Prospectus,  up  to  117,000,000  Listed 
Options (Offer).
The  Listed  Options  under  the  Offer  are  offered  to  participants  in  the  placement  of 
58,500,000  Shares  at  $0.03  each  announced  by  the  Company  on  28 June  2016 
(Placement),  on  the  basis  of  two  free  attaching  Listed  Options  for  one  Share 
subscribed for under the Placement.
The Placement Shares are to be issued in two tranches:
(a)
(b)
the first tranche of 18,096,283 Shares were issued on 6 July 2016 in 
accordance with the Company’s Listing Rule 7.1A capacity; and
the second tranche of 40,403,717 Shares were subject to Shareholder 
approval received at a Shareholder meeting held on 16 August 2016.
The Listed Options offered under this Prospectus will form a new class of securities 
of  the  Company.  Further  details  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  the  Listed 
Options are in Section 4.2.
Shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  the  Listed  Options  was  received  at  the 
Shareholder meeting held on 16 August 2016.
1.2
Purpose of the Prospectus
This Prospectus has been issued to:
(a)
(b)
facilitate  secondary  trading  of  the  Listed  Options  to  be  issued  under  the 
Offer.    A  prospectus  is  required  under  the  Corporations  Act  to  enable 
persons  who  are  issued  the  Listed  Options  to  on-sell  those  Listed  Options 
within  12  months  of  their  issue.    The  Company  will  not  issue  the  Listed 
Options with the purpose of the persons to whom they are issued selling or 
transferring  those  Listed  Options,  or  granting,  issuing  or  transferring 
interests  in  those  Listed  Options  within  12  months  of  the  issue,  but  this 
Prospectus provides them the ability to do so should they wish; and
facilitate secondary trading of the Shares to be issued upon exercise of the 
Listed Options to be issued under the Offer.  Issuing the Listed Options under 
this Prospectus will enable persons who are issued the Listed Options to on-
sell  the  Shares  issued  on  exercise  of  the  Listed  Options  pursuant  to  ASIC 
Corporations (Sale Offers That Do Not Need Disclosure) Instrument 2016/80.
Accordingly, the purpose of this Prospectus is to:
(a)
(b)
make the Offer;
ensure that the on-sale  of Listed Options does not breach section 707(3) of 
the Corporations Act; and
5
(c)
ensure  that  the  on-sale  of  the  underlying  Shares  to  be  issued  upon  the 
exercise of the Listed Options is in accordance with ASIC Corporations (Sale 
Offers That Do Not Need Disclosure) Instrument 2016/80.
The Listed Options to be issued to Participants will be issued pursuant to Shareholder 
approvals under Listing Rule 7.1 received at the General Meeting on 16 August 2016.
No funds will be raised under the Offer. The total estimated expenses of the Offer of 
$36,484 will be paid by the Company from its cash reserves.
1.3
Closing Date
The  Closing  Date  for  the  Offer  is  18  August  2016.  The  Company  reserves  the  right, 
subject  to  the  Corporations  Act  and  the  Listing  Rules  to  extend  the  Closing  Date 
without  prior  notice.    If  the  Closing  Date  is  varied,  subsequent  dates  may  also  be 
varied accordingly.
1.4
Application Forms
Only  Participants  will  be  provided  a  copy  of  this  Prospectus  and  a  personalised 
Application Form.
Completed Application Forms must be received by the Company prior to the Closing 
Date.    Application  Forms  should  be  sent  to  Argent  Minerals  Limited,  Level  2,  66 
Hunter Street, Sydney, NSW 2000 or sent by facsimile to +61 2 9221 6333.
If  you  are  in  doubt  as  to  the  course  of  action,  you  should  consult  your  professional 
advisor.
Acceptance  of  a  completed  Application  Form  by  the  Company  creates  a  legally 
binding  contract  between  the  Applicant  and  the  Company  for  the  number  of  Listed 
Options on the Application Form.  The Application Form does not need to be signed 
to be a binding acceptance of the Listed Options under the Offer.
If  the  Application  Form  is  not  completed  correctly  it  may  still  be  treated  as  valid.  
The  Directors’  decision  as  to  whether  to  treat  the  acceptance  as  valid  and  how  to 
construe, amend or complete the Application Form, is final.
1.5
Issue Date and despatch
Subject to the Corporations Act and the Listing Rules, the Company intends to issue 
the Listed Options under the Offer on or about 23 August 2016.
Security holder statements will be dispatched, as soon as possible after the issue of 
the Listed Options under the Offer.
1.6
ASX quotation
Application will be made to ASX no later than 7 days after the date of this Prospectus 
for official quotation of the Listed Options under the Offer.
The Listed Options will only be admitted to official quotation by ASX if the conditions 
for  quotation  of  new  class  of  securities  are  satisfied  (which  include,  amongst  other 
things,  there  being  a  minimum  of  100,000  Listed  Options  on  issue,  with  at  least  50 
holders with a Marketable Parcel).
6
If  permission  is  not  granted  by  ASX  for  the  official  quotation  of  the  Listed  Options 
offered by this Prospectus within 3 months after the date of this Prospectus (or such 
period as the ASX allows), the Company will not issue the Listed Options.
1.7
CHESS
The  Company  participates  in  the  Clearing  House  Electronic  Subregister  System, 
known as CHESS. ASX Settlement, a wholly owned subsidiary of ASX, operates CHESS 
in accordance with the Listing Rules and the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
Under CHESS, Applicants will not receive a certificate but will receive a statement of 
their holding of Listed Options.
If you are broker sponsored, ASX Settlement will send you a CHESS statement.
The  CHESS  statement  will  set  out  the  number  of  Securities  issued  under  this 
Prospectus,  provide  details  of  your  holder  identification  number,  the  participant 
identification number of the sponsor and the terms and conditions applicable to the 
Securities.
If  you  are  registered  on  the  Issuer  Sponsored  subregister,  your  statement  will  be 
dispatched by Computershare and will contain the number of Securities issued to you 
under this Prospectus and your security holder reference number.
A  CHESS  statement  or  Issuer  Sponsored  statement  will  routinely  be  sent  to 
Shareholders  at  the  end  of  any  calendar  month  during  which  the  balance  of  their 
Shareholding  changes.  Shareholders  may  request  a  statement  at  any  other  time, 
however, a charge may be made for additional statements.
1.8
Risks of the Offer
An investment in Securities of the Company should be regarded as speculative.  Some 
of the more significant risks which affect an investment in the Company are:
(a)
(b)
(c)
going concern risk;
funding risk; and
additional requirements for capital.
Please  refer  to  Section  3  for  further  details  relating  to  these  and  other  risks  of  an 
investment in the Company.
1.9
Residents outside Australia
This Prospectus, and any accompanying Application Form, do not, and is not intended 
to,  constitute  an  offer  of  Securities  in  any  place  or  jurisdiction  in  which,  or  to  any 
person  to  whom,  it  would  not  be  lawful  to  make  such  an  offer  or  to  issue  this 
Prospectus  or  the  Securities  under  the  Offer.   The  distribution  of  this  Prospectus  in 
jurisdictions  outside  Australia  may  be  restricted  by  law  and  persons  who  come  into 
possession of this Prospectus should seek advice on and observe any such restrictions.  
Any failure to comply with such restrictions may constitute a violation of applicable 
securities laws.
1.10  Taxation implications
The Directors do not consider it appropriate to give Applicants advice regarding the
7
taxation consequences of subscribing for Listed Options under this Prospectus.
The Company, its advisers and its officers do not accept any responsibility or liability 
for  any  such  taxation  consequences  to  Applicants.    As  a  result,  Applicants  should 
consult  their  professional  tax  adviser  in  connection  with  subscribing  for  Listed 
Options under this Prospectus.
1.11  Major activities and financial information
A summary of the activities and financial information relating to the Company for the 
financial year ended 30 June 2016 is in the Annual Report which was lodged with ASX 
on 10 August 2016.
A  summary  of  the  Company's  activities  for  the  three  month  period  ended  30  June 
2016 is in the Quarterly Report which was lodged with ASX on 27 July 2016.
The  Company's  continuous  disclosure  notices  (i.e.  ASX  announcements)  since  the 
lodgement of its Annual Report on 10 August 2016 are listed in Section 4.4.
Copies of these documents are available free of charge from the Company. Directors 
strongly  recommend  that  potential  Applicants  review  these  and  all  other 
announcements prior to deciding whether or not to participate in the Offer.
1.12  Privacy
The  Company  collects  information  about  each  Applicant  provided  on  an  Application 
Form  for  the  purposes  of  processing  the  Application  and,  if  the  Application  is 
successful, to administer the Applicant’s Security holding in the Company.
By submitting an Application Form, each Applicant agrees that the Company may use 
the  information  provided  by  an  Applicant  on  the  Application  Form  for  the  purposes 
set out in this privacy disclosure statement and may disclose it for those purposes to 
the share registry, the Company’s related bodies corporate, agents, contractors and 
third party service providers, including mailing houses and professional advisers, and 
to ASX and regulatory authorities.
If you do not provide the information required on the Application Form, the Company 
may not be able to accept or process your Application.
An Applicant has an entitlement to gain access to the information that the Company 
holds  about  that  person  subject  to  certain  exemptions  under  law.    A  fee  may  be 
charged  for  access.    Access  requests  must  be  made  in  writing  to  the  Company’s 
registered office.
1.13
Enquiries concerning Prospectus
Enquiries relating to this Prospectus should be directed to the Company Secretary by 
telephone on +61 2 9300 3390.
8
2.
2.1
Effect of the Offer
Capital structure on completion of the Offer
No. of       
Shares
No. of 
unquoted 
Options
No. of quoted 
Options
Balance at the date 
of this Prospectus
318,398,972
6,574,000
Placement Shares
40,403,717
-
Nil
-
No. of 
Performance 
Rights
2,500,000
-
To be issued 
pursuant to the 
Offer
Balance after the 
Offer
Notes:
Nil
Nil
117,000,000
Nil
358,802,689
6,574,000(1)
117,000,000(2)
2,500,000(3)
(1)
6,574,000 Options with an exercise price of $0.25 each and an expiry date of 29 August 2016.
(2)
Assumes that the quotation requirements in respect of the Listed Options are satisfied and that the Listed 
Options are quoted. Assumes that 117,000,000 Listed Options are issued under the Offer. 117,000,000 
Options with an exercise price of $0.10 each and an expiry date of 27 June 2019.
(3)
2,500,000 Performance Rights comprised of:
(a)  1,500,000 Tranche 1 Performance Rights to David Busch each vest into one Share on achievement of the
Tranche 1 Milestone on or before 29 August 2016; and
(b)  1,000,000 Tranche 2 Performance Rights each vest into one Share if on achievement of the Tranche 2
Milestone on or before 29 August 2016.
2.2
Pro forma statement of financial position
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Other assets 
Total Current Assets 
 
Non-Current Assets 
Other financial assets –  security 
deposits 
Property, plant and equipment 
Total Non-Current Assets 
Total Assets
Consolidated 
30 June 2016
Effect of 
Placement
(Audited)
(Unaudited)
$
$
Consolidated 
30 June 2016
Pro- Forma 
(Unaudited)
$
648,759 
- 
17,902 
666,661
67,000 
408,438 
475,438 
1,142,099
851,592 
- 
- 
851,592
- 
- 
- 
851,592
1,500,351 
- 
17,902 
1,518,253
67,000 
408,438 
475,438 
1,993,691
9
Current Liabilities 
Trade and Other Payables 
Employee entitlements 
Advance monies received from 
share placement 
Total Current Liabilities 
Total Liabilities 
Net Assets 
 
Equity 
Issued Capital 
Reserves 
Accumulated Losses
96,106 
52,057
360,520 
508,683 
508,683 
633,416
-
96,106 
52,057
(360,520) 
(360,520) 
(360,520) 
1,212,112
- 
148,163 
148,163 
1,845,528
24,343,436 
61,796 
(23,771,816)
1,212,112 
- 
-
25,555,548 
61,796 
(23,771,816)
Total Equity
633,416
1,212,112
1,845,528
Basis of Preparation
The  above  pro  forma  statement  of  financial  position  has  been  prepared  in 
accordance  with  the  draft  ASIC  Guide  to  Disclosing  Pro  Forma  Financial  Information 
(issued July 2005).
The  pro  forma  balance  sheets  have  been  prepared  on  a  going  concern  basis,  which 
contemplates the continuity of normal business activity and the realisation of assets 
and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business.
The  pro  forma  statement  of  financial  position  is  based  on  the  audited  financial 
position  as  at  30  June  2016  that  has  then  been  adjusted  to  reflect  the  material 
transactions as per the notes to the pro forma above.
2.3
Market price of Shares
The highest and lowest market sale prices of the Shares on ASX during the 3 months 
immediately  preceding  the  date  of  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus  with  the  ASIC  and 
the respective dates of those sales were:
Highest:
$0.039 per Share on 13 July 2016
Lowest:
$0.024 per Share on 15 June 2016
The  latest  available  market  sale  price  of  the  Shares  on  ASX  prior  to  the  date  of 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC was $0.032 per Share on 16 August 2016.
2.4
Dividend Policy
The Directors are not able to say when and if dividends will be paid in the future, as 
the  payment  of  any  dividends  will  depend  on  the  future  profitability,  financial 
position and cash requirements of the Company.
10
3.
Risk factors
The  Listed  Options  offered  under  this  Prospectus  are  considered  highly  speculative.  
An investment in the Company is not risk free and the Directors strongly recommend 
potential  investors  to  consider  the  risk  factors  described  below,  together  with 
information contained elsewhere in this Prospectus and to consult their professional 
advisers before deciding whether to apply for Options pursuant to this Prospectus.
There are specific risks which relate directly to the Company’s business.  In addition, 
there  are  other  general  risks,  many  of  which  are  largely  beyond  the  control  of  the 
Company and the Directors.  The risks identified in this section, or other risk factors, 
may  have  a  material  impact  on  the  financial  performance  of  the  Company  and  the 
market price of the Company’s securities.
The following is not intended to be an exhaustive list of the risk factors to which the 
Company is exposed.
3.1
Specific risks associated with the Company
(a)
Going concern risk
The Directors have determined that future equity raisings or debt financing 
arrangements  will  be  required  to  assist  the  funding  of  the  Company’s 
activities to meet the Company’s objectives. There is no certainty that these 
will  be  successfully  completed  to  provide  adequate  working  capital  for  the 
Company.
In  the  event  that  the  Placement  is  not  completed  successfully  there  is 
significant  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  Company  can  continue  as  a  going 
concern,  and  which  is  likely  to  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the 
Company’s activities.
(b)
Funding risk
At the date of this Prospectus, the Company has no income producing assets 
and  will  generate  losses  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Until  it  is  able  to 
develop a project and generate appropriate cash flow, it is dependent upon 
being  able  to  obtain  future  equity  or  debt  funding  to  support  long  term 
exploration,  after  the  expenditure  of  the  net  proceeds  raised  under  the 
Placement.  Neither  the  Company  nor  any  of  the  Directors  nor  any  other 
party  can  provide  any  guarantee  or  assurance  that  if  further  funding  is 
required, such funding can be raised on terms favourable to the Company (or 
at all).
Any  additional  equity  funding  will  dilute  existing  Shareholders.  Also,  no 
guarantee or assurance can be given as to when a project can be developed 
to  the  stage  where  it  will  generate  cash  flow.  As  such,  a  project  would  be 
dependent  on  many  factors,  for  example  exploration  success,  subsequent 
development, commissioning and operational performance.
(c)
Additional requirements for capital
The  Company’s  capital  requirements  depend  on  numerous  factors.    The 
Company  will  require  further  financing  in  addition  to  amounts  raised  under
11
the  Placement.    Any  additional  equity  financing  will  dilute  shareholdings, 
and  debt  financing,  if  available,  may  involve  restrictions  on  financing  and 
operating activities.  If the Company is unable to obtain additional financing 
as  needed,  it  may  be  required  to  reduce  the  scope  of  its  operations  and 
scale back its exploration programmes as the case may be.  There is however 
no guarantee that the Company will be able to secure any additional funding 
or be able to secure funding on terms favourable to the Company.
(d)
Title – Sunny Corner mineral rights only
The  Company  does  not  have  a  registered  interest  in  the  Sunny  Corner 
tenement.    It  only  has  an  equitable  interest  pursuant  to  farm  in  and  joint 
venture agreements to earn an initial interest of 70% of the mineral rights of 
the tenement.
The  only  right  available  to  the  Company  to  protect  its  interest  in  this 
tenement  is  lodgement  of  a  caveat  over  the  tenement  pursuant  to  the 
Mining Act 1992 (NSW).  A caveat prevents the registration of any transfer or 
mortgage over the tenement without first giving notice to the Company.  As 
at the date of this Prospectus, the Company has not yet lodged caveats with 
the  Department  of  Trade  and  Investment,  Mineral  Resources  and  Energy 
Division, New South Wales over the tenement.
3.2
Specific industry risks
(a)
Environmental
The operations and proposed activities of the Company are subject to State 
and Federal laws and regulations concerning the environment.  As with most 
exploration  projects  and  mining  operations,  the  Company’s  activities  are 
expected  to  have  an  impact  on  the  environment,  particularly  if  advanced 
exploration or mine development proceeds.  It is the Company’s intention to 
conduct  its  activities  to  the  highest  standard  of  environmental  obligation, 
including compliance with all environmental laws. Approvals are required for 
land  clearing  and  for  ground  disturbing  activities.    Delays  in  obtaining  such 
approvals  can  result  in  the  delay  to  anticipated  exploration  programmes  or 
mining activities.
(b)
Exploration
The mineral tenements of the Company are at various stages of exploration, 
and  potential  investors  should  understand  that  mineral  exploration  and 
development  are  high-risk  undertakings.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that 
exploration  of  these  tenements,  or  any  other  tenements  that  may  be 
acquired  in  the  future,  will  result  in  the  discovery  of  an  economic  ore 
deposit.    Even  if  an  apparently  viable  deposit  is  identified,  there  is  no 
guarantee that it can be economically exploited.
The future exploration activities of the Company may be affected by a range 
of  factors  including  geological  conditions,  limitations  on  activities  due  to 
seasonal  weather  patterns,  unanticipated  operational  and  technical 
difficulties,  industrial  and  environmental  accidents,  native  title  process, 
changing government regulations and many other factors beyond the control 
of the Company.
12
(c)
Exploration costs
The exploration costs of the Company are based on certain assumptions with 
respect  to  the  method  and  timing  of  exploration.    By  their  nature,  these 
estimates  and  assumptions  are  subject  to  significant  uncertainties  and, 
accordingly, the actual costs may materially differ from these estimates and 
assumptions.  Accordingly, no assurance can be given that the cost estimates 
and  the  underlying  assumptions  will  be  realised  in  practice,  which  may 
materially and adversely affect the Company’s viability.
(d)
Operations
No assurances can be given that the Company will achieve commercial 
viability through the successful exploration and/or mining of its tenement 
interests.
(e)
Tenure and access
Mining and exploration tenements are subject to periodic renewal.  There is 
no  guarantee  that  current  or  future  tenements  or  future  applications  for 
production tenements will be approved.
The  Company's  tenements  are  subject  to  the  applicable  mining  acts  and 
regulations  in  New  South  Wales.    The  renewal  of  the  term  of  a  granted 
tenement is also subject to the discretion of the relevant Minister.  Renewal 
conditions  may  include  increased  expenditure  and  work  commitments  or 
compulsory  relinquishment  of  areas  of  the  tenements  comprising  the 
Company’s  projects.    The  imposition  of  new  conditions  or  the  inability  to 
meet  those  conditions  may  adversely  affect  the  operations,  financial 
position and/or performance of the Company.
(f)
Government policy changes
Adverse changes in government policies or legislation may affect ownership 
of  mineral  interests,  taxation,  royalties,  land  access,  labour  relations,  and 
mining  and  exploration  activities  of  the  Company.    It  is  possible  that  the 
current system of exploration and mine permitted in New South Wales  may 
change,  resulting  in  impairment  of  rights  and  possibly  expropriation  of  the 
Company’s properties without adequate compensation.
(g)
Joint venture parties, agents and contractors
The Directors are unable to predict the risk of financial failure or default by 
a  participant  in  the  earn-in  agreements  and  joint  ventures  to  which  the 
Company is at present a party (i.e. the West Wyalong and Sunny Corner joint 
ventures) or may become a party or the insolvency or managerial failure by 
any of the contractors used (or to be used in the future) by the Company in 
any  of  its  activities  or  the  insolvency  or  other  managerial  failure  by  any  of 
the  other  service  providers  used  (or  to  be  used  in  the  future)  by  the 
Company for any activity.
3.3
General risks
(a)
Economic
General economic conditions, movements in interest and inflation rates and 
currency exchange rates may have an adverse effect on the Company’s
13
exploration, development and production activities, as well as on its ability 
to fund those activities.
(b)
Market conditions
Share market conditions may affect the value of the Company’s quoted 
securities regardless of the Company’s operating performance.  Share 
market conditions are affected by many factors such as:
(i)
(ii)
general economic outlook;
introduction of tax reform or other new legislation;
(iii)
commodity prices;
(iv)
interest rates and inflation rates;
(v)
changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors;
(vi)
the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
(vii)
terrorism or other hostilities.
The market price of securities can fall as well as rise and may be subject to 
varied and unpredictable influences on the market for equities in general 
and resource exploration stocks in particular.  Neither the Company nor the 
Directors warrant the future performance of the Company or any return on 
an investment in the Company.
(c)
Dividends
Any future determination as to the payment of dividends by the Company 
will be at the discretion of the Directors and will depend on the financial 
condition of the Company, future capital requirements and general business 
and other factors considered relevant by the Directors.  No assurance in 
relation to the payment of dividends or franking credits attaching to 
dividends can be given by the Company.
(d)
Reliance on key personnel
The responsibility of overseeing the day-to-day operations and the strategic 
management of the Company depends substantially on its senior 
management and its key personnel.  There can be no assurance given that 
there will be no detrimental impact on the Company if one or more of these 
employees cease their employment.
3.4
Speculative nature of investment
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the risks faced by 
the Company or by investors in the Company.
The  above  factors,  and  others  not  specifically  referred  to  above,  may  in  the  future 
materially  affect  the  financial  performance  of  the  Company  and  the  value  of  the 
Securities  offered  under  this  Prospectus.    The  Applicants  should  consider  that  an 
investment  in  the  Company  is  speculative  and  should  consult  their  professional 
adviser before deciding whether to apply for Securities pursuant to this Prospectus.
14
4.
Additional information
4.1
Rights and liabilities attaching to Shares
There  is  only  one  class  of  Share  in  the  Company,  fully  paid  ordinary  shares.    The 
following  is  a  summary  of  the  more  significant  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to 
Shares.    This  summary  is  not  exhaustive  and  does  not  constitute  a  definitive 
statement of the rights and liabilities of Shareholders.
Full  details  of  the  rights  attaching  to  the  Shares  of  the  Company  are  in  the 
Constitution  of  the  Company,  a  copy  of  which  is  available  for  inspection  at  the 
Company’s registered office during normal business hours.
(a)
General Meetings
Shareholders  are  entitled  to  be  present  in  person  or  by  proxy,  attorney  or 
representative  to  attend  and  vote  at  general  meetings  of  the  Company. 
Shareholders  may  requisition  meetings  in  accordance  with  Section  249D  of 
the Corporations Act and the Constitution of the Company.
(b)
Voting Rights
Subject to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any class 
or classes of shares of the Company, at general meetings of Shareholders or 
classes of Shareholders:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
each Shareholder entitled to vote, may vote in person or by proxy, 
attorney or representative;
on a show of hands, every person present who is a Shareholder or a 
proxy,  attorney  or  representative  of  a  Shareholder  has  one  vote; 
and
on  a  poll,  every  person  present  who  is  a  Shareholder  or  a  proxy, 
attorney or representative of a Shareholder shall, in respect of each 
Share held by him, or in respect of which he is appointed a proxy, 
attorney  or  representative,  have  one  vote  for  the  Share,  but  in 
respect  of  partly  paid  Shares,  shall  have  such  number  of  votes  as 
bears the same proportion to the total of such Shares registered in 
the Shareholder’s name as the amount paid (not credited) bears to 
the total amounts paid and payable (excluding amounts credited).
(c)
Dividend Rights
Subject to the rights of any preference Shareholders and to the rights of the 
holders of any shares created or raised under any special arrangement as to 
dividend, the Directors may from time to time declare a dividend to be paid 
to the Shareholders entitled to the dividend which shall be payable on all 
Shares according to the proportion that the amount paid (not credited) is of 
the total amounts paid and payable (excluding amounts credited) in respect 
of such Shares but only out of the profits of the Company.
The Directors may from time to time pay to the Shareholders any interim 
dividends as they may determine.  No dividend shall carry interest as against 
the Company.
15
Subject to the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act, the Company may 
implement a dividend reinvestment plan on any terms, under which 
participants may elect in respect of all or part of their Shares to apply the 
whole or any part of a dividend from the Company in subscribing for 
securities of the Company or a related body corporate of the Company. The 
Directors may, at their discretion, implement, amend, suspend or terminate 
a dividend reinvestment plan subject to the ASX Listing Rules.
(d)
Winding-Up
If  the  Company  is  wound  up,  the  liquidator  may,  with  the  authority  of  a 
special  resolution  of  the  Company,  divide  among  the  Shareholders  in  kind 
the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  property  of  the  Company,  and  may  for  that 
purpose  set  such  value  as  he  considers  fair  upon  any  property  to  be  so 
divided, and may determine how the division is to be carried out as between 
the  Shareholders  or  different  classes  of  Shareholders.  The  liquidator  may, 
with the authority of a special resolution of the Company, vest the whole or 
any part of any such property in trustees upon such trusts for the benefit of 
the contributories as the liquidator thinks fit, but so that no Shareholder is 
compelled to accept any Shares or other securities in respect of which there 
is any liability.
(e)
Transfer of Shares
Generally,  Shares  are  freely  transferable,  subject  to  formal  requirements, 
the registration of the transfer not resulting in a contravention of or failure 
to observe the provisions of a law of Australia and the transfer not being in 
breach of the Corporations Act or the Listing Rules.
(f)
Variation of Rights
Pursuant  to  Section  246B  of  the  Corporations  Act,  the  Company  may,  the 
rights  attached  to  the  shares  in  any  class  may  be  varied  or  cancelled  only 
with  the  written  consent  of  the  holders  of  at  least  three-quarters  of  the 
issued  shares  of  the  affected  class,  or  by  special  resolution  passed  at  a 
separate meeting of the holders of the issued shares of the affected class.
(g)
Alteration of constitution
In  accordance  with  the  Corporations  Act,  the  Constitution  can  only  be 
amended  by  a  special  resolution  passed  by  at  least  three  quarters  of 
Shareholders  present  and  voting  at  the  general  meeting.    In  addition,  at 
least  28  days  written  notice  specifying  the  intention  to  propose  the 
resolution as a special resolution must be given.
4.2
Terms and Conditions attaching to Listed Options
The Listed Options offered pursuant to this Prospectus entitle  a holder  to subscribe 
for Shares on the following terms and conditions:
(a)
Entitlement
Each  Listed  Option  entitles  the  holder  to  subscribe  for  one  Share  upon 
exercise of the Listed Option.
(b)
Exercise Price
16
Subject  to  paragraph  4.2(k),  the  amount  payable  upon  exercise  of  each 
Listed Option will be $0.10 (Exercise Price).
(c)
Expiry Date
Each  Listed  Option  will  expire  at  5.00pm  (AEST)  on  27  June  2019  (Expiry 
Date).  A  Listed  Option  not  exercised  before  the  Expiry  Date  will 
automatically lapse on the Expiry Date.
(d)
Exercise Period
The Listed Options are exercisable at any time on or prior to the Expiry Date 
(Exercise Period).
(e)
Notice of Exercise
The Listed Options may be exercised during the Exercise Period by notice in 
writing  to  the  Company  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  Option  certificate 
(Notice  of  Exercise)  and  payment  of  the  Exercise  Price  for  each  Listed 
Option being exercised in Australian currency by electronic funds transfer or 
other means of payment acceptable to the Company.
(f)
Exercise Date
A  Notice  of  Exercise  is  only  effective  on  and  from  the  later  of  the  date  of 
receipt of the Notice of Exercise and the date of receipt of the payment of 
the  Exercise  Price  for  each  Listed  Option  being  exercised  in  cleared  funds 
(Exercise Date).
(g)
Quotation
Provided the Company can meet the minimum requirements pursuant to the 
Listing Rules, the Company will apply for quotation of the Listed Options on 
ASX.
(h)
Quotation of Shares issued on exercise
Application will be made by the Company to ASX for quotation of the Shares 
issued upon the exercise of the Listed Options.
(i)
Timing of issue of Shares on exercise
After  a  Listed  Option  is  validly  exercised,  the  Company  must,  within,  15 
Business  Days  of  receipt  of  the  Notice  of  Exercise  and  receipt  of  cleared 
funds equal to the Exercise Price of the exercised Listed Option:
(i)
(ii)
issue the Share; and
do all such acts, matters and things to obtain the grant of official 
quotation of the Share on ASX no later than 10 Business Days after 
issuing the Share.
(j)
Shares issued on exercise
Shares  issued  on  exercise  of  the  Listed  Options  rank  equally  with  the  then 
issued shares of the Company.
17
(k)
Reconstruction of capital
In  the  event  of  any  reconstruction  (including  consolidation,  subdivision, 
reduction or return of capital) of the issued capital of the Company prior to 
the  Expiry  Date,  all  rights  of  the  Listed  Option  holder  will  be  varied  in 
accordance with the Listing Rules.
(l)
Participation in new issues
There  are  no  participation  rights  or  entitlements  inherent  in  the  Listed 
Options  and  holders  will  not  be  entitled  to  participate  in  new  issues  of 
capital  offered  to  Shareholders  during  the  currency  of  the  Listed  Options 
without exercising the Listed Options.
(m)
Change in exercise price
The  Company  may  change  the  exercise  price  of  the  Listed  Options  or  the 
number of Shares over which the Listed Options are exercisable in the event 
of the Company making a pro-rata issue of Shares or other securities to the 
holders  of  Shares  in  the  Company  (other  than  a  bonus  issue)  in  accordance 
with Listing Rule 6.22.2A.
(n)
Adjustment for bonus issues
If the Company makes a bonus issue of Shares or other securities to existing 
Shareholders (other than an issue in lieu or in satisfaction, of dividends or by 
way of dividend reinvestment):
(i)
the number of Shares which must be issued on the exercise of a 
Listed Option will be increased by the number of Shares which the 
holder would have received if the holder of the Listed Options had 
exercised the Listed Option before the record date for the bonus 
issue; and
(ii)
no change will be made to the Listed Option exercise price.
(o)
Transferability
The  Listed  Options  are  transferable  subject  to  any  restriction  or  escrow 
arrangements imposed by ASX or under applicable Australian securities laws.
4.3
Company is a disclosing entity
The  Company  is  a  disclosing  entity  under  the  Corporations  Act.    It  is  subject  to 
regular reporting and disclosure obligations under both the Corporations Act and the 
Listing  Rules.    These  obligations  require  the  Company  to  notify  ASX  of  information 
about  specific  events  and  matters  as  they  arise  for  the  purpose  of  ASX  making  the 
information  available  to  the  stock  market  conducted  by  ASX.    In  particular,  the 
Company  has  an  obligation  under  the  Listing  Rules  (subject  to  certain  limited 
exceptions), to notify ASX once it is, or becomes aware of information concerning the 
Company  which  a  reasonable  person  would  expect  to  have  a  material  effect  on  the 
price or value of the Securities.
The Company is also required to prepare and lodge with ASIC yearly and half-yearly 
financial statements accompanied by a Directors’ statement and report, and an audit 
review or report.
18
Copies  of  documents  lodged  with  the  ASIC  in  relation  to  the  Company  may  be 
obtained from ASIC (see Section 4.4 below).
4.4
Copies of documents
Copies  of  documents  lodged  by  the  Company  in  connection  with  its  reporting  and 
disclosure obligations may be obtained from ASIC. The Company will provide free of 
charge to any person who requests it during the period of the Offer, a copy of:
(a)
(b)
the Annual Report, being the last financial year for which an annual financial 
report was lodged with ASIC in relation to the Company before the issue of 
the Prospectus; and
the  following  notices  given  by  the  Company  to  notify  ASX  of  information 
relating to the Company during the period from the date of lodgement of the 
Annual Report referred to in paragraph 4.4(a) and before the date of issue of 
this Prospectus are as follows:
Date
Description of Announcement
10/08/2016
Annual Report to Shareholders
16/08/2016
Results of General Meeting
The  following  documents  are  available  for  inspection  throughout  the  period  of  the 
Offer  during  normal  business  hours  at  the  registered  office  of  the  Company  at 
Level 2, 66 Hunter Street, Sydney, New South Wales:
(a)
(b)
(c)
this Prospectus;
the Constitution; and
the  consents  referred  to  in  Section  4.13  and  the  consents  provided  by  the 
Directors to the issue of this Prospectus.
4.5
Information excluded from continuous disclosure notices
There is no information which has been excluded from a continuous disclosure notice 
in accordance with the Listing Rules other than as is set out in this Prospectus.
4.6
Determination by ASIC
ASIC  has  not  made  a  determination  which  would  prevent  the  Company  from  relying 
on section 713 of the Corporations Act in issuing Securities under this Prospectus.
4.7
Directors' interests
Except as disclosed in this Prospectus, no Director and no firm in which a Director or 
proposed director is a partner:
(a)
has  any  interest  nor  has  had  any  interest  in  the  last  two  years  prior  to  the 
date  of  this  Prospectus  in  the  formation  or  promotion  of  the  Company,  the 
Securities offered under this Prospectus or property acquired or proposed to 
be  acquired  by  the Company  in  connection  with  its  formation  or  promotion 
or the Securities offered under this Prospectus; or
19
(b)
has  been  paid  or  given  or  will  be  paid  or  given  any  amount  or  benefit  to 
induce him or her  to become, or to qualify as,  a Director, or otherwise for 
services  rendered  by  him  or  her  in  connection  with  the  formation  or 
promotion of the Company or Securities offered under this Prospectus.
4.8
Directors' interests in Securities
Set out in the table are details of the Directors' relevant interests in the Securities at 
the date of this Prospectus:
Director
Shares
Options
Mr Stephen Gemell(1)
1,181,818
Mr David Busch(2)
2,681,818
Mr Peter 
Nightingale(3)
Nil
Mr Peter Michael(4)
420,000
Notes:
(1)
Mr Gemell has the following interests:
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Performance 
Rights
Nil
2,500,000
Nil
Nil
•  1,181,818 Shares indirectly held through Davalik Pty Ltd as trustee for the <Gemell Family Superfund
A/C>.
•  Mr Gemell is participating in the Placement and Offer. Following Shareholder approval of the Placement
Shares and Listed Options, Mr Gemell will have an interest in a further 400,000 Shares and 800,000 
Options in the Company.
(2)
Mr Busch has the following interests:
•  2,681,818 Shares indirectly held through Busch Custodians Pty Limited <Busch Super Fund A/C>.
•  2,500,000 Performance Shares consisting of 1,500,000 Tranche 1 Performance Rights and 1,000,000
Tranche 2 Performance Rights which expire on 29 August 2016.
Each Tranche 1 Performance Right vests into one Share upon:
(a)   the Company receiving all necessary approvals for the commencement of the Kempfield
project;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Company making a public announcement to ASX of its intent to mine for the Kempfield 
project;
the Company entering into legally binding arrangements for debt funding for the Kempfield 
project; and
the Company entering into a construction contract with a principal contractor in respect of the 
Kempfield project,
(together, the Tranche 1 Milestone).
Each Tranche 2 Performance Right vests into one Share upon:
(a)   the vesting conditions in respect of the Tranche 1 Performance Rights having been met; and
(b)   receipt by the Company of written confirmation of completion by the provider of the Kempfield
project debt funding,
(together, the Tranche 2 Milestone).
•  Mr Busch is participating in the Placement and Offer. Following Shareholder approval of the Placement
Shares and Listed Options, Mr Busch will have an interest in a further 2,100,000 Shares and 4,200,000 
Options in the Company.
(3)
Mr Nightingale is participating in the Placement and Offer indirectly through Rosignol Pty Ltd <Nightingale 
Family A/C>. Following Shareholder approval of the Placement Shares and Listed Options, Mr Nightingale 
will have an interest in a further 833,333 Shares and 1,666,666 Options in the Company.
(4)
Mr Michael has the following interests:
•  420,000 Shares indirectly through Mowka Pty Ltd <Monaghan Super Fund A/C>.
20
•  Mr Michael is participating in the Placement and Offer. Following Shareholder approval of the Placement
Shares and Listed Options, Mr Michael will have an interest in a further 333,334 Shares and 666,668 
Options in the Company.
4.9
Directors’ remuneration
The  remuneration  of  an  executive  Director  is  decided  by  the  Board.    The  total 
maximum remuneration of non-executive Directors is determined by the Company in 
general meeting, or until so determined, as the Directors resolve.
The  determination  of  non-executive  Directors’  remuneration  within  that  maximum 
will be made by the Board, failing which the maximum will be divided between the 
non-executive directors equally.  The current amount has been set at an amount not 
to exceed $250,000 per annum.
A  Director  may  be  paid  fees  or  other  amounts  (ie  non-cash  performance  incentives 
such  as  Options,  subject  to  any  necessary  Shareholder  approval)  as  the  other 
Directors determine where a Director performs extra or special services.  In addition, 
Directors are also entitled to be paid reasonable travelling, hotel and other expenses 
incurred  by  them  respectively  in  or  about  the  performance  of  their  duties  as 
Directors.
The following table shows the total annual remuneration paid to both executive and 
non-executive directors.
Director
Mr Stephen Gemell
Mr David Busch
Mr Peter 
Nightingale
2016
(Actual)
$65,700
$194,713
$34,530
Mr Peter Michael
$34,067
2015
2014
(Actual)
(Actual)
$65,700
$52,932
$318,415
$331,483
-
-
-
-
4.10
Substantial Shareholders
As  at  the  date  of  the  Prospectus,  the  Company  has  the  following  substantial 
Shareholders:
Substantial Shareholder
Number of Shares
Voting power (%)
Oceanic Capital Pty Ltd
HSBC Custody Nominees (Australia) 
Limited
20,242,563
20,092,985
6.36
6.31
4.11
Interests of other persons
Except as disclosed in this Prospectus, no expert, promoter or other person named in 
this Prospectus as performing a function in a professional, advisory or other capacity:
(a)
has  any  interest  nor  has  had  any  interest  in  the  last  two  years  prior  to  the 
date  of  this  Prospectus  in  the  formation  or  promotion  of  the  Company,  the 
Securities offered under this Prospectus or property acquired or proposed to
21
be  acquired  by  the Company  in  connection  with  its  formation  or  promotion 
or the Securities offered under this Prospectus; or
(b)
has  been  paid  or  given  or  will  be  paid  or  given  any  amount  or  benefit  in 
connection  with  the  formation  or  promotion  of  the  Company  or  the 
Securities offered under this Prospectus.
Bellanhouse Legal will be paid fees of approximately $10,000 (plus GST) in relation to 
the preparation of this Prospectus.
Computershare  has  been  appointed  to  conduct  the  Company’s  share  registry 
functions  and  to  provide  administrative  services  in  respect  to  issue  of  the  Listed 
Options,  and  will  be  paid  for  these  services  on  standard  industry  terms  and 
conditions.
4.12
Expenses of Offer
The estimated expenses of the Offer are as follows:
ASIC Lodgement fee
ASX quotation fee
Legal, preparation and printing expenses
Total
4.13  Consents
$
2,350
24,134
10,000
36,484
Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act imposes a liability regime on the Company (as the 
offeror of Securities under this Prospectus), the Directors, underwriters (if any), any 
persons named in the Prospectus with their consent having made a statement in the 
Prospectus  and  persons  involved  in  a  contravention  in  relation  to  the  Prospectus, 
with  regard  to  misleading  and  deceptive  statements  made  in  the  Prospectus.  
Although  the  Company  bears  primary  responsibility  for  the  Prospectus,  the  other 
parties  involved  in  the  preparation  of  the  Prospectus  can  also  be  responsible  for 
certain statements made in it.
Each of the parties referred to below:
(a)
(b)
(c)
does not make the Offer;
does  not  make,  or  purport  to  make,  any  statement  that  is  included  in  this 
Prospectus, or a statement on which a statement made in this Prospectus is 
based, other than as specified below or elsewhere in this Prospectus; and
has given and has not, prior to the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, 
withdrawn consent to the inclusion of the statements in this Prospectus that 
are specified below in the form and context in which the statements appear.
Bellanhouse  Legal  has  given,  and  has  not  withdrawn  prior  to  the  lodgement  of  the 
Prospectus  with  ASIC,  its  written  consent  to  being  named  in  this  Prospectus  as 
solicitors to the Company in the form and context in which it is named.
22
Computershare has given, and has not withdrawn and has not withdrawn prior to the 
lodgement  of  the  Prospectus  with  ASIC,  its  written  consent  to  be  named  as  the 
Company's  share  registry  in  the  form  and  context  in  which  it  is  named.  
Computershare  has  had  no  involvement  in  the  preparation  of  any  part  of  this 
Prospectus other than being named as the share registry of the Company.
Only to the maximum extent permitted by law, each of the persons referred to above 
expressly  disclaims  and  takes  no  responsibility  for  any  part  of  this  Prospectus  other 
than the references to their name.
5.
Directors' Statement and Consent
This Prospectus is authorised by each of the Directors of the Company.
This Prospectus is signed for and on behalf of Company by: 
 
 
 
 
 
David Busch 
Managing Director 
 
Dated: 17 August 2016
23
6.
Glossary of Terms
These  definitions  are  provided  to  assist  persons  in  understanding  some  of  the 
expressions used in this Prospectus.
$ means Australian dollars.
AEST  means  Australian  Eastern  Standard  Time,  being  the  time  in  Perth,  Western 
Australia.
Annual  Report  means  the  financial  report  lodged  by  the  Company  with  ASIC  in 
respect  to  the  year  ended  30  June  2016  and  includes  the  corporate  directory, 
chairman’s  report, review  of  activities,  Shareholder  information,  financial  report  of 
the  Company  and  its  controlled  entities  for  the  year  ended  30  June  2016,  together 
with a Directors’ report in relation to that financial year and the auditor’s report for 
the period to 30 June 2016.
Applicant means a Participant.
Application means a valid application for Listed Options under the Offer made on an 
Application Form.
Application Form means the Application Form provided by the Company with a copy 
of this Prospectus.
ASIC means Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASX Settlement means ASX Settlement Pty Limited ACN 008 504 532.
ASX  means  ASX  Limited  ACN  008  129  164  and  where  the  context  permits  the 
Australian Securities Exchange operated by ASX Limited.
Business Day means Monday to Friday inclusive, other than a day that ASX declares is 
not a business day.
CHESS means ASX Clearing House Electronic Subregistry System.
Closing Date has the meaning given in Section 1.3.
Company means Argent Minerals Limited ACN 124 780 276.
Computershare  means  Computershare  Investor  Services  Pty  Limited  ACN  078  279 
277.
Constitution  means  the  constitution  of  the  Company  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.
Corporations Act means Corporations Act (Cth) 2001.
Directors mean the directors of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus.
Issuer Sponsored means securities issued by an issuer that are held in uncertificated 
form  without  the  holder  entering  into  a  sponsorship  agreement  with  a  broker  or 
without the holder being admitted as an institutional participant in CHESS.
24
Listed Option means an Option having  the  terms and conditions detailed in Section 
4.2.
Listing Rules means the listing rules of ASX.
Marketable Parcel has the meaning given in the Listing Rules.
Offer means the offer of Listed Options under this Prospectus detailed in Section 1.1.
Option means an option to acquire a Share.
Participant means a participant in the Placement.
Performance Rights means the performance rights held by David Busch described in 
Section 4.8.
Placement has the meaning given in Section 1.1.
Prospectus means this prospectus with the date in Section 5.
Section means a section of this Prospectus.
Securities mean any securities including Shares or Options.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
Shareholder means a holder of Shares.
Tranche 1 Milestone has the meaning given in Section 4.8.
Tranche 2 Milestone has the meaning given in Section 4.8.
Tranche  1  Performance  Rights  means  1,500,000  Performance  Rights  granted  to 
Mr David Busch by which the Tranche 1 Milestone must be satisfied before 29 August 
2016.
Tranche  2  Performance  Rights  means  1,000,000  Performance  Rights  issued  to 
Mr David Busch by which the Tranche 2 Milestone must be satisfied before 29 August 
2016.
25