
EX-10.2 3 s103899_ex10-2.htm EXHIBIT 10-2
Exhibit 10.2
EXECUTIVE EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
This Executive Employment, Severance and Non-compete Agreement (the “Agreement”) is made
effective this 23rd day of October, 2015 (the “Effective Date”), between U.S. Energy Corp, a
Wyoming corporation (the “Company”) and David Veltri the (“Executive”).
WHEREAS, the Executive is presently employed by the Company as President and CEO;
WHEREAS, the Company and the Executive desire to enter into this Agreement, the terms of
which shall supersede any prior agreements in place between the Executive and the Company,
effective as of the Effective Date;
WHEREAS, the Board of Directors of the Company (“the Board”) recognizes that the Executive’s
efforts have been among the most important factors to the growth and success of the Company,
and the Board wishes to ensure continuing access to the Executive’s services to the benefit of
the Company’s employees and shareholders;
WHEREAS, this Agreement will benefit the Company’s shareholders by placing the Executive in
a neutral position with respect to any proposed merger, consolidation, sale of substantially all
assets, change in control or similar substantial corporate change of the Company, and
accordingly enable the Executive to better represent the Company and its shareholders in
evaluating and responding to any such transaction;
WHEREAS, this Agreement will serve to secure certain benefits for the Executive to which the
Board believes the Executive is entitled, as a result of services rendered and services anticipated
to be provided to the Company; and
NOW THEREFORE, in order to effect the foregoing, the Company and the Executive wish to
enter into this Agreement on the terms and conditions set forth below, and in consideration of the
promises and the respective covenants and agreements of the parties herein contained, it is
agreed as follows:
1.          Definitions. As used in this Agreement:
(a)          Beneficial Owner shall mean any Person who directly or through any contract,
arrangement, understanding, relationship, or otherwise has or shares voting power (which
includes the power to vote or to direct the voting) and/or investment power (which includes the
power to dispose or to direct the disposition) of a security issued by the Company.
b)          Cause shall mean:
(i)          the negligent and continued failure by the Executive to substantially perform his duties
with the Company (other than any such failure resulting from Disability) after a written demand for
substantial performance improvement is delivered to the Executive, identifying the manner in
which the Executive has not substantially performed his duties, or describing his participation in
misconduct which is materially injurious to the Company, monetarily or otherwise, unless done or
omitted to be done, in good faith and with a reasonable belief that the action or omission was in
the best interest of the Company; which failure is not remedied upon notice within 10 calendar
days.
(ii)           that the Executive shall have committed an intentional act of fraud, embezzlement or
theft in connection with his duties with, or in the course of his employment with, the Company, or
been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude;
(iii)        intentional wrongful damage to or misappropriation of property of the Company;
(iv)        an intentional or grossly negligent refusal or failure to perform Executive’s duties, or to
carry out the reasonable directions of the Company’s Board of Directors (other than on account of
illness or other physical or mental disability), which refusal or failure is not remedied within the 10
calendar days after receipt by the Executive of written notice from the Company thereof, or
insubordination; or
(v)         a material breach of any of the provisions of this Agreement applicable to Executive,
which breach is not remedied within the 10 calendar days after receipt by the Executive of written
notice from the Company of such breach; and in any case any such act or failure to act shall be
determined by the Board of Directors of the Company to have been materially harmful to the
Company. For purposes of this Agreement, no act, or failure to act, on the part of the Executive
shall be deemed “intentional” unless done, or omitted to be done, by the Executive not in good
faith and without a reasonable belief that his action or omission was in the best interests of the
Company, as determined by the Board of Directors of the Company in its sole but reasonable
discretion.
(c)          Change in Control shall mean a change in the control of the Company of a nature which
would be required to be reported in response to Item 6(e) of Schedule 14a to Regulation 14A, as
promulgated under the Exchange Act (or any successors thereto); provided that, without
limitation, a Change in Control shall be deemed to have occurred if:
(i) any Person is or becomes the Beneficial Owner directly or indirectly, of 50% or more of a class
of equity securities of the Company, or of securities which in the aggregate provide such
Beneficial Owner with 50% or more of the votes entitled to be cast with respect to the election of
members of the Board of Directors;
(ii) during any period of two consecutive years, the individuals who at the beginning of such
period constituted the Board of Directors cease for any reason to constitute a majority thereof;
(iii) any Person acquires, directly or indirectly, more than 25% of the outstanding shares of voting
securities of the Company, coupled with or followed by the election of directors of the Company
of persons who were not directors at the time of such acquisition, if such directors comprise a
majority of the Board;
2
(iv) as a result of a tender offer, merger, consolidation, sale of assets, contested election or any
combination of those or similar transactions, the directors of the Company immediately before
such transaction(s) shall cease to constitute a majority of the Board or of any successor to the
Company;
(v) the acquisition, directly or indirectly, by another person or entity, in a single transaction or
series of related transactions of all or substantially all (greater than 50%) of the Company’s
assets; or
(vi) the Company’s shareholders approve a plan of liquidation of the Company.
(d)          Date of Termination shall be the effective date of the Notice of Termination.
(e)          Disability shall mean absence from the Executive’s duties with the Company on a full-
time basis for 60 days, as a result of incapacity due to physical or mental illness, unless within 30
days after Notice of Termination is given following such absence the Executive shall have
returned to the full-time performance of duties as President and CEO of the Company.
(f)          Exchange Act means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
(g)          Good Reason shall mean termination subsequent to a Change in Control of the
Company within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the occurrence of any of the following
events:
(i) a significant and material adverse change in the nature or scope of Executive’s duties and
responsibilities or other working conditions with Company including job classification change
from that of an Executive;
(ii)         the assignment to the Executive of any duties inconsistent with the positions,
responsibilities and status of the Executive with the Company immediately prior to the Change in
Control, or a change in the Executive’s reporting responsibilities, titles or offices, as in effect
immediately prior to the Change in Control;
(iii)           any removal of the Executive from, or any failure to re-elect the Executive to, any of
such positions, except in connection with termination of employment for Cause, Disability,
Retirement or as a result of the Executive’s death or termination by the Executive, other than for
Good Reason;
(iv)          a reduction by the Company in the Executive’s base salary as in effect immediately prior
to the Change in Control;
3
(v)          reassignment of the Executive to offices more than 25 miles from the location of the
Company’s principal executive offices immediately prior to the Change in Control, except for
required travel on the Company’s business to an extent substantially consistent with the
Executive’s business travel obligations prior to the Change in Control;
(vi)          failure by the Company to continue in effect any benefit or compensation plan, stock
ownership plan, stock purchase plan, stock option plan, life insurance plan, health and accident
plan, or disability plan in which the Executive is participating immediately prior to the Change in
Control (or a plan providing the Executive substantially similar benefits), the taking of any action
by the Company which would adversely affect the Executive’s participation in or materially
reduce his benefits under any such plan, deprive the Executive of any material fringe benefit
enjoyed immediately prior to the Change in Control, including, but not limited to any failure by the
Company to provide the Executive with the number of vacation days to which the Executive is
entitled in accordance with the Company’s normal vacation policy in effect immediately prior to
the Change in Control; provided, that if the Company or a successor seeks to provide the
Executive with substantially similar benefits under a different plan, the Company must solicit and
obtain the Executive’s written consent to the substitution of such plan, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld;
(vii)          a failure by the Company to make timely payment to the Executive of any amounts to
which he is entitled hereunder or to otherwise provide Executive with any of the benefits to which
he is entitled hereunder on the terms provided herein or any other breach of the covenants
contained herein, any of which is not remedied within 10 calendar days after receipt by the
Company of written notice from the Executive of Executive’s objection to such change, failure,
reduction or breach, as the case may be; or
(viii)          any purported termination of the Executive’s employment by the Company which is not
affected pursuant to a Notice of Termination.
In the event the Executive believes that any of the events set forth in subparagraphs (i), (ii), (iv),
(v), (vii) or (viii) have occurred, the Executive shall promptly give written notice to the Company of
his belief that such event has occurred.
(h)          Market Value shall mean the closing price for a security reported by the principal stock
exchange on which such security is traded, or if the security is not listed for trading on a stock
exchange, the closing price reported by the National Market System (“NMS”), or if the security is
not listed for trading on a stock exchange or included in the NMS, the mean of the closing bid and
asked prices reported by NASDAQ, or if the security is not listed for trading on a stock exchange,
included in the NMS or included in the NASDAQ system, the average of the bid and asked prices
reported by market makers for the security to the National Quotation Bureau, all at the close of
business on the applicable date.
4
(i)          Notice of Termination shall mean a written notice whereby the Company or a successor
advises the Executive that his employment with the Company is or shall be terminated, which
document shall indicate the specific termination provision in this Agreement relied upon by the
Company or the successor and shall set forth in reasonable detail the facts and circumstances
claimed to provide a basis for termination of the Executive’s employment under those provisions.
(j)          Person shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
limited liability company, joint venture, trust, association, syndicate, business entity,
governmental body or any combination thereof.
(k)          Target Bonus shall mean an amount up to 150% of Base Salary of Executive’s base
salary for the relevant year, except as otherwise provided under the terms of an applicable bonus
plan in place at such time.
2.          Acceptance and Term of Employment. The Company agrees to employ Executive, and
Executive agrees to serve the Company, on the terms and conditions set forth herein. The “Term
of Employment” shall mean the period commencing on the Effective Date and, unless terminated
sooner as provided in Section 8 hereof, continuing for a period of two years from the Effective
Date. This Agreement shall automatically renew for two (2) successive terms of one (1) year
each, unless either party provides written notice within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the
then current term that the Agreement will not be renewed; provided, however, that nonrenewal of
this Agreement shall in no event be treated as a termination of employment with the Company
unless Executive’s employment with the Company is actually terminated in connection with such
nonrenewal. Notwithstanding any nonrenewal or other expiration of this Agreement, the
provisions of Sections 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 24 and 25 shall continue to apply to the same
extent as if the Agreement were in full force and effect.
3.          Position, Duties, and Responsibilities; Place of Performance.
(a)          During the Term of Employment, Executive shall be employed and serve as President
and CEO of the Company and shall have such duties and responsibilities as are commensurate
with such title. The Executive shall report to the Chief Executive Officer of the Company and shall
carry out and perform all orders, directions and policies given to Executive by the Chief Executive
Officer of the Company consistent with his position and title.
(b)          Executive shall devote his best efforts to the performance of his duties under this
Agreement and shall not engage in any other business or occupation during the Term of
Employment that interferes with Executive’s exercise of judgment in the Company’s best
interests. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall preclude Executive from (i) serving
as a member of the boards of directors or advisory boards (or their equivalents in the case of a
non-corporate entity) of non-competing businesses, (ii) engaging in charitable activities and
community affairs, and (iii) managing his personal investments and affairs; provided, however,
that the activities set out in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) shall be limited by Executive so as not to
materially interfere, individually or in the aggregate, with the performance of his duties and
responsibilities hereunder.
5
4.          Compensation. During the Term of Employment, Executive shall be entitled to the
following compensation:
(a)          Base Salary. Executive shall be paid an annualized Base Salary, payable in United
States dollars and less applicable taxes and deductions and in accordance with the regular
payroll practices of the Company, of USD$359,000 with increases, if any, as may be approved in
writing by the Compensation Committee.
(b)          Annual Short Term Incentive Bonus. Executive shall be eligible to participate in the
short-term incentive cash-based program offered by the Company, in an amount as determined
by the Company. The annual short-term cash-based incentive shall be based on the Company’s
evaluation of the condition of the Company’s business, the results of operations, Executive’s
individual performance for the relevant period, the satisfaction by the Executive or the Company
of goals that may be established by the Company, as the Company may decide in its sole
discretion. Each annual short-term cash-based incentive award shall be up to 150% of Base
Salary governed by the applicable plan document in effect at that time.
(c)          Annual Long Term Incentive Equity Bonus Grants. Executive shall be entitled to
participate in equity-based compensation program offered by the Company in accordance with
the terms of any equity-based plans that may be adopted by the Company. The annual long-term
equity-based incentive award shall be based on the Company’s evaluation of the condition of the
Company’s business, the results of operations, Executive’s individual performance for the
relevant period, the satisfaction by the Executive or the Company of goals that may be
established by the Company, as the Company may decide in its sole discretion. Each annual
long-term equity-based incentive award shall be governed by the applicable plan document in
effect at that time.
5.          Employee Benefits.
(a)          General. During the Term of Employment, Executive shall be entitled to participate in
health insurance, retirement plans, directors’ and officers’ insurance coverage and other benefits
provided to other senior executives of the Company, as in effect from time to time.
(b)          Vacation and Time Off. During each calendar year of the Term of Employment,
Executive shall be eligible for 20 days of paid vacation, as well as sick pay and other paid and
unpaid time off in accordance with the policies and practices of the Company, as in effect from
time to time.
6.          Reimbursement of Business Expenses. Executive is authorized to incur reasonable
business expenses in carrying out his duties and responsibilities under this Agreement, and the
Company shall promptly reimburse Executive for all such reasonable business expenses,
subject to documentation in accordance with written Company policy, as in effect from time to
time.
6
7.          Termination.
(a)          Termination for any reason (including but not limited to Retirement). Except for
termination for cause and except as otherwise provided for in the remaining sections of this
Paragraph 7, in the event of the termination of the Executive’s employment the Executive shall be
entitled to receive, and the Company shall pay the Executive (i) the base salary owing to the
Executive hereunder through the date of termination, (ii) accrued vacation, and (iii) any business
expenses which were properly reimbursable to the Executive through the date of termination.
Such amounts shall be paid to the Executive in a lump-sum not later than seventy-five (75) days
after the date of termination. The Company shall also provide a cash payment, equal to 18
months of COBRA health insurance coverage to the Executive for the Executive and his spouse
from the date of termination, payable to the Executive in a lump-sum not later than seventy-five
(75) days after the date of termination. In the event that the Executive becomes eligible for health
insurance from another source, the obligation of the Company hereunder shall cease.
(b)          Termination without Cause. In the event of the termination of the Executive’s
employment by the Company without Cause (except following a Change in Control), then the
Executive shall be entitled to receive, and the Company shall pay the Executive, in addition to
the amounts described in 7(a) above:
(i)          severance equal to 1.5x the Executive’s current annual Base Salary, plus an amount
equal to the current year Target Bonus as of the date of termination; and
(ii)          accelerated vesting of any unvested equity-based awards as proscribed for and in
accordance with the relevant terms of the applicable equity-based compensation programs and
award agreements.
Executive’s right to receive payment of such amounts shall be conditioned upon the Executive’s
execution of a separation agreement and general release in a form acceptable to the Company.
Such payments shall be paid to the Executive in a lump-sum not later than seventy-five (75) days
after the date of termination, and if the Executive has not executed a binding release by such
date, the Executive shall forfeit all rights to such payments; provided however, that if such
seventy-five day period begins in a first taxable year and ends in a second taxable year, such
payments shall be made in the second taxable year.
(c)          Termination without Cause, or by the Executive for Good Reason, in connection with a
Change in Control. If any Change in Control shall occur, the Executive shall be entitled to the
following benefits, upon the subsequent termination of the Executive’s employment within one
year following the Change in Control, unless such termination is because of the Executive’s
death or Retirement, by the Company for Cause or Disability, or by the Executive other than for
Good Reason, then the Executive shall be entitled to receive, and the Company shall pay the
Executive, in addition to the amounts described in 7(a) above:
7
(i)          any bonus for a past or the current fiscal year which has been awarded or otherwise
earned but not yet paid under any Bonus Plan(s). The Executive shall be considered to have
earned the right to participate in bonus Plans of the Company for any fiscal year for which service
of more than six months has been provided, and the bonus ultimately owed for any such period
shall be adjusted proportionately to reflect the service of the Executive for the applicable portion
of the year;
(ii)         severance pay in an amount equal to 2x the Executive’s current year annual Base Salary,
plus an amount equal to the current year target bonus;
(iii) accelerated vesting of any unvested equity-based awards as proscribed for and in
accordance with the relevant terms of the applicable equity-based compensation programs and
award agreements.
(iv)        all reasonable legal fees and expenses incurred by the Executive as a result of such
termination (including all such fees and expenses, if any, incurred in contesting or disputing any
such termination or in seeking to obtain or enforce any right or benefit provided by this
Agreement), such fees and expenses being payable on or before the expiration of ten days from
the presentation of applicable invoices by the Executive to the Company or any successor;
(v)         cash payment equal to the cost of coverage under all life insurance, medical, health,
accident, and disability programs or arrangements in which the Executive was entitled to
participate immediately prior to the Change in Control for a period of two years from the
termination, payable to the Executive in a lump-sum not later than seventy-five (75) days after the
date of termination.
(vi)        (A) If it is determined that the payment or benefit provided to or for the benefit of the
Executive under this Paragraph 7(c) (a “Payment”), whether paid or payable or distributed or
distributable pursuant to the terms of this Agreement or otherwise, would be subject to the excise
tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Internal Revenue Code (“Code”) or any interest or penalties
with respect to such excise tax (such excise tax, together with any such interest and penalties,
shall be referred to as the “Excise Tax”), the Payment shall be reduced if and to the extent that a
reduction in the Payment would result in the Executive retaining a larger amount, on an after-tax
basis (taking into account federal, state, and local income taxes and the Excise Tax), than he
would have retained had he been entitled to receive all of the Payment (such reduced amount is
hereinafter referred to as the “Limited Payment Amount”). The Company shall reduce the
Payment by first reducing or eliminating payments or benefits which are not payable in cash and
then by reducing or eliminating cash payments, in each case in reverse order beginning with
payments or benefits which are to be paid the furthest in time from the date the “Determination”
(as hereinafter defined) is delivered to the Company and the Executive.
8
(B)           The determination as to whether the Payment shall be reduced to the Limited Payment
Amount and the amount of such Limited Payment Amount (the “Determination”) shall be made at
the Company’s expense by a firm selected by the Company and reasonably acceptable to the
Executive (the “Tax Firm”). The agreed upon Tax Firm shall provide the Determination in writing,
together with detailed supporting calculations and documentation, to the Company and the
Executive on or prior to the effective date of termination of the Executive’s employment if
applicable, or at such other time as requested by the Company or by the Executive. Within ten
(10) days of the delivery of the Determination to the Executive, the Executive shall have the right
to dispute the Determination (the “Dispute”) in writing setting forth the precise basis of the
dispute. If there is no Dispute, the Determination shall be binding, final and conclusive upon the
Company and the Executive.
(C)           Any Excise Tax with respect to the Executive’s Payment shall be the sole obligation of
the Executive, subject to any tax withholding obligation imposed on the Company with respect
thereto.
(d)          Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Executive is a “specified employee” (within the
meaning of Section 409A(a)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended) and if
Section 409A is applicable to any amounts payable hereunder, all such amounts that would have
been paid to the Executive under this Paragraph 7 during the 6-month period following the
termination of his employment shall instead be paid in a lump sum on the first day of the 7th
month after the month of such termination of employment.
(e)          The amounts payable to the Executive under this Paragraph 2 shall be in addition to and
not in lieu of any benefit payable to the Executive pursuant to the Company’s Executive Officer
Retirement Plan.
(f)          In the event that the Executive dies while employed as President and CEO and this
Agreement has not been terminated, the benefits under Paragraph 7(c) will inure to the benefit of
the Executive’s designated beneficiary or his estate.
Executive’s right to receive payment of such amounts shall be conditioned upon the Executive’s
execution of a separation agreement and general release in a form acceptable to the Company.
Such payments shall be paid to the Executive in a lump-sum not later than seventy-five (75) days
after the date of termination, and if the Executive has not executed a binding release by such
date, the Executive shall forfeit all rights to such payments; provided however, that if such
seventy-five day period begins in a first taxable year and ends in a second taxable year, such
payments shall be made in the second taxable year.
8.          Procedures for Certain Terminations by Company. The employment of the Executive may
be terminated by the Company only after a Notice of Termination has been given in accordance
with this agreement. The date on which the Notice of Termination is effective shall be as follows:
9
(a)          Disability: Termination because of Disability shall be effective 30 days after Notice of
Termination is given, provided the Executive shall not have returned to the performance of his
duties on a full-time basis during such 30 day period;
(b)           Cause: Termination for Cause shall occur only after an opportunity has been provided
for the Executive, and counsel of his choice, to be heard before the Board. Termination for Cause
shall be effective on the date specified in the Notice of Termination, which shall be no earlier
than the conclusion of such hearing; and
(c)          Other Termination: If the Executive is terminated for any other reason, the termination
shall be effective on the date the Notice of Termination is given, but if the Executive notifies the
Company, within five business days after such Notice of Termination is given, that a dispute
exists concerning the reasons or basis of the termination, the notice shall be effective on the date
on which the dispute is finally resolved, either by mutual agreement of the parties, by a binding
and final arbitration award, or by final judgment, order or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction entered upon such arbitration award (the time and appeal therefrom having expired
with no appeal having been perfected).
9.          Non-compete Covenant. In consideration of the Company’s obligations to Executive
delineated herein, during the two (2) years following the Date of Termination of the Executive by
the Company or a successor, the Executive will not directly compete with U.S. Energy in
acquiring any oil and gas properties that the Company is actively engaged in an evaluation,
signed a NDA, actively negotiating\ or began a due diligence process at the time of the
Executive’s termination, or any properties located within a 5-mile radius of any such properties.
Notwithstanding anything set forth in this paragraph, the Executive shall not be in any way
restricted in seeking employment with another oil and gas company.
10.         Covenant Not to Solicit. In consideration of the company’s obligations delineated herein,
the Executive shall not, during his employment by the Company and the two (2) year period
following the termination of the Executive’s employment with the Company (the “Restriction
Period”), directly or indirectly solicit, entice, persuade, induce or cause any employee, officer,
manager, director, consultant, agent or independent contractor of the Company to terminate his,
her or its employment, consultancy or other engagement by the Company to become employed
by or engaged by any individual, entity, corporation, partnership, association, or other
organization (collectively, “Person”) other than the Company, or approach any such employee,
officer, manager, director, consultant, agent or independent contractor for any of the foregoing
purposes, or authorize or assist in the taking of any of such actions by any Person.
10
The Executive shall not, during the Restriction Period, directly or indirectly, solicit, entice,
persuade, induce or cause (i) any Person who is a customer of the Company at any time during
the Restriction Period; or (ii) any lessee, vendor or supplier to, or any other Person who had or
has a business relationship with, the Company at any time during the Restriction Period (the
Persons referred to in items (i) and (ii) above, collectively, the “Prohibited Persons”) to enter into
a business relationship with any other Person for the same or similar services, activities or goods
that any such Prohibited Person purchased from, was engaged in or provided to, the Company or
to reduce or terminate such Prohibited Person’s business relationship with the Company; and the
Executive shall not, directly or indirectly, approach any such Prohibited Person for any such
purpose, or authorize or assist in the taking of any of such actions by any Person.
For purposes of this Paragraph 10, the terms “employee,” “consultant,” “agent,” and “independent
contractor” shall include any Persons with such status at any time during the one (1) month
preceding any solicitation in question.
11.         Restrictions on Certain Actions Following Employment Termination. The Executive
agrees that during any period while he is subject to the non-compete covenants under Paragraph
9, he will not perform or do any other act which is prejudicial or injurious to the business or
goodwill of the Company. In furtherance of the foregoing, but not in limitation thereof, the Each
Party agrees that during such period he will refrain from making public comments concerning the
Company or the Executive which are adverse to or critical of Either Party.
12.         Reasonableness of Scope; Non-Compete Agreement. The Company and Executive
agree that the duration and geographic scope for the non-compete covenants contained in
Paragraph 9 have been selected by mutual agreement of the Company and the Executive. It is
further agreed by both parties that the duration and geographic scope of such covenant is
reasonable, and does not significantly impede competition in the industry in which the Company
intends to engage, nor does the scope of the non-compete agreement significantly restrict the
Executive’s ability to support himself and employ his skills as an entrepreneur and manager.
The Executive agrees that in the event it is necessary for the Company to seek judicial
enforcement of the non-compete agreement of Paragraph 9, he will not resist enforcement of the
non-compete provisions on the basis that they are over-broad or violate public policy by virtue of
their duration or geographic scope. Furthermore, the Company and the Executive agree that in
the event the non-compete agreement contained in Paragraph 9 is found by a court to be
unenforceable for any reason, the provisions thereon shall be modified by the court, to the
minimum extent possible, so as to ensure the protection to the Company or its successor sought
to be obtained through the non-compete agreement, while avoiding any unacceptable
impairment of competition, freedom of employment of the Executive, or other overly broad,
believed by such court to make the non-compete provisions unenforceable as originally written.
13.         Certain Additional Considerations. The Executive agrees that it is a legitimate interest of
the Company and reasonable and necessary for the protection of the goodwill and business of
the Company, which are valuable to the Company, that the Executive make the covenants
contained in Paragraphs 9 and 10 of this Agreement.
The Company shall indemnify and hold Executive harmless to the maximum extent permitted by
law and by the bylaws of the Company, and shall purchase indemnity insurance, including
directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, if available, to protect the Executive from and against
any and all claims, damages, judgments, settlements, reasonable attorney’s fees, and other
expenses reasonably incurred by the Executive in connection with any proceeding arising out of
or in connection with the Executive’s employment by the Company.
11
The parties acknowledge that (i) the type and periods of restriction imposed in the provisions of
Paragraphs 9, 10, and 11 of this Agreement are fair and reasonable and are reasonably required
to protect and maintain the proprietary and other legitimate business interests of the Company, as
well as the goodwill associated with the Business conducted by the Company, (ii) the Business
conducted by the Company extends throughout the Restricted Territory, and (iii) the time, scope,
geographic area and other provisions of Paragraphs 9, 10, and 11 of this Agreement have been
specifically negotiated by sophisticated commercial parties represented by experienced legal
counsel.
In the event that any covenant contained in this Agreement, including, without limitation, any
covenant contained in Paragraphs 9, 10, and 11 of this Agreement shall be determined by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable by reason of its extending for
too great a period of time or over too great a geographical area or by reason of its being too
extensive in any other respect, (i) such covenant shall be interpreted to extend over the maximum
period of time for which it may be legal, valid and enforceable, as applicable, and/or over the
maximum geographical area as to which it may be legal, valid and enforceable, as applicable,
and/or to the maximum extent in all other respects as to which it may be legal, valid and
enforceable, as applicable, all as determined by such court making such determination, and (ii) in
its reduced form, such covenant shall then be legal, valid and enforceable, as applicable, but
such reduced form of covenant shall only apply with respect to the operation of such covenant in
the particular jurisdiction in or for which such adjudication is made. It is the intention of the parties
that such covenants shall be enforceable to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law.
14.         Representations and Warranties of Executive. Executive represents and warrants to the
Company that:
(a) Executive is entering into this Agreement voluntarily and that Executive’s employment
hereunder and compliance with the terms and conditions hereof will not conflict with or result in
the breach by Executive of any agreement to which Executive is a party or by which Executive
may be bound;
(b) Executive has not violated, and in connection with Executive’s employment with the
Company will not violate, any non-solicitation, non-competition, or other similar covenant or
agreement of a prior employer by which Executive is or may be bound; and
(c) in connection with Executive’s employment with the Company, Executive will not use any
confidential or proprietary information Executive may have obtained in connection with
employment with any prior employer.
12
15.         Nondisclosure and Nonuse of Confidential Information.
(a) Executive will not disclose or use at any time, either during the Term of Employment or
thereafter, any Confidential Information (as defined below) of which Executive is or becomes
aware, whether or not such information is developed by him, except to the extent that such
disclosure or use is directly related to and required by Executive’s performance in good faith of
duties assigned to Executive by the Company. Executive will take all appropriate steps to
safeguard Confidential Information and to protect it against disclosure, misuse, espionage, loss
and theft. Executive shall deliver to the Company at the termination of the Term of Employment,
or at any time the Company may request, all memoranda, notes, plans, records, reports, disks,
computer tapes and software and other documents and data (and copies thereof, regardless of
the form thereof, including electronic copies) relating to the Confidential Information or the Work
Product (as defined below) of the business of the Company or any of the Company’s Affiliates,
which Executive may then possess or have under his control.
(b) As used in this Agreement, the term “Confidential Information” means confidential, proprietary,
trade secret, proprietary, scientific, technical, business or financial information that is not
generally known to the public and that is used, developed or obtained by the Company or any
Affiliate, in connection with their respective businesses, including, but not limited to, information,
observations and data obtained or learned by Executive while employed by the Company or any
of its Affiliates (including those obtained or learned prior to the date of this Agreement)
concerning (i) the business or affairs of the Company or any Affiliate, (ii) products or services, (iii)
geologic data, (iv) seismic data, (v) analyses, (vi) drawings, photographs and reports, (vii)
computer software, including operating systems, applications and program listings, (viii) flow
charts, manuals and documentation, (ix) databases, (x) accounting and business methods, (xi)
inventions, devices, new developments, methods and processes, whether patentable or
unpatentable and whether or not reduced to practice, (xii) customers, clients, suppliers and
subcontractors and customer, client, supplier and subcontractor lists, (xiii) other copyrightable
works, (xiv) all drilling methods, processes, technology and trade secrets, (xv) business
strategies, acquisition plans and target properties, financial or other performance data and
personnel lists and data, and (xvi) all similar and related information in whatever form.
All such Confidential Information is extremely valuable and is intended to be kept secret to the
Company and its clients and customers, is the sole and exclusive property of the Company or its
clients and customers, and is subject to the restrictive covenants set forth herein.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, Executive shall not be required to
maintain as confidential any information or material which:
(i) is now, or hereafter becomes, through no act or failure to act on the part of Executive which
would constitute a breach of this Section 14, generally known or available to the public;
13
(ii) is furnished to Executive by a third party who, to the knowledge of Executive, is not under
obligations of confidentiality to the Company or any of its Affiliates, without restriction on
disclosure;
(iii) is disclosed with the written approval of the Company;
(iv) is required to be disclosed by law, court order, or similar compulsion; provided, however, that
such disclosure shall be limited to the extent so required or compelled; and provided further, that
Executive shall give the Company notice of such disclosure and cooperate (without cost to
Executive) with the Company in seeking suitable protection; or
(v) is disclosed pursuant to or in connection with any legal proceeding involving Executive and/or
the Company or any Affiliate thereof.
16.         Inventions, Discoveries and Patents. Executive agrees that all inventions, discoveries,
innovations, improvements, technical information, systems, software developments, methods,
designs, analyses, drawings, reports, service marks, trademarks, trade names, logos and all
similar or related information (whether patentable or unpatentable) which relate to the Company’s
or any of its Affiliates’ business or research and development and any existing or future products
or services and which are or were discovered, conceived, developed or made by Executive
(whether or not during usual business hours or on the premises of the Company and whether or
not alone or in conjunction with any other person) while employed by the Company or any
Affiliate (including those conceived, developed or made prior to the date of this Agreement)
together with all patent applications, letters patent, trademark, trade name and service mark
applications or registrations, copyrights and reissues thereof that may be granted for or upon any
of the foregoing (collectively referred to herein as, the “Work Product”), belong in all instances to
the Company or such Affiliate. Executive will promptly disclose such Work Product to the Board
and assign to and otherwise perform (without cost to Executive) all actions reasonably requested
by the Board (whether during or after the employment period) to establish and confirm the
Company’s or Affiliate’s exclusive ownership of such Work Product (including, without limitation,
the execution and delivery of assignments, consents, oaths, powers of attorney and other
instruments) and to provide reasonable assistance to the Company or any of its Affiliates in
connection with the prosecution of any applications for patents, trademarks, trade names, service
marks or reissues thereof or in the prosecution or defense of interferences relating to any Work
Product.
17.         Taxes.
(a)          Withholding. The Company may withhold and deduct from any payments made under
this Agreement all applicable taxes, including but not limited to income, employment, and social
security taxes, as shall be required by applicable law. Executive acknowledges and represents
that the Company has not provided any tax advice to Executive in connection with this
Agreement and that Executive has been advised by the Company to seek tax advice from
Executive’s own tax advisors regarding this Agreement and payments that may be made, and the
benefits to be provided, to Executive pursuant to this Agreement, including specifically, the
application of the provisions of Section 409A of the Code to such payments.
14
(b)          Section 409A - General. This Agreement shall be interpreted and administered in a
manner so that any amount or benefit payable hereunder shall be paid or provided in a manner
that is either exempt from or compliant with the requirements Section 409A of the Code and
applicable Internal Revenue Service guidance and Treasury Regulations issued thereunder.
(c)          Definitional Restrictions. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, no
payment that is due upon Executive’s termination of employment shall be made unless and until
Executive has incurred a “separation from service,” as defined under Treas. Reg. Section
1.409A-l(h).
(d)          Six-Month Delay in Certain Circumstances. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Agreement, if Executive is a Specified Employee (as defined below) at the time of termination of
employment, then, to the extent that payments and benefits under this Agreement constitute
“deferred compensation” under Section 409A of the Code and are not eligible for any exemption
thereunder (“Non-Exempt Deferred Compensation”), and payment of cash or provision of his
benefits is pursuant to a termination of employment, then:
(i) the amount of such Non-Exempt Deferred Compensation that would otherwise be payable
during the six-month period immediately following Executive’s separation from service will be
accumulated through and paid or provided on the first day of the seventh month following
Executive’s separation from service (or, if Executive dies during such period, within 30 days after
Executive’s death) (in either case, the “Required Delay Period”); and
(ii) the normal payment or distribution schedule for any remaining payments or distributions will
resume at the end of the Required Delay Period.
For purposes of this Agreement, the term “Specified Employee” has the meaning given such term
in Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-l(i).
(e)          Treatment of Installment Payments. Each payment of termination benefits under Section
7 of this Agreement shall be considered a separate payment, as described in Treas. Reg.
Section 1.409A-2(b)(2), for purposes of Section 409A of the Code.
(f)          Timing of Reimbursements and In-kind Benefits. If Executive is entitled to be paid or
reimbursed for any taxable expenses under Section 6, and such payments or reimbursements
are includible in Executive’s federal gross taxable income, the amount of such expenses
reimbursable in any one calendar year shall not affect the amount reimbursable in any other
calendar year, the reimbursement of an eligible expense must be made no later than December
31 of the year after the year in which the expense was incurred, and the right of Executive to
reimbursement of such expenses shall not be subject to exchange or liquidation for any other
benefit or payment.
15
(g)          Permitted Acceleration. The Company shall have the sole authority to make any
accelerated distribution permissible under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4) to Executive of
deferred amounts, provided that such distribution meets the requirements of Treas. Reg. Section
1.409A-3(j)(4).
18.         Set Off; Mitigation. The Company’s obligation to pay Executive the amounts provided
and to make the arrangements provided hereunder shall be subject to set-off, counterclaim, or
recoupment of amounts owed by Executive to the Company or its Affiliates, provided that such
amounts owed have been acknowledged by Executive in writing. To the extent any amount so
subject to set-off, counterclaim, or recoupment is payable in installments hereunder, such set-off,
counterclaim, or recoupment shall not modify the applicable payment date of any installment, and
to the extent an obligation cannot be satisfied by reduction of a single installment payment, any
portion not satisfied shall remain an outstanding obligation of Executive and shall be applied to
the next installment only at such time the installment is otherwise payable pursuant to the
specified payment schedule.
19.         Successors and Assigns; No Third-Party Beneficiaries.
(a)          The Company. The Company will require any successor (whether direct or indirect, by
purchase, merger, consolidation or otherwise), to all or substantially all of the business and/or
assets of the Company, by agreement in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the
Executive and his counsel, to expressly assume and agree to perform this Agreement in the
same manner and to the same extent that the Company would be required to perform it if no such
succession had taken place. Failure of the Company to obtain such agreement prior to any such
succession shall be a breach of this Agreement and shall entitle the Executive to compensation
from the Company in the same amount and on the same terms as the Executive would be entitled
hereunder if he terminates his employment for Good Reason. For purposes of implementing the
foregoing, the date on which any such succession becomes effective shall be deemed the Date
of Termination. As used in this Agreement “Company” shall mean the Company as hereinabove
defined and any successor to its business and/or assets as aforesaid which executes and
delivers the agreement provided for in the Paragraph or which otherwise becomes bound by all
the terms and provisions of the Agreement by operation of law.
(b)          Executive. Executive’s rights and obligations under this Agreement shall not be
transferable by Executive by assignment or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the
Company; provided, however, that if Executive shall die, all amounts then payable to Executive
hereunder shall be paid in accordance with the terms of this Agreement to Executive’s devisee,
legatee, or other designee, or if there be no such designee, to Executive’s estate.
(c)          No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Except as otherwise set forth in Section 19(a) or Section
19(b) hereof, nothing expressed or referred to in this Agreement will be construed to give any
Person other than the Company (and its Affiliates) and Executive any legal or equitable right,
remedy, or claim under or with respect to this Agreement or any provision of this Agreement.
16
20.         Waiver and Amendments. Any waiver, alteration, amendment, or modification of any of
the terms of this Agreement shall be valid only if made in writing and signed by each of the
parties hereto. No waiver by either of the parties hereto of their rights hereunder shall be deemed
to constitute a waiver with respect to any subsequent occurrences or transactions hereunder
unless such waiver specifically states that it is to be construed as a continuing waiver.
21.         Notices. All notices, demands, consents, requests, instructions and other
communications to be given or delivered or permitted under or by reason of the provisions of this
Agreement or in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby shall be in writing and
shall be deemed to be delivered and received by the intended recipient as follows: (i) if
personally delivered, on the business day of such delivery (as evidenced by the receipt of the
personal delivery service), (ii) if mailed certified or registered mail return receipt requested, four
(4) business days after being mailed, (iii) if delivered by overnight courier (with all charges having
been prepaid), on the business day of such delivery (as evidenced by the receipt of the overnight
courier service of recognized standing), or (iv) if delivered by facsimile transmission or email, on
the business day of such delivery if sent by 5:00 p.m. in the time zone of the recipient, or if sent
after that time, on the next succeeding business day (as evidenced by the printed confirmation of
delivery generated by the sending party’s facsimile machine). If any notice, demand, consent,
request, instruction or other communication cannot be delivered because of a changed address
of which no notice was given (in accordance with this Paragraph 11), or the refusal to accept
same, the notice, demand, consent, request, instruction or other communication shall be deemed
received on the second business day the notice is sent (as evidenced by a sworn affidavit of the
sender). All such notices, demands, consents, requests, instructions and other communications
will be sent to the following addresses or facsimile numbers as applicable:
If to the Company, to:
U.S. Energy Corp.
Attn: Legal Department
877 North 8th West
Riverton, WY 82501
(307) 856-9271
If to the Executive, to:
David Veltri
Address:
22.         Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding of the parties with
respect to the subject matter hereof. No agreements or representations, oral or otherwise,
express or implied, with respect hereto have been made by either party which are not expressly
set forth in the Agreement.
17
23.         Severability. The unenforceability of any provision of this Agreement shall not affect the
validity or enforceability of any other provision of the Agreement, which shall remain in full force
and effect.
24.         Arbitration. Any dispute or controversy arising with respect to or in connection with this
Agreement (including, without limitation, any controversies concerning the formation thereof)
shall be settled by final and binding arbitration in a location mutually agreed upon by the parties
in accordance with the Rules of the American Arbitration Association then in effect. Judgment
may be entered on the arbitrator’s award in any court having jurisdiction. The arbitrator(s) shall
have the power to award equitable as well as legal relief against a defaulting party.
25.         Governing Law; Jurisdiction. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of Wyoming applicable to agreements made and to be
performed in that state, without regard to any of its principles of conflicts of laws or other laws that
would result in the application of the laws of another jurisdiction.
27.         Specific Performance. It is agreed that in the event of a breach of the provisions of this
Agreement, the non-defaulting party may not be satisfactorily compensated through payment of
damages, and in the event of any breach or anticipated breach thereof, the non-defaulting party
will be entitled, without proof of damages, to an award specifically prohibiting the breach thereof
or providing such other equitable relief as may be deemed appropriate. Such equitable relief
shall be in addition to any legal remedies to which the non-defaulting may be entitled.
28.         Headings. The section headings contained in this Agreement are inserted for reference
purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning, construction or interpretation of this
Agreement. Any reference to the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender shall be a reference to
such other gender as is appropriate. References to the singular shall include the plural and vice
versa.
29.         Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two (2) or more counterparts
(including by facsimile or electronic signature, which shall constitute a legal and valid signature),
and by the different parties hereto in separate counterparts, each of which when executed shall
be deemed to be an original, and all of which, when taken together, shall constitute one and the
same document. This Agreement shall become effective when one or more counterparts, taken
together, shall have been executed and delivered by all of the parties.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have executed this Agreement, to be effective as of
the day and year first above written.
18
/s/ Jerry W. Danni
EXECUTIVE
U.S.ENERGY CORP.
  
 
 /s/ David Veltri, May 2, 2016
By:
 David Veltri
Jerry W. Danni
 
  
Title:Chairman, Compensation Committee
May 9, 2016
19