
TREVALI MINING CORPORATION
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
NOTICE  IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that  an  annual  and  special  meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  the  holders  of  the 
common  shares  (collectively,  the  “Shareholders”  or  individually,  a  “Shareholder”)  of  Trevali  Mining 
Corporation  (the  “Company”)  will  be  held  at  the  Renaissance  Vancouver  Harbourside  Hotel,  Port  of 
Vancouver Room, 2nd Floor, 1133 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, BC, V6E 3T3 on Wednesday, June 17, 
2015 at the hour of 9:00 a.m. (Vancouver Time) for the following purposes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
to receive the audited financial statements of the Company for the financial year ended December 31, 
2014, together with the report of the auditor thereon;
to elect the directors of the Company;
to appoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Chartered Accountants, as auditor of the Company for the 
ensuing year and to authorize the directors of the Company to fix its remuneration; and
to transact such other business as may properly be brought before the Meeting or any adjournment or 
adjournments thereof.
Accompanying this Notice of Annual and Special Meeting of Shareholders (the “Notice”) is the management 
information circular of the Company dated May 5, 2015, either a form of proxy for registered shareholders or a 
voting  instruction  form  for  beneficial  shareholders,  and  a  reply  card  for  use  by  shareholders  who  wish  to 
receive the Company’s interim and/or annual financial statements.
A Shareholder wishing to be represented by proxy at the Meeting or any adjournment thereof must deposit his, 
her  or  its  duly  executed  form  of  proxy  with  the  Company’s  transfer  agent  and  registrar,  Computershare 
Investor  Services  Inc.,  100  University  Avenue,  8th  Floor,  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  M5J  2Y1,  Attention: 
Stock Transfer Department, not later than forty-eight (48) hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) 
before  the  time  fixed  for  the  Meeting  or  any  adjournment  thereof,  or  delivering  it  to  the  chairman  of  the 
Meeting on the day of the Meeting or any adjournment thereof prior to the time of voting.
Shareholders who are unable to be present personally at the Meeting are urged to sign, date and return the 
enclosed form of proxy in the envelope provided for that purpose.  If you plan to be present personally at the 
Meeting, you are requested to bring the enclosed form of proxy for identification.  The record date for the 
determination of those Shareholders entitled to receive the Notice and to vote at the Meeting is the close of 
business on Tuesday, May 5, 2015.
DATED at Vancouver, British Columbia, this 5th day of May, 2015.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD 
 
“Mark D. Cruise” 
Mark D. Cruise 
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director