
​ Result of BoD Meeting - RNS - London Stock Exchange​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Regulatory Story
Go to market news section
PJSC LukOil  -  LKOD
Result of BoD Meeting
Released 13:24 13-May-2016
​ ​ ​
RNS Number : 2390Y
PJSC LukOil
13 May 2016
LUKOIL BOARD OF DIRECTORS GRANTS TENTATIVE APPROVAL TO COMPANY 2015
ANNUAL REPORT
The PJSC "LUKOIL" Board of Directors granted tentative approval to the 2015 Annual Report of
PJSC "LUKOIL", in Moscow today, in accordance with the Federal Law of the Russian
Federation on Joint-stock Companies and the company's Charter. The document is
recommended for approval at the General Shareholders Meeting of PJSC "LUKOIL" which will
take place on 23 June 2016 in Perm.
The Board of Directors also approved the 2015 Corporate Governance Report of PJSC
"LUKOIL" prepared in accordance with the UK FCA's Disclosure and Transparency Rules. The
Corporate Governance Report will be placed on the company's website and submitted to the UK
National Storage Mechanism.
The Board heard a report on the progress of the program on production development of hard-to-
recover oil reserves and a report on implementation of measures on efficiency enhancement of
mature fields development through application of innovative technologies.
The Board of Directors also heard a report on the performance of internal control, internal audit
and risk management systems in the LUKOIL Group organizations in 2015.
The meeting approved the Board's report on its own performance in 2015-2016. Given the report
and the results of the opinion poll of Board members, a positive evaluation was given to the
Board of Directors performance in the reporting period.
This information is provided by RNS
The company news service from the London Stock Exchange
 
END
 
 
ROMAKNDBBBKDBPD ​ ​ ​ 
Close
London Stock Exchange plc is not responsible for and does not check content on this
Website. Website users are responsible for checking content. Any news item (including
any prospectus) which is addressed solely to the persons and countries specified therein
should not be relied upon other than by such persons and/or outside the specified
countries. Terms and conditions, including restrictions on use and distribution apply.
©2014 London Stock Exchange plc. All rights reserved
Result of BoD Meeting - RNS
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​