
S-8 1 a16-16371_1s8.htm SECURITIES TO BE OFFERED TO EMPLOYEES PURSUANT TO
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 10, 2016.
Registration Statement No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, DC 20549
FORM S-8
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Helmerich & Payne, Inc.
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter)
(State or Other Jurisdiction of Incorporation or
Delaware
Organization)
1437 South Boulder Ave., Suite 1400, Tulsa,
Oklahoma
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)
73-0679879
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
74119
(Zip Code)
Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan
(Full Title of the Plan)
Cara M. Hair, 1437 South Boulder Ave., Suite 1400, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74119
(Name and Address of Agent for Service)
(918) 742-5531
(Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Agent for Service)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer,
or a smaller reporting company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller
reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.  (Check one):
Large accelerated filer x
Accelerated filer o
Non-accelerated filer o
(Do not check if a smaller
Smaller reporting company o
reporting company)
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Securities
to be Registered
Common Stock, $.10 par value
Amount to
be Registered(1)
6,600,000 shares   $
Proposed
Maximum
Offering
Price
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Amount of
Registration
Per Share(2)
Offering Price(2)
64.49  $ 425,634,000  $
Fee
42,862
(1)                               The shares of Common Stock being registered consist of shares that may be
issued under the Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan.  In addition, pursuant to
Rule 416 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement also covers
an indeterminate number of additional shares that may be used to adjust the number of shares
issued pursuant to the Plan as a result of any future stock split, stock dividend, or similar
adjustment of the registrant’s outstanding Common Stock.
(2)                               Estimated solely for the purpose of determining the registration fee pursuant to
Rules 457(c) and 457(h) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.  The offering price and
registration fee are based on a price of $64.49 per share, which price is an average of the high
and low sales prices of the Common Stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange on
August 8, 2016.
PART I
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE SECTION 10(a) PROSPECTUS
Item 1.         Plan Information.(1)
Item 2.         Registrant Information and Employee Plan Annual Information.(1)
(1)  Information required by Part I to be contained in the Section 10(a) prospectus is omitted from this Registration
Statement in accordance with Rule 428 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the Note to Part I of
Form S-8, and has been or will be sent or given to participants in the Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 2016 Omnibus
Incentive Plan as specified in Rule 428(b)(1).
PART II
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Item 3.         Incorporation of Documents by Reference.
The following documents filed by Helmerich & Payne, Inc. (the “Company”) with the Securities and Exchange
Commission are incorporated herein by reference:
(a)                                 The Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
September 30, 2015;
(b)                                 The Company’s Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended
December 31, 2015, March 31, 2016 and June 30, 2016;
(c)                                  The Company’s Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on December 1, 2015,
March 2, 2016, March 3, 2016, June 1, 2016 and July 13, 2016; and
(d)                                 The description of the Common Stock of the Company contained in its Form 8-K
filed on August 10, 2016, including any subsequent amendment or report filed for the purpose of
updating the description of the Common Stock of the Company contained therein.
All documents subsequently filed by the Company pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, prior to the filing of a post-effective amendment which indicates that all
securities offered have been sold or which deregisters all securities then remaining unsold, shall be deemed to be
incorporated by reference in this Registration Statement and to be part hereof from the date of the filing of such
documents.  Unless expressly incorporated into this Registration Statement, any information furnished pursuant to a
Current Report shall not be incorporated by reference into this Registration Statement.  Any statement contained
herein or in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference herein shall be deemed to be modified
or superseded for purposes of this Registration Statement to the extent that a statement contained in any
subsequently filed document which also is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein modifies or supersedes
such statement. Any such statement so modified or superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modified or
superseded, to constitute a part of this Registration Statement.
2
Item 4.  Description of Securities.
Not applicable.
Item 5.  Interests of Named Experts and Counsel.
The validity of the issuance of the shares of Common Stock offered hereby will be passed upon for the Company by
Cara M. Hair, Vice President and General Counsel of the Company.  Ms. Hair presently owns, directly or indirectly,
3,825 shares (which includes 2,832 restricted shares) and 2,000 exercisable options to purchase
shares of Common Stock of the Company.
Item 6.  Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Section 145 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware provides generally that a corporation may
indemnify any person who was or is a party to or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative, or investigative in nature, by reason of the
fact that he is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving at the request of
the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust or other enterprise, against expenses (including attorneys’ fees) and, in a
proceeding not by or in the right of the corporation, judgments, fines and amounts paid in
settlement, actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such suit or proceeding, if
he acted in good faith and in a manner he believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of
the corporation and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause
to believe his conduct was unlawful.  Delaware law further provides that a corporation may not
indemnify any person against expenses incurred in connection with an action by or in the right of
the corporation if such person shall have been adjudged to be liable in the performance of his
duty to the corporation unless and only to the extent that the court in which such action or suit
was brought shall determine that, despite the adjudication of liability but in view of all the
circumstances of the case, such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for the
expenses which such court shall deem proper.
The Fourteenth Article of the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Charter”) provides
for the indemnification by the Company of any director, officer or employee of the Company or any of its subsidiaries
in connection with any claim, action, suit or proceeding brought or threatened by reason of such position with the
Company or any of its subsidiaries.  The Charter also (i) limits or in certain circumstances eliminates the personal
liability of a director to the Company or to its stockholders for monetary damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a
director as authorized by Section 102(b) of the Delaware General Corporation Law, (ii) permits the Company’s
indemnification of its officers and directors as provided by Section 145 of the Delaware General Corporation Law;
provided, however, that the directors remain subject to personal liability for breaches of the duty of loyalty, acts
committed in bad faith or intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law, the payment of an unlawful dividend or
unlawful stock repurchases, or any transaction from which the directors received an improper personal benefit, and
(iii) permits the Company as provided in Section 145 of the Delaware General Corporation Law to maintain insurance
to protect itself and any director, officer, employee or agent of the Company.  The Company presently maintains in
effect a liability insurance policy covering officers and directors.
Item 7.  Exemption From Registration Claimed.
Not applicable.
Item 8.  Exhibits.
3
The following are filed as exhibits to this Registration Statement:
Exhibit No.
 
4.1
4.2
4.3
Description
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Helmerich & Payne, Inc. (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s Form 8-K filed on March 14, 2012).
 
Amended and Restated By-laws of Helmerich & Payne, Inc. (incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s Form 8-K/A filed on June 9, 2014).
 
Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by reference to
Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by reference to
Appendix “A” of the Company’s Proxy Statement dated January 19, 2016).
Opinion of Cara M. Hair as to the legality of shares of Common Stock being registered.
 
  Consent of Ernst & Young LLP.
 
  Consent of Cara M. Hair (contained in her opinion filed as Exhibit 5).
 
  Power of Attorney (set forth on the signature page to this Registration Statement).
4.3
5
 
23.1
 
23.2
 
24
Item 9.  Undertakings.
(a)                                 The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)                                 To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-
effective amendment to this Registration Statement;
(i)                                     To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of
1933;
(ii)                                  To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of
the Registration Statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which,
individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the
Registration Statement.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of
securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range
may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in
the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20 percent change in
the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in
the effective Registration Statement;
4
(iii)                               To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not
previously disclosed in the Registration Statement or any material change to such information in
the Registration Statement;
Provided, however, that Paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) do not apply if the information required to be included in a
post-effective amendment by those paragraphs is contained in reports filed with or furnished to the Commission by
the Registrant pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that are incorporated
by reference in the Registration Statement.
(2)                                 That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933,
each such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new Registration Statement
relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be
deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3)                                 To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the
securities being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(b)                                 The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining
any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each filing of the Registrant’s annual report
pursuant to Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and, where
applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) that is incorporated by reference in the Registration
Statement shall be deemed to be a new Registration Statement relating to the securities offered
therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide
offering thereof.
(h)                                 Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933
may be permitted to directors, officers and controlling persons of the Registrant pursuant to the
foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the Registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the
Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as
expressed in the Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.  In the event that a claim for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the Registrant of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the Registrant in the successful
defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling
person in connection with the securities being registered, the Registrant will, unless in the
opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as
expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
5
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the Registrant certifies that it has reasonable grounds to
believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-8 and has duly caused this Registration Statement to
be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Tulsa, State of Oklahoma, on this
10th day of August, 2016.
HELMERICH & PAYNE, INC.
 
By:
/s/ John W. Lindsay
John W. Lindsay
President and Chief Executive Officer
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each individual whose signature appears below constitutes and
appoints John W. Lindsay and Cara M. Hair, and each of them, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents
with full power of substitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign
any and all amendments (including post-effective amendments) to this Registration Statement, and to file the same,
with all exhibits thereto, and all documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
granting unto said attorneys-in-fact and agents, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she
might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or his, her or
their substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Registration Statement has been signed by the
following persons in the capacities and on the date(s) indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/s/ John W. Lindsay
John W. Lindsay
 
 
/s/ Juan Pablo Tardio
Juan Pablo Tardio
 
 
/s/ Gordon K. Helm
Gordon K. Helm
 
/s/ Hans Helmerich
Hans Helmerich
 
/s/ Randy A. Foutch
Randy A. Foutch
 
/s/ Paula Marshall
Paula Marshall
 
/s/ Thomas A. Petrie
Thomas A. Petrie
(Principal Financial Officer)
(Principal Executive Officer)
Director, President and
  Chief Executive Officer
 
 
  Vice President and
  Chief Financial Officer
 
 
  Vice President and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
 
 
  Director and
  Chairman of the Board
 
  Director
 
 
  Director
 
 
  Director
August 10, 2016
 
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
/s/ Donald F. Robillard, Jr.
Donald F. Robillard, Jr.
 
/s/ Francis Rooney
Francis Rooney
 
/s/ Edward B. Rust, Jr.
Edward B. Rust, Jr.
 
/s/ John D. Zeglis
John D. Zeglis
Director
 
 
  Director
 
 
  Director
 
 
  Director
6
7
August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
 
 
  August 10, 2016
Exhibit No.
 
4.1
4.2
4.3
5
 
23.1
 
23.2
 
24
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Helmerich & Payne, Inc. (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s Form 8-K filed on March 14, 2012).
 
Amended and Restated By-laws of Helmerich & Payne, Inc. (incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s Form 8-K/A filed on June 9, 2014).
 
Helmerich & Payne, Inc. 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Appendix “A” of
the Company’s Proxy Statement dated January 19, 2016).
Opinion of Cara M. Hair as to the legality of shares of Common Stock being registered.
 
  Consent of Ernst & Young LLP.
 
  Consent of Cara M. Hair (contained in her opinion filed as Exhibit 5).
 
  Power of Attorney (set forth on the signature page to this Registration Statement).
8