
Suite 702, 191 Clarence St., Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
heron@heronresources.com.au
Heron Resources Limited 
ASX/TSX Release
29 August 2016
+61 2 9119 8111
ABN: 30 068 263 098
Dear Shareholder
Heron  Resources  Limited  (Heron)  announced  on  10  August  2016  its  intention  to  restructure  its  non-Woodlawn  asset 
portfolio in New South Wales and Western Australia, with a focus on gold and nickel, through the proposed listing of its 
wholly owned subsidiary, Ardea Resources Limited (Ardea) (Spin-Off).
In this mail-out to shareholders you have just received, you will find three documents:
1.  Notice for an extraordinary general meeting of the shareholders of Heron (Notice and EGM), with the meeting to be
held at the Celtic Club, 48 Ord Street, West Perth, WA 6005 on 29 September 2016 at 2pm (WST).
2.  Proxy form for voting at the EGM (Proxy).
3.
Prospectus for an offer to transfer Ardea shares to eligible Heron shareholders under a capital reduction by way of 
In-specie Distribution and to allow the trading of those shares (Prospectus).
The Notice of Meeting includes two resolutions to be voted on at the EGM to approve the Spin-Off:


Resolution 1 - disposal of a major asset, being the transfer of the non-Woodlawn Assets from Heron to Ardea, with 
payment to Heron through the issue of Ardea shares to Heron.
Resolution 2 - If Resolution 1 passes, then a reduction of capital of Heron, being the distribution of those Ardea shares 
to Heron shareholders at nil cost.
The Prospectus is for information purposes only, as required by the Corporations Act.  You are not required to do anything 
with this Prospectus.  It is solely to facilitate the distribution and future trading of your Ardea shares.
If the EGM resolutions are approved and the other conditions to the Spin-Off are satisfied, Heron will be issued new fully 
paid ordinary shares in Ardea and these shares will then be distributed at nil cost to Heron shareholders on an approximate 
1 for 10 entitlements basis at a record date of 3 October 2016 (Record Date).  Following the Record Date, Ardea intends 
to undertake a public offer concurrent with ASX listing, raising up to A$6 million.  Heron shareholders at the Record Date 
will have a priority application right to subscribe for additional Ardea shares.  The capital raising prospectus is in preparation, 
for mail out after the EGM.  Azure Capital Limited and Euroz Securities Limited are mandated advisors to Ardea.
Your Directors believe that Ardea as an independent company has great potential for new gold discoveries, notably at Mt 
Zephyr.  Ardea’s two main development projects, Lewis Ponds and the KNP, will undergo feasibility programs which are 
expected to create long term value.  This balanced combination of exploration and development projects  is expected to 
position Ardea as a quality standalone mineral resources company with excellent prospects.
Directors therefore encourage and recommend shareholders to vote “for” Resolutions 1 and 2, either by attending 
and voting at the EGM on 29 September 2016, or by completing and returning the enclosed Proxy at the earliest opportunity.
Stephen Dennis 
Chairman
For further information, please visit www.heronresources.com.au or contact: 
Australia: 
Mr Wayne Taylor   
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer 
Tel: +61 2 9119 8111 or +61 8 6500 9200 
Email: heron@heronresources.com.au
Jon Snowball 
FTI Consulting 
+61 2 8298 6100 
jon.snowball@fticonsulting.com
Canada: 
Tel: +1 647-862-1157 (Toronto)
ASX:HER/TSX:HRR Release - Heron Resources Limited
1 of 1
Heron Resources Limited
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
An Extraordinary General Meeting of Heron Resources Limited will be held at
the Celtic Club, 48 Ord Street, West Perth, WA 6005 on 29 September 2016 at
2pm (WST).
This notice of extraordinary general meeting should be read in its entirety.  If Shareholders
are in any doubt as to how they should vote, they should seek advice from their professional
advisor prior to voting.
Please contact the Company Secretary on +61 2 9119 8111 or +61 8 6500 9200, or email to
heron@heronresources.com.au if you wish to discuss any matter concerning the Meeting.
Heron Resources Limited
ABN 30 068 263 098
Notice of General Meeting
Notice is hereby given that an extraordinary general meeting of the Shareholders of Heron
Resources Limited will be held at the Celtic Club, 48 Ord Street, West Perth, WA 6005 on 29
September 2016 at 2pm (Western Standard Time) (Meeting).
The Explanatory Memorandum to this Notice of Meeting provides additional information on
matters to be considered at the Meeting.  The Explanatory Memorandum and Proxy Form
form part of this Notice of Meeting.
Shareholders  are  urged  to  vote  by  attending  the  Meeting  in  person  or  by  returning  a
completed Proxy Form.  Instructions on how to complete a Proxy Form are set out in the
Explanatory Memorandum.
Proxy Forms must be received by no later than 2pm on 27 September 2016.
Terms and abbreviations used in this Notice and Explanatory Memorandum are defined in
Schedule 1 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
Agenda
RESOLUTION 1  DISPOSAL OF MAJOR ASSET
To  consider,  and  if  thought  fit,  to  pass  with  or  without  amendment  the  following  as  an
ordinary resolution:
“That for the purposes of Listing Rule 11.4 and for all other purposes, approval is
given for the disposal of Ardea Resources Limited, a subsidiary of the Company, and
the tenements as described in Schedule 5 on the terms and conditions set out in the
Explanatory Memorandum.”
A voting exclusion statement is set out below.
RESOLUTION 2  REDUCTION OF CAPITAL
To  consider,  and  if  thought  fit,  to  pass  with  or  without  amendment  the  following  as  an
ordinary resolution:
“That, subject to Resolution 1 being passed and for the purposes of sections 256B
and 256C of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, the issued share capital
of the Company be reduced by the Company making a pro rata distribution in-specie
of Ardea Shares to all holders of ordinary shares in the Company at the Record Date
and on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 1
VOTING PROHIBITION AND EXCLUSION STATEMENTS
Under  Listing  Rule  14.11,  the  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  the  following
Resolutions by the following persons:
Resolution
Persons excluded from voting
Resolution 1 – Disposal of major asset
A party to the transaction
However, the Company need not disregard a vote if:
(a)
it is cast by a person as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance
with the direction on the Proxy Form; or
(b)
it is cast by the person chairing the Meeting as proxy for the person who is entitled
to  vote,  in  accordance  with  a  direction  on  the  Proxy  Form  to  vote  as  the  proxy
decides.
There are no parties other than Heron as asset vendors so the Heron Board is not aware of
any person to whom exclusion applies.
By order of the Heron Board of Directors
Simon Smith
Company Secretary
Heron Resources Limited
26 August 2016
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 2
Heron Resources Limited
ABN 30 068 263 098
Explanatory Memorandum
1
INTRODUCTION
This  Explanatory  Memorandum  has  been  prepared  for  the  information  of
Shareholders in connection with the business to be conducted at the Meeting to be
held at the Celtic Club, 48 Ord Street, West Perth, WA 6005 on 29 September 2016
at 2pm.  The purpose of this Explanatory Memorandum is to provide information to
Shareholders in deciding how to vote on the Resolutions set out in the Notice.
This Explanatory Memorandum should be read in conjunction with and forms part of
the accompanying Notice, and includes the following:
RESOLUTION 1
DISPOSAL OF MAJOR ASSET ............................................ 1
RESOLUTION 2
REDUCTION OF CAPITAL ................................................ 1
VOTING PROHIBITION AND EXCLUSION STATEMENTS...................................... 2
A Proxy Form is located at the end of Explanatory Memorandum.
Your vote is important.
Please contact the Company Secretary on +61 2 9119 8111 or +61 8 6500 9200, or
email to heron@heronresources.com.au if you wish to discuss any matter concerning
the Meeting.
1.1
Defined terms
Capitalised terms in this Notice of Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum are defined
either in Schedule 1 or where the relevant term is first used.
1.2
Regulatory matters
Under  applicable  ASIC  guidelines,  the  invitation  to  Shareholders  to  vote  on
Resolution 2 of the Notice of Meeting constitutes an “offer” to transfer Ardea Shares
to  Shareholders  pursuant  to  the  In-specie  Distribution  under  Chapter  6D  of  the
Corporations Act and a prospectus is required unless an exemption applies or ASIC
provides relief.  As no exemptions apply and no relief was sought, the Company has
prepared a prospectus that contains information in relation to Ardea (Prospectus).
The Prospectus accompanies this Notice of Meeting and has been lodged with ASIC
at  the  same  time  as  this  Notice  of  Meeting.    The  Company  recommends  that  all
Shareholders  read  the  Prospectus  carefully  in  conjunction  with  this  Notice  of
Meeting.  The Prospectus also allows Shareholders to sell their Ardea Shares within
the first 12 months after receiving them without further disclosure.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 3
1.3
No material information
There is no information known to the Company that is material to the decision by a
Shareholder on how to vote on Resolution 2 other than as disclosed in this Notice of
Meeting  and  Explanatory  Memorandum,  the  accompanying  Prospectus  and
information that the Company has previously disclosed to Shareholders.
As set out in section  3.10, the Directors will seek a taxation class ruling from the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) as to whether Heron Shareholders and the Company
may  be  eligible  for  Demerger  Relief.    The  Heron  Board  will  not  proceed  with  the
Proposed Transaction if the Heron Board is not satisfied that the Company or Heron
Shareholders will be eligible for Demerger Relief.
1.4
Purpose of this Notice of Meeting
The main purpose of this Notice of Meeting is to:
(a)
explain the terms of the Proposed Transaction, and the manner in which the
Proposed  Transaction  (or  parts  of  the  Proposed  Transaction)  will  be
implemented (if approved); and
(b)
to  provide  such  information  as  is  prescribed  or  otherwise  material  to  the
decision of Shareholders whether or not to approve the Resolutions required
to give effect to the Proposed Transaction.
1.5
ASIC and ASX
A final copy of this Notice of Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum has been lodged
with  Australian  Securities  and  Investments  Commission  (ASIC)  and  Australian
Securities Exchange (ASX), together with a copy of the Prospectus that accompanies
this Notice of Meeting.  Neither ASIC, ASX nor any of their respective officers takes
any responsibility for the contents of this document.
1.6
Disclosure to ASX and TSX
Heron  is  a company  whose  ordinary securities  are  quoted  on  Australian  Securities
Exchange (ASX) and Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) and as such is subject to regular
reporting and disclosure obligations.  Copies of all documents lodged in relation to
Heron may be obtained from www.asx.com.au and www.tsx.com.
1.7
Forward looking statements
Some of the statements appearing in this document may be in the nature of forward
looking  statements.    The  words  ‘anticipate’,  ‘believe’,  ‘expect’,  ‘project’,
‘forecast’, ‘estimate’, ‘likely’, ‘intend’, ‘should’, ‘could’, ‘may’, ‘target’, ‘plan’,
‘consider’, ‘foresee’, ‘aim’, ‘will’ and similar expressions are intended to identify
forward-looking  statements.    Indications  of  guidance  on  future  production,
resources, reserves, sales, capital expenditure, earnings and financial position and
performance are also forward-looking statements.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 4
You should be aware that such statements are only predictions and are subject to
inherent risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside the Company’s control.
Those risks and uncertainties include factors and risks specific to the Company and
Ardea such as (without limitation) the status of exploration and mining applications
and  licences  and  the  risks  associated  with  the  non-grant  or  expiry  of  those
applications  and  licences,  liquidity  risk,  risks  associated  with  the  exploration  or
developmental stage of projects, native title claims, funding risks, operational risks,
changes  to  Government  fiscal,  monetary  and  regulatory  policies,  the  impact  of
actions  of  Governments,  the  potential  difficulties  in  enforcing  agreements,
protecting assets, increases in costs of transportation and shipping of international
operations, alterations to resource estimates and the imprecise nature of resource
and reserve statements, any circumstances adversely affecting areas in which the
Company operates, fluctuations in the production, volume and price of commodities,
any
imposition  of  significant  obligations  under  environmental  regulations,
fluctuations in exchange rates, the fluctuating industry and commodity cycles, the
impact of inflation on operating and development costs, taxation, regulatory issues
and changes in law and accounting policies, the adverse impact of wars, terrorism,
political, economic or natural disasters, the impact of changes to interest rates, loss
of  key  personnel  and  delays  in  obtaining  or  inability  to  obtain  any  necessary
Government and regulatory approvals, insurance and occupational health and safety.
For more information on the risk factors facing Ardea, please refer to Schedule 4.
Actual events or results may differ materially from the events or results expressed
or implied in any forward looking statement and such deviations are both normal and
to be expected.  None of the Company, Ardea, any of their respective officers or any
person named in this document or involved in the preparation of this document make
any  representation  or  warranty  (either  express  or  implied)  as  to  the  accuracy  or
likelihood of fulfilment of any forward looking statement, or any events or results
expressed or implied in any forward looking statement, and you are cautioned not
to place undue reliance on those statements.
The forward looking statements in this document reflect views held only as at the
date of this document.
1.8
No financial product advice
This document does not constitute financial product, taxation or investment advice
nor a recommendation in respect of the Ardea Shares.  It has been prepared without
taking into account the objectives, financial situation or needs of Shareholders or
other persons.  Before deciding how to vote or act, Shareholders should consider the
appropriateness of the information, having regard to their own objectives, financial
situation and needs and seek legal, taxation and financial advice appropriate to their
circumstances.
Neither the Company nor Ardea is licensed to provide financial product advice.  No
cooling-off regime applies in respect of the acquisition of Ardea Shares under the In-
specie Distribution (whether the regime is provided for by law or otherwise).
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 5
1.9
No internet site is part of this document
No internet site is part of this Notice of Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum.  The
Company maintains an internet site (www.heronresources.com.au).  Any reference
in this document to this internet site is a textual reference only and does not form
part of this document.
2
ACTION TO BE TAKEN BY SHAREHOLDERS
Shareholders  should  read  the  Notice  and  this  Explanatory  Memorandum  carefully
before deciding how to vote on the Resolutions.
2.1
Voting in person
A Shareholder that is an individual may attend and vote in person at the Meeting.  If
you wish to attend the Meeting, please bring a copy of the enclosed proxy form to
the Meeting to assist in registering your attendance and number of votes.  Please
arrive  20  minutes  prior  to  the  start  of  the  Meeting  to  facilitate  this  registration
process.
2.2
Corporate representatives
Shareholders who are body corporates may appoint a person to act as their corporate
representative at the Meeting by providing that person with a certificate or letter
executed in accordance with the Corporations Act authorising him or her to act as
the  body  corporate’s  representative.   The  authority  may  be sent  to  the Company
and/or  registry  in  advance  of  the  Meeting  or  handed  in  at  the  Meeting  when
registering as a corporate representative.
An appointment  of corporate representative form is available from the website of
the  Company’s
share
registry
Security  Transfer  Australia  Pty
Ltd
(www.securitytransfer.com.au).
2.3
Proxies
If a Shareholder is unable to attend in person, they can appoint a proxy to attend on
their behalf by signing and returning the Proxy Form (attached to the Notice) to the
Company  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  on  the  Proxy  Form.    The  Company
encourages Shareholders completing a Proxy Form to direct the proxy how to vote
on each Resolution.
The Proxy Form must be received no later than 48 hours before the commencement
of the Meeting.  Any Proxy Form received after that time will not be valid for the
Meeting.
A Proxy Form may be lodged in the following ways:
(a)
for  Shareholders  registered  on  the  Company’s  Australian  share  register,  a
Proxy Form must be received by no later than 2pm (WST) on 27 September
2016:
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 6
By Mail
Security  Transfer  Australia  Pty  Ltd,  PO  Box  535,
Applecross, WA 6953
By Hand
Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd, Alexandrea House,
Suite 1, 770 Canning Highway, Applecross, WA 6153
By Email
Scan and email to registrar@securitytransfer.com.au
Online
www. securitytransfer.com.au
(b)
for Shareholders registered on Company’s Canadian share register, in addition
to  the  above  mail,  hand,  email  and  online  options,  a  Proxy  Form  must  be
received by no later than 2am (Toronto time) on 27 September 2016:
By Mail
TSX Trust Company, 200 University Avenue, Suite 300,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5H 4H1; or
By Fax
+416 361 0470
Shareholders lodging a Proxy Form are not precluded from attending and voting in
person at the Meeting.
2.4
Eligibility to vote
The  Directors  have  determined  that,  for  the  purposes  of  voting  at  the  Meeting,
Shareholders are those persons who are the registered holders of Shares at 4.00pm
(WST) on 27 September 2016.
2.5
Canadian Management Information Circular Disclosure
The  Company  is  a  reporting  issuer  in  Canada.  Accordingly,  pursuant  to  the
requirements of National Instrument 51-102 - Continuous Disclosure Obligations (NI
51-102)  of  the  Canadian  Securities  Administrators,  the  following  disclosure  is
required  to  be  included  with  this  Explanatory  Memorandum.    The  Circular  and
additional information regarding the Company have been filed under the Company’s
profile on www.sedar.com and, upon request, a copy of this circular will be provided
promptly without charge by contacting the Company Secretary on +61 29119 8111 or
+61  8  6500  9200,  or  e-mail  to  heron@heronresources.com.au.    The  date  of  the
Circular is August 25, 2016.
(a)
Purpose of solicitation
This Circular is furnished in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the
management of the Company for use at the Meeting.
Solicitation of proxies will be primarily by mail but may also be by telephone,
facsimile or in person by Directors, officers and employees of the Company
who will not be additionally compensated therefore.  Brokers, nominees or
other persons holding Shares in their names for others shall be reimbursed for
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 7
their  reasonable  charges  and  expenses  in  forwarding  proxies  and  proxy
material  to  the  beneficial  owners  of  such  shares.  The  costs  of  soliciting
proxies will be borne by the Company.
(b)
Appointment of proxies
Enclosed  with  the  Notice  is  a  form  of  proxy  for  use  at  the  Meeting.    A
Shareholder  has  the  right  to  appoint  up  to  two  persons  (who  need  not  be
Shareholders) to attend and act for the Shareholder and on the Shareholder’s
behalf at the Meeting other than the person designated in the form of proxy
and may exercise such right by inserting the full name of the desired person(s)
in the blank space provide in the form of proxy.
A  proxy  will  not  be  valid  unless  it  is  signed  by  the  Shareholder  or  by  the
Shareholder’s attorney duly authorized in writing. If the Shareholder appoints
a  body  corporate  as  the  Shareholder’s  proxy  to  attend  and  vote  for  the
Shareholder at the Meeting, then the representative of the body corporate
must  produce  the  Certificate  of  Appointment  of  Representative  prior  to
admission. A person executing a proxy, or acting, on behalf of a corporation
or  another  individual  must  provide  documentation  evidencing  his  or  her
authority to sign the proxy or act on behalf of the Shareholder at the Meeting,
as the case may be.
If the Shareholder is entitled to cast two or more votes at the Meeting, then
the  Shareholder  may  appoint  not  more  than  two  proxies.  Where  the
Shareholder appoints more than one proxy the Shareholder may specify the
proportion or number of votes each proxy is appointed to exercise. If such
proportion or number of votes is not specified each proxy may exercise half
of the Shareholder’s votes.
(c)
Revocation of proxies
A proxy given pursuant to this solicitation may be revoked by instrument in
writing  executed  by  the  Shareholder  or  by  his/her  attorney  authorised  in
writing, and delivered either to the registered office of the Company or the
above  mentioned  address  of  TSX  Trust  Company  at  any  time  up  to  and
including close of business on the last business day preceding the day of the
Meeting, or any adjournment thereof at which the proxy is to be used, or to
the Chairman of the Meeting on the day of the Meeting or any adjournment
thereof, or in any other manner permitted by law.
(d)
Voting by proxies
Shares  represented  by  properly  executed  proxies  in  favour  of  persons
designated in the printed portion of the enclosed form of proxy will be voted
for each of the matters referred to in the Notice, as described in this Circular,
or withheld from voting or voted against if so indicated on the form of proxy.
The form of proxy confers discretionary  authority upon the persons named
therein with respect to amendments or variations to matters identified in the
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 8
Notice, or other matters, which may properly come before the Meeting.  At
the time of printing of the Circular, management of the Company knows of
no  such  amendments,  variations  or  other  matters  to  come  before  the
Meeting.
(e)
Voting by non-registered shareholders
Only registered Shareholders or the persons they appoint as their proxies are
permitted to vote at the Meeting. Most Shareholders are “non-registered” or
“beneficial” Shareholders (Non-Registered Shareholders) because the Shares
they own are not registered in their names but are instead registered in the
name  of  the  brokerage  firm,  bank  or  trust  company  through  which  they
purchased  the  Shares.  Shares  beneficially  owned  by  a  Non-Registered
Shareholder  are  registered  either:  (i)  in  the  name  of  an  intermediary
(Intermediary) that the Non-Registered Shareholder deals with in respect of
the Shares; or (ii) in the name of a clearing agency (such as CDS Clearing and
Depository Services Inc. (CDS)) of which the Intermediary is a participant. In
accordance  with  applicable securities law  requirements,  the  Company  will
have  distributed  copies,  via  mail  or  electronically,  of  the  Notice,  this
Circular,  the  form  of  proxy  and  a  request  card  for  interim  and  annual
materials (collectively, the Meeting Materials) to the clearing agencies and
Intermediaries for distribution to Non-Registered Shareholders.
Intermediaries  are  required  to  forward  the  Meeting  Materials  to  Non-
Registered Shareholders unless a Non-Registered Shareholder has waived the
right to receive them. Intermediaries often use service companies to forward
the  Meeting  Materials  to  Non-Registered  Shareholders.  Generally,  Non-
Registered  Shareholders  who  have  not  waived  the  right  to  receive Meeting
Materials will either:
(i)
be  given  a  voting  instruction  form  which  is  not  signed  by  the
Intermediary and which, when properly completed and signed by the
Non-Registered  Shareholder  and returned  to  the  Intermediary  or  its
service  company,  will  constitute  voting  instructions  (often  called  a
Voting  Instruction  Form)  which  the  Intermediary  must  follow.
Typically, the voting instruction form will consist of a one page pre-
printed form. The majority of brokers now delegate responsibility for
obtaining instructions from clients to Broadridge Financial Solutions,
Inc.  (Broadridge)  in  Canada  and  the  United  States.  Broadridge
typically prepares a machine-readable voting instruction form, mails
those forms to Non-Registered Shareholders and asks Non-Registered
Shareholders  to  return  the  forms  to  Broadridge  or  otherwise
communicate voting instructions to Broadridge (by way of the Internet
or telephone, for example). Broadridge then tabulates the results of
all  instructions  received  and  provides  appropriate  instructions
respecting the voting of the shares to be represented at the Meeting.
Sometimes,  instead  of  the  one  page  pre-printed  form,  the  voting
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 9
instruction  form  will  consist  of  a  regular  printed  proxy  form
accompanied  by  a  page  of  instructions  which  contains  a  removable
label with a bar-code and other information. In order for this form of
proxy  to  validly  constitute  a  voting  instruction  form,  the  Non-
Registered Shareholder must remove the label from the instructions
and affix it to the form of proxy, properly complete and sign the form
of proxy and submit it to the Intermediary or its service company in
accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  Intermediary  or  its  service
company.  A  Non-Registered  Shareholder  who  receives  a  voting
instruction form cannot use that form to vote his or her Shares at the
Meeting; or
(ii)
be  given  a  form  of  proxy  which  has  already  been  signed  by  the
Intermediary  (typically by  a  facsimile, stamped signature),  which  is
restricted as to the number of Shares beneficially owned by the Non-
Registered Shareholder but which is otherwise not completed by the
Intermediary. Because the Intermediary has already signed the form
of proxy, this form of proxy is not required to be signed by the Non-
Registered Shareholder when submitting the proxy.  In this case, the
Non-Registered  Shareholder  who  wishes  to  submit  a  proxy  should
properly  complete  the  form  of  proxy  and  deposit  it  with  TSX  Trust
Company at 200 University Avenue, Suite 300, Toronto, Ontario M5H
4H1, Fax Number: 416.595.9593.
In either case, the purpose of these procedures is to permit Non-Registered
Shareholders  to  direct  the  voting  of  the  Common  Shares  they  beneficially
own.  Should  a  Non-Registered  Shareholder  who  receives  one  of  the  above
forms wish to vote at the Meeting, or any adjournment(s) or postponement(s)
thereof,  (or  have  another  person  attend  and  vote  on  behalf  of  the  Non-
Registered  Shareholder),  the  Non-Registered  Shareholder  should  strike  out
the  persons  named  in  the  voting  instruction  form  and  insert  the  Non-
Registered  Shareholder  or  such  other  person’s  name  in  the  blank  space
provided. In either case, Non-Registered Shareholders should carefully follow
the  instructions  of  their  Intermediary,  including  those  regarding  when  and
where the voting instruction form is to be delivered.
A  Non-Registered  Shareholder  may  revoke  a  voting  instruction  form  or  a
waiver of the right to receive Meeting Materials and to vote which has been
given to an Intermediary at any time by written notice to the Intermediary
provided  that  an  Intermediary  is  not  required  to  act  on  a  revocation  of  a
voting instruction form or of a waiver of the right to receive Meeting Materials
and to vote, which is not received by the Intermediary at least seven (7) days
prior to the Meeting.
Non-Registered  Shareholders  fall  into  two  categories:  those  who  object  to
their identity being made known to the issuers of securities which they own
(Objecting Beneficial Owners or OBOs) and those who do not object to their
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 10
identity  being  made  known  to  the  issuers of  the  securities  they  own (Non-
Objecting Beneficial Owners or NOBOs). Subject to the provisions of NI 54-
101, issuers may request and obtain a list of their NOBOs from intermediaries.
Pursuant to NI 54-101, issuers may obtain and use the NOBO list in connection
with any matter relating to the affairs of the issuer, including the distribution
of  proxy-related  materials  directly  to  NOBOs.  The  Company  is  not  sending
Meeting  Materials  directly  to  the  NOBOs.  The  Company  will  use  and  pay
intermediaries and agents to send the Meeting Materials and also intends to
pay for intermediaries to deliver the Meeting Materials to the OBOs.
(f)
Interest of certain persons or companies in matters to be acted upon
No person who has been a Director or executive officer of the Company at
any  time  since  the  beginning  of  its  last  completed  financial  year  or  any
associate of any such Director or executive officer has any material interest,
direct or indirect, by way of beneficial ownership of securities or otherwise,
in any matter to be acted upon at the Meeting, other than in their capacity
as  Shareholders  in  the  Company  and  as  disclosed  in  section  3.13  of  this
Explanatory Memorandum.
(g)
Voting securities and principal holders thereof
The authorised share capital of the Company consists of an unlimited number
of Shares. As of the date of the Circular, the Company has 415,009,381 Shares
issued and outstanding.
The Company shall make a list of all persons who are registered holders of
Shares as at the close of business at 5pm (Toronto time) on August 29, 2016
(Record  Date)  and  the  number  of  Shares  registered  in  the  name  of  each
person on that date.  Any person who owns Shares as at the Record Date will
be mailed a copy of the Meeting Materials.
To the knowledge of the directors and executive officers of the Company, as
of  the  date  hereof,  no  person  or  company  beneficially  owns,  controls  or
directs, directly or indirectly, voting securities of the Company carrying 10%
or more of the voting rights attached to all outstanding Shares other than as
disclosed under section 4.11 (Substantial Shareholders).
(h)
Approval  of  this  Explanatory  Memorandum  and  Management  Information
Circular
The  contents  and  sending  of  this  Explanatory  Memorandum  have  been
approved by the Directors.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 11
3
THE PROPOSED TRANSACTION
3.1
Introduction
On  10  August  2016  the  Company  announced  its  intention  to  restructure  its  non-
Woodlawn  asset  portfolio  in  New  South  Wales  (NSW)  and  Western  Australia  (WA)
(together the Non-Woodlawn Assets), with a focus on gold and nickel exploration
and development, through the proposed listing of its wholly owned subsidiary, Ardea
Resources Limited (Ardea) on ASX (Proposed Transaction).
Ardea’s development focus will be the Lewis Ponds Gold-Zinc Project in central NSW
and Kalgoorlie Nickel Project (KNP) in WA, and its exploration focus will be the Mt
Zephyr and the Bardoc Tectonic Zone gold projects in the Eastern Goldfields of WA.
The  Proposed  Transaction  is  subject  to  various  conditions,  including  approval  by
Heron Shareholders.
Following the positive Woodlawn Project Feasibility Study released on 29 June 2016,
Heron’s  primary  focus  is  to  bring  Woodlawn  to development.    Accordingly,  in  this
corporate  environment,  the  Heron  Board  considers  that  the  value  of  the  Non-
Woodlawn Assets is not properly reflected within Heron, and are unlikely to attract
the focus and budgets which they warrant and require for advancement.
The  Heron  Board  is cognisant  of  the  need  to  unlock  the  significant  value  in  these
Non-Woodlawn Assets, and believes that this can be best achieved through the ASX
listing  of  a  focused,  standalone  gold  and  nickel  exploration  and  development
company, with a dedicated board and management team.
The Proposed Transaction would allow for the creation of two distinct companies:
(a)
Heron,  with  its  existing  Board  and  senior  executive  team,  as  a  project
developer solely focused on fast tracking the Woodlawn Zinc-Copper Project
towards production; and
(b)
Ardea as a gold and nickel exploration and development company with a 100%
interest in the Lewis Ponds Gold-Zinc Project (currently JORC 2004 Indicated
Mineral Resource), several high quality gold exploration plays with advanced
drill targets and, importantly, ownership of the substantial Kalgoorlie Nickel
Project.
Ardea has appointed Azure Capital Limited as corporate advisor and Euroz Securities
Limited as Lead Manager for the Proposed Transaction.
Heron  will  be  issued  approximately  41.5  million  new  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in
Ardea for the Non-Woodlawn Assets, which will be distributed at nil cost to Heron
Shareholders, on the basis of 1 Ardea Share for approximately 10 Heron Shares held
on  the  Record  Date.    Heron’s  Directors  and  certain  substantial  Shareholders  have
agreed  in  principle  to  having  the  Ardea  Shares  transferred  to  them  under  the
Distribution voluntarily escrowed for a period to be determined.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 12
This model is similar to past corporate initiatives undertaken by Heron, notably the
successful Avoca Resources Limited “spin-out” in 2002.
3.2
Conditions to the Proposed Transaction
Whilst Heron’s Directors have resolved to proceed with the Proposed Transaction, it
remains subject to the following conditions (together, the In-specie Conditions):
(a)
Heron  obtaining  shareholder  approval  under  the  Corporations  Act  for  the
proposed In-specie Distribution (such approval to be sought at the Meeting);
(b)
receipt of a draft class ruling from the Australian Taxation Office confirming
the availability of Demerger Relief;
(c)
Ardea receiving subscriptions for an issue of fully paid ordinary shares for an
amount to be determined pursuant to a prospectus to be lodged by Ardea in
support of its application for listing on the ASX (Capital Raising);
(d)
Ardea obtaining a conditional admission letter from ASX on terms satisfactory
to the Ardea Directors, acting reasonably (including waivers so that the Ardea
shares issued to Heron in consideration for the Non-Woodlawn Assets are not
treated as restricted securities); and
(e)
final approval by Heron’s Directors.
There is no certainty that the above conditions will be satisfied.
3.3
Foreign Shareholders
Heron Shareholders on the Record Date with an address outside Australia will have
their pro-rata entitlement of Ardea Shares sold by the Lead Manager to the Capital
Raising and the net proceeds paid to the Ineligible Shareholder, with the timing of
the sale to coincide with the Capital Raising and a market for Ardea Shares being
established on ASX.
The  Lead  Manager  will  act  on  a  best  efforts  only  basis  to  sell  the  Foreign
Shareholders’ Ardea Shares, and will not be liable to the Foreign Shareholder for any
loss suffered as a result.
3.4
Directors’ recommendation
The Board recommends that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolutions 1 and 2, for
the following reasons:
(a)
With proper funding, the Heron Board sees considerable underlying value in
the Ardea assets.  To fully unlock this value, a dedicated fully funded vehicle
is required;
(b)
The Heron Board and management team is totally focused on securing funding
and  then  commissioning  Woodlawn,  and  Heron does  not  have  the  required
financial and management resources available to further develop the Ardea
assets;
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 13
(c)
The Ardea assets are best developed in a separate exploration/development
vehicle, with a dedicated board and management team to be appointed, who
will be responsible for asset funding and further development;
(d)
The market values advanced development and exploration assets on different
bases.  The Proposed Transaction separates Heron’s advanced development
and exploration assets, and allows the market to separately and better value
those assets;
(e)
After a full and proper assessment of all available information, the Directors
believe  that  the  Proposed  Transaction  is  in  the  best  interests  of  Heron
Shareholders, and
(f)
In  the  opinion  of  the  Directors,  the  benefits  of  the  Proposed  Transaction
outweigh its disadvantages.
3.5
Effect of the Proposed Transaction on Heron
The  Proposed  Transaction  will  result  in  Heron  disposing  of  certain  Non-Woodlawn
Assets,  through  the  listing  of  Ardea  on  ASX.    These  assets  have  a  value  of  A$8.3
million in Heron’s audited financial statements for the year ending 30 June 2016.
Heron will be issued approximately 41.5 million Ardea Shares for these assets.
To  effect  the  Proposed  Transaction,  Heron  and  Ardea  have  entered  into  an
implementation agreement, the material terms of which are summarised in section
4.10(a).
Set out in schedule 2 is the Historical Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
of  the Company  as  at  30  June  2016,  which  has been  derived  from  the Company’s
financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2016 which were audited by Ernst
& Young in accordance with Australian Auditing Standards.  Ernst & Young issued an
unqualified  audit  opinion on  these  financial statements.    Schedule  2  also  sets out
and the unaudited Consolidated Pro-Forma Statement of Financial Position, as at 30
June 2016 and on the basis of the following assumptions:
(a)
(b)
the Proposed Transaction was effective on 30 June 2016; and
loans for the Proposed Transaction made by the Company  of A$350,000 for
expenses of the Proposed Transaction and A$150,000 in budgeted tenement
expenses made prior to completion of the Proposed Transaction are repaid
through the issue of 10 million Ardea Options with an exercise price of A$0.25
and 3 year term.
The  Company’s  capital  structure  (including  number  of  Shares  on  issue)  will  not
change as a result of the Proposed Transaction.
3.6
Effect of the Proposed Transaction on Shareholders
Heron Shareholders will hold the same number of Heron Shares they held prior to
the Proposed Transaction.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 14
Heron Shareholders on the Record Date with a registered address in Australia will be
transferred Ardea Shares on a pro-rata basis.  Heron Shareholders with an address
outside Australia will have their pro-rata entitlement of Ardea Shares sold and the
net proceeds paid to them in cash.
Assuming no further Shares are issued prior to the Effective Date, each Shareholder
will  receive  1  Ardea  Share  for  every  approximately  10  Heron  Shares  held  on  the
Record Date.
Eligible Heron Shareholders may be exposed to tax consequences as a result of the
Proposed Transaction.  See section 3.10(a) for details.
3.7
Plans for Heron following the Proposed Transaction
Following the positive Woodlawn Project Feasibility Study released on 29 June 2016,
the  Heron  Board’s  primary  focus  is  bringing  that  project  to  development.
Accordingly, in this corporate environment, the Non-Woodlawn Assets are unlikely
to attract the program and budgets which they warrant and require for advancement
and their value is not properly reflected within Heron.
3.8
Advantages and disadvantages of the Proposed Transaction
The  Directors  consider  that  the  Proposed  Transaction  will  have  the  following
advantages for the Company and its Shareholders:
(a)
(b)
Provides Heron with a clear focus and corporate strategy;
True market value for the Non-Woodlawn Assets should arise through Ardea
securing a separate listing on ASX;
(c)
Potential to retain Shareholder exposure to the upside of the Non-Woodlawn
Assets;
(d)
Allows management to solely focus on advancing Woodlawn through financing
and construction;
(e)
The Non-Woodlawn Assets are not currently being valued by the market;
(f)
Heron relinquishes the tenement holding costs for the Non-Woodlawn Assets,
whilst allowing Shareholders to retain an interest in those assets; and
(g)
Shareholders  will  be  given  exposure  to  two  separate  investment  strategies
including zinc development at Woodlawn through Heron, and/or exploration
for  gold  and  feasibility  study  for  nickel  through  Ardea.    Shareholders  can
choose to retain both, one or neither following completion of the Proposed
Transaction.
The  Directors  consider  that  the  Proposed  Transaction  will  have  the  following
disadvantages for the Company and its Shareholders:
(a)
The  Company  becomes  a  single  project  zinc-copper  company  with  a  NSW
near-mine  exploration  portfolio,  together  with  the  Alchemy  Joint  Venture
tenements;
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 15
(b)
The Company becomes solely exposed to zinc price fluctuations and market
sentiment; and
(c)
There  are  costs  associated  with  the  spin-out  and  potential  replication  of
overhead  costs  in  the  future  (but  Heron  relinquishes  the  majority  of  the
exploration tenement costs).
3.9
Timetable
The record date to determine entitlement to be transferred Ardea Shares under the
In-Specie  Distribution  is  3  October  2016,  or  such  other  date  as  Company  may
determine (subject to ASX approval) (Record Date).
The Company is yet to determine the precise timing of the Proposed Transaction,
including the Effective Date and the date that Ardea Shares may commence trading
on ASX.  The Company will update Shareholders in due course on the timing of the
Proposed Transaction.
3.10  Taxation consequences
(a)
Taxation implications for Australian tax resident Shareholders
The  Company  will  seek  a  taxation  class  ruling  from  the  ATO  seeking
confirmation that:
(i)
Heron  Shareholders  may  be  eligible  to  choose  to  receive  roll-over
relief under Division 125 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (Cth)
in respect of the proposed demerger; and
(ii)
The Commissioner for Taxation will not make a determination under
section 45A, 45B (3) (a) or 45B (3) (b) of the Income Tax Assessment
Act 1936 (Cth) in respect of  Heron Shareholders participating in the
In-specie Distribution.
(Demerger Relief)
Under  Demerger  Relief,  the  distribution  of  Ardea  Shares  should  not  be  a
taxable dividend for income tax purposes, and any capital gain or loss from
the demerger should be disregarded, provided the Shareholder elects for this
capital gains tax (CGT) relief to apply.
Under Demerger Relief, a Shareholder's cost base and reduced cost base of
their Heron Shares before the demerger should be apportioned across their
Heron Shares and Ardea Shares after the demerger on a reasonable basis and
the Ardea Shares will be treated as being acquired at the same time as the
Shareholder's Heron Shares for the purposes of applying the CGT provisions.
Shareholders should consult their own professional advisors to confirm these
implications  as  they  may  vary  depending  on  individual  circumstances  and
taxation positions.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 16
The Proposed Transaction is conditional upon Heron receiving a draft ruling
from the ATO confirming the availability of Demerger Relief.
Once  a  class  ruling  has  been received,  it  will  be  posted on  the Company’s
website www.heronresources.com.au.
(b)
Taxation implications for the Company
The  Company  will  seek  a  private  binding  ruling  from  the  ATO  seeking  to
confirm  Demerger  Relief  for  income  tax  purposes  will  be  available  to  the
Company.
The transfer of Ardea Shares from Heron to Heron Shareholders in respect of
the share capital reduction is not expected to have any CGT implications for
Heron where Demerger Relief is available.
(c)
Certain Canadian Federal income tax considerations
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  principal  Canadian  federal  income  tax
considerations under the Income Tax Act (Canada) (the “Canadian Tax Act”)
generally  applicable  to  a  Heron  Shareholder  who,  for  purposes  of  the
Canadian Tax Act, is resident in Canada (a "Canadian Resident Shareholder"),
holds  Heron  Shares,  and  will  hold  Ardea  Shares  acquired  pursuant  to  the
demerger, as capital property, deals at arm’s length with each of Heron and
Ardea  and  is  not  affiliated  with  Heron  or  Ardea.  Heron  Shares  and  Ardea
Shares generally will be considered capital property to a Heron Shareholder
for purposes of the Canadian Tax Act unless the Heron Shareholder holds such
shares in the course of carrying on a business of buying and selling securities
or  the  Heron  Shareholder  has  acquired  or  holds  them  in  a  transaction  or
transactions considered to be an adventure or concern in the nature of trade.
This summary is based on the current provisions of the Canadian Tax Act, the
regulations thereunder (the “Canadian Tax Regulations”) in force on the date
hereof,  and  the  current  published  administrative  policies  and  assessing
practices of the Canada Revenue Agency (the "CRA").  The summary takes into
account  all  specific  proposals  to  amend  the  Canadian  Tax  Act  and  the
Canadian Tax Regulations publicly announced by or on behalf of the Minister
of Finance (Canada) prior to the date hereof (the “Canadian Tax Proposals”),
and  assumes  that  all  Canadian  Tax  Proposals  will  be  enacted  in  the  form
proposed.  However,  there  is  no  certainty  that  the  Canadian  Tax  Proposals
will be enacted in the form currently proposed, if at all. The summary does
not otherwise take into account or anticipate any changes in law, whether by
judicial, governmental or legislative decision or action, or other changes in
administrative policies or assessing practices of the CRA, nor does it take into
account  provincial,  territorial  or  foreign
income  tax
legislation  or
considerations,  which  may  materially  differ  from  Canadian  federal  income
tax legislation or considerations.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 17
This summary does not apply to a Heron Shareholder: (i) that is a “financial
institution” for the purposes of the market-to-market rules in the Canadian
Tax Act, (ii) that is a "specified financial institution", (iii) an interest in which
would be, or whose Heron Shares or Ardea Shares are, a “tax shelter” or a
"tax shelter investment", each as defined in the Canadian Tax Act, (iv) that
has elected to report its “Canadian tax results” (as defined in the Canadian
Tax Act) in a currency other than Canadian currency or (v) in respect of whom
Heron or Ardea is or will become a "foreign affiliate" for the purposes of the
Canadian Tax Act.  This summary also does not apply to a Heron Shareholder
who has entered into or will enter into a “derivative forward agreement” (as
defined in the Canadian Tax Act) with respect to Heron Shares or the Ardea
Shares.   In  addition,  this summary  does  not  address  the  tax considerations
relevant to Heron Shareholders who acquired their shares on the exercise of
an employee stock option.  Such Heron Shareholders should consult their own
tax  advisors.  This  summary  also  does  not  apply to  a  holder  of  Heron stock
options.  This summary assumes that at all relevant times, neither Heron nor
Ardea is resident in Canada for purposes of the Canadian Tax Act.
This summary is of a general nature only and is not exhaustive of all possible
Canadian federal income tax considerations and is not intended to be, nor
should it be construed to be, legal, business or tax advice or representations
to any particular Heron Shareholder.  Accordingly, Heron Shareholders should
consult their own tax advisors with respect to their particular circumstances,
including the application and effect of the income and other tax laws of any
country, province, state or local tax authority.
The  Canadian  federal  income  tax  consequences  to  a  Canadian  Resident
Shareholder will depend upon whether or not the distribution of the Ardea
Shares  by  Heron  to  Heron  Shareholders  as  part  of  the  demerger  (the
"Distribution") would qualify as an "eligible distribution" for the purposes of
section  86.1  of  the  Canadian  Tax  Act.    In  order  to  qualify  as  an  "eligible
distribution", it will be necessary for Heron to apply to the CRA to have the
Distribution "prescribed" for the purposes of the rules in section 86.1 of the
Canadian Tax Act.  As the success and timing of such an application cannot
be assured no such application will be made to the CRA.
Distribution of Ardea Shares"
As  the  Distribution  does  not  qualify  as  an  "eligible  distribution"  for  the
purposes of section 86.1 of the Canadian Tax Act, the Distribution will likely
constitute a dividend-in-kind to a Canadian Resident Shareholder.  As such,
the fair market value of the Ardea Shares on the Effective Date distributed
to a Canadian Resident Shareholder will be treated as the receipt of a taxable
dividend from a foreign corporation.
The full amount of such dividend received on the Heron Shares by a Canadian
Resident  Shareholder  who  is  an  individual  (including  a  trust),  including
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 18
amounts  withheld  for  foreign  withholding  tax,  if  any,  will  be  included  in
computing  the  Canadian  Resident  Shareholder's  income  and  will  not  be
subject to the gross-up and dividend tax credit rules normally applied under
the  Canadian  Tax  Act  to  taxable  dividends  received  (or  deemed  to  be
received) from taxable Canadian corporations.
The  full  amount  of  the  dividend  deemed  to  be  received  by  a  Canadian
Resident Shareholder that is a corporation on the Heron Shares pursuant to
the Distribution, including amounts withheld for foreign withholding tax, if
any,  will  be  included  in  computing  such  corporation's  income,  and  such
corporation will not be entitled to the inter-corporate dividend deduction in
computing taxable income which generally applies to dividends received from
taxable Canadian corporations.
Subject to the detailed rules in the Canadian Tax Act, a Canadian resident
shareholder  may  be  entitled  to  a  foreign  tax  credit  or  deduction  for  any
foreign withholding tax paid with respect to dividends deemed to be received
by  the  Canadian  Resident  Shareholder  with  respect  to  the  Heron  Shares.
Canadian  Resident  Shareholders  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisors  with
respect to the availability of a foreign tax credit or deduction having regard
to their own particular circumstances.
The cost of the Ardea Shares acquired by a Canadian Resident Shareholder
pursuant to the Distribution should be equal to the fair market value of such
shares at the time of the Distribution.
Disposition of Ardea Shares
A Canadian Resident Shareholder that disposes of an Ardea Share in a taxation
year generally will realize a capital gain (or capital loss) equal to the amount
by which the proceeds of disposition of the Ardea Share exceed (or are less
than)  the  aggregate  of  the  Canadian  Resident  Shareholder’s  adjusted  cost
base of such Ardea Share, determined immediately before the disposition and
any  reasonable  costs  of  disposition.  See  “Taxation  of  Capital  Gains  and
Losses” below.
Taxation of Capital Gains and Losses
Generally,  a  Canadian  Resident  Shareholder  will  be  required  to  include  in
computing  its  income  for  a  taxation  year  one-half  of  the  amount  of  any
capital gain (a “taxable capital gain”) realized by it in that year.  A Canadian
Resident Shareholder must deduct one-half of the amount of any capital loss
(an “allowable capital loss”) realized in a taxation year from taxable capital
gains realized by the Canadian Resident Shareholder in that year.  Allowable
capital losses in excess of taxable capital gains for a taxation year may be
carried back to any of the three preceding taxation years or carried forward
to  any  subsequent  taxation  year  and  deducted  against  net  taxable  capital
gains  realized  in  such  years  to  the  extent  and  under  the  circumstances
specified in the Canadian Tax Act.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 19
3.11  Consequences if the Proposed Transaction does not complete
Heron will, in the event Shareholders do not approve the Proposed Transaction or it
does  not  otherwise  complete,  continue  to  hold  its  Non-Woodlawn  Assets.    Given
Heron’s focus will be on developing Woodlawn, Heron will consider its alternatives
to maximise Shareholder return from the Non-Woodlawn Assets.
3.12
Information concerning Heron Shares
The highest and lowest recorded sale price of the Company’s Shares as traded on
ASX during the 12 months immediately prior to this Explanatory Memorandum is set
out below:
ASX
TSX
Date
Price
Date
Price
Highest
14
August
A$0.180
16
August
C$0.170
2016
2016
Lowest
10
February
A$0.083
13
October
C$0.065
2016
2015
Last
25
August
A$0.150
25
August
C$0.155
2016
2016
3.13  Directors’ interests
The table below sets out the number of securities in Heron held by Heron Directors
at the date of this Explanatory Memorandum and also the number of Ardea Shares
they  are  likely  to  have  an  interest  in  if  Resolution  2  is  passed  and  the  Proposed
Transaction completes:
Interest in Ardea following
the Distribution
Heron Director
Heron
Shares
Heron
Options
Entitlement to 
Ardea Shares 1
%  Interest  in
Ardea Shares
Mr Stephen Dennis  1,350,000
1,000,000
135,000
Mr Wayne Taylor
1,864,523
4,858,369
186,452
($6m raising)
0.2%
0.3%
Mr Ian Buchhorn
46,790,959
8,000,000
4,679,096
6.5%
Mr  Borden  Putnam
Nil
1,000,000
III
Nil
Nil
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 20
Ms Fiona
Robertson
500,000
1,000,000
50,000
0.1%
Mr Mark Sawyer
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
1 approximate 1 for 10 ratio for the In-specie Distribution and assuming Ardea raises 
A$6 million at A$0.20 per Ardea Share under an initial public offer.  Refer to section
3.1 for further details.
The Company intends to apply to ASX for certain waivers to escrow conditions for
directors and other associates of the Company.  The Company is unable at this stage
to advise what if any escrow conditions will apply to Ardea Shares held by directors
and associates of the Company.
3.14  Disclosure to ASX and TSX
As an entity with shares quoted on ASX and TSX, Heron is a disclosing entity and, as
such, is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations.  Copies of documents
lodged  in  relation  to  Heron  can  be  accessed  at  the  ASX  or  TSX  announcements
platforms, or the Company’s website.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 21
4
ARDEA RESOURCES LIMITED
4.1
Introduction
Ardea was incorporated as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company to hold Heron’s
Kalgoorlie Nickel Project and other Non-Woodlawn portfolio of assets; which includes
the following leading projects:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Lewis Ponds, New South Wales;
Mt Zephyr, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia;
Bardoc Tectonic Zone, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia; and
(d)
Kalgoorlie Nickel Project
Figure 1
Ardea Resources Limited, Project Locations, Lachlan Fold Belt of NSW
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 22
4.2
Lewis Ponds, Lachlan Fold Belt, New South Wales
Technical Report
TriAusMin (which was acquired by the Company in August 2014) announced a JORC
Code 2004 compliant resource estimate on 6 October 2005.  An updated JORC 2012-
compliant resource estimate is currently being prepared.
Description, Location and Access
Lewis Ponds is located 15km east of Orange in central NSW in a region of excellent
mining infrastructure (Cadia-Ridgeway mining centre).  The  main project is within
granted  EL5583  and  is  100%  Heron-owned.    Access  is  good,  with  extensive  road
networks servicing cleared agricultural land.
History
The  Lewis Ponds  district  has  been  subject  to  modern  exploration  by  several  well-
credentialed  companies  following  its  recognition  as  a  VMS  setting  by  the  Shell
Company of Australia in the 1980s.  Tri Origin Australia NL discovered and delineated
the current deposit in the early to mid-1990s.
The district of Lewis Ponds has had a long history of mining with the discovery of
gold in the 1850s and open pit and shallow underground mining during the period
1887 to 1921.
The Lewis Pond tenements are currently held by various subsidiaries of Heron other
than Ardea, and Heron and Ardea have agreed that these tenements will under the
Proposed  Transaction  be  transferred  to  Ardea  (either  directly  or  through  wholly
owned subsidiaries).
Details  of  the  tenements  which  together  comprise  Lewis  Ponds,  together  with
Ardea’s  interest,  encumbrances  and  risk  factors  are  set  out  in  Schedule  5.    An
existing royalty holder will require a deed of assignment with Ardea.
Geological Setting, Mineralization and Deposit Types
Lewis Ponds is within a world-class Volcanogenic Massive Sulphide (VMS) province in
the eastern Lachlan Fold Belt (LFB), hosted by N-S trending Silurian felsic volcanic
rifts  which  includes  from  south  to  north  Stockmans,  Captains  Flat,  Woodlawn,
Cullarin and Lewis Ponds.
Specifically,  the  Lewis  Ponds  property  lies  within  a  belt  of  Silurian-aged  felsic
volcanics  and  associated  sedimentary  rocks  including  limestone  breccias  on  the
western margin of the Hill End Trough.
Regis  Resources’  McPhillamy’s  gold  project,  which  hosts  73.2Mt  at  0.94g/t  Au  for
2.21Moz,  is  located  some  15km  south  along  strike  from  the  southern  tenement
boundary, with the gold-hosting-structure and soil gold anomalism trending into the
Ardea tenure.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 23
In addition to VMS base metal targets, Ardea controls some 30km of the favourable
McPhillamys gold-hosting structure from Lewis Ponds in the southeast to Copper Hill
in the northwest.
The  Lewis  Ponds  deposit  consists  of  two  stratabound,  disseminated  to  massive
sulphide lenses, Main Zone and Tom’s Zone, which occur in a sequence of steeply
dipping, tightly folded and faulted volcanics.  The deposit is highly deformed with
mineralisation extending over a strike length of more than 2km.
The Ophir Gold prospect is located in the northeast project area and has a profusion
of historic gold workings.  Systematic evaluation is required.
The Copper Hill East prospect includes porphyry copper-gold targets at Mystery 3km
NE from Copper Hill along structure, and McPhillamy’s-style gold hosted by Silurian-
aged felsic volcanics at Calula Mines.
Exploration
Heron exploration has focused on geological review and limited field sampling (refer
Heron 2015 Annual Report, 27 August 2015).
Drilling, Sampling, Analysis and Data Verification
Database upgrade from 2005 is current.
Mineral Processing and Metallurgical Testing
These programs are planned following the listing of Ardea.
Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates
The  independently  estimated  JORC-compliant  Mineral  Resource  at  Lewis  Ponds  is
divided into resources from two zones, Main Zone and Tom’s Zone.
The cut-off grade applied to the calculation of  Lewis Ponds Mineral Resources was
3.0% zinc equivalent (ZnEq). The following metal prices were used to calculate zinc
equivalent values applied to the Kriged Mineral Resource estimate.
Zinc
1240  USD/t
or
56.2  US Cents/lb
Copper
2860  USD/t
Lead
Gold
900  USD/t
430  USD/oz
Silver
6.75  USD/oz
or
or
129.7  US Cents/lb
40.8  US Cents/lb
The  ratio  of  these  metal  prices  are  not  dissimilar  to  present  prices,  meaning  the
ZnEq cut-off grades used are still relevant to use.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 24
Details of the Mineral Resources for the Lewis Ponds Project are as follows:
Lewis Ponds Project Mineral Resources
Resource
Category
Quantity
(Mt)
Indicated
Main Zone
5.82
Tom’s Zone
0.54
Zn
(%)
2.1
5.5
Cu
(%)
0.1
0.3
Grades
Pb
(%)
1.1
3.8
Au
(g/t)
1.5
1.7
Total Indicated
6.35
2.4
0.2
1.4
1.5
Inferred
Main Zone
0.17
Tom’s Zone
0.10
1.7
5.0
Total Inferred
0.27
3.0
Refer to TRO press release on 6 October 2005.
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.8
3.6
1.9
0.9
1.4
1.1
Ag
(g/t)
59
172
68
47
174
96
This information was prepared and first disclosed under the JORC Code 2004. It has not been updated 
since to comply with the JORC Code 2012 on the basis that the information has not materially changed 
since it was last reported.
Program and Budget
An A$1.4 million two year program is proposed assuming the Proposed Transaction
completes, including 3,100m of diamond drilling, 1,600m of RC drilling and 3,000m
of RAB drilling, and importantly, metallurgical piloting at Lewis Ponds.  This proposed
program will facilitate updated JORC 2012 resource estimates ahead of commencing
feasibility programs.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 25
Figure 2
Ardea Resources Limited, Project Locations, Eastern Goldfields of WA
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 26
4.3  Mt Zephyr, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia
Technical Report
Heron  announced  exploration  results  in  accordance  with  the  JORC  Code  2012
(including table 1) on 10 August 2016.
Description, Location and Access
The Mt Zephyr prospects are located 60km NNE of Leonora in the northern Goldfields
of WA.  The project area has excellent mining infrastructure (Sunrise Dam, Darlot,
well  established  milling  capability).    The  main  gold  prospect  is  within  granted
Exploration Licences and is 100% Heron-owned.
The  tenure  covers  the  northwestern strike  extension  of  Dacian  Gold’s  Mt  Morgans
tenure in association with the Celia Lineament.  Gold camps are located from 30km
SE  and  are  mainly  hosted  by  granitoid  (Jupiter,  Granny  Smith)  and  Banded  Iron
Formation (BIF) (Mt Morgans, Lancefield).
Certain Mt Zephyr tenements are currently held by Heron.  Heron and Ardea have
agreed that these tenements will under the Proposed Transaction be transferred to
Ardea (either directly or through wholly owned subsidiaries).
Details of the tenements which together comprise Mt Zephyr, together with Ardea’s
interest, encumbrances and risk factors are set out in Schedule 5.
History
Nord  Resources  explored  the  historic  shaft  workings  for  gold  in  BIF  and  Newcrest
explored  for  granitoid-hosted  gold.    Heron  explored  for  VMS  base  metals  since
acquiring tenure in 2012 (refer Heron 2015 Annual Report, 27 August 2015).
Geological Setting, Mineralization and Deposit Types
Mt  Zephyr  has  major  historic  underground  shaft  workings  associated  with  the
northern  strike  extension  of  the  Dacian  Gold’s  Mt  Morgans  Banded  Iron  Formation
(BIF).  Limited drilling in the 1980s by Nord Resources only sampled the BIF lodes,
with  assaying stopping  in ore  grade.   Collars  in general  were  too close  to  the  old
workings so drilling often failed to test below the depleted regolith:
MZP4  33-34m
1m at 2.45g/t Au
BIF at a porphyry contact
Significantly, RAB drilling regional soil gold anomalies at the Mt Zephyr Gale prospect
in the 1990s by Aurora  Gold intersected 0.5 to 3.12g/t Au which were considered
sub-economic  grades  at prevailing low gold prices (Gale has comparable grades to
material now included in Dacian Gold’s Jupiter resource model).
Historic 1990s Gale prospect RAB drill intercepts include:
•
•
•
MZR4  0-18m  18m at 0.51g/t Au  weathered sericite altered granitoid
MZR19 0-18m  18m at 0.48g/t Au   weathered sericite altered granitoid
MZR49 0-6m
6m at 1.26g/t Au   weathered sericite altered granitoid
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 27
Limited RC drilling by Newcrest restricted to the northern part of the Gale prospect
returned consistent 0.1-0.7g/t Au assays.
The Gale intercepts have not been adequately followed up, and represent walk-up
drill targets.
This level of  gold  anomalism  in  shallow  drilling,  combined  with  the  demonstrated
syenite intrusive association at Mt Zephyr North, confirms a high priority  “Jupiter-
style” exploration target.  In particular, the “donut”-shaped circular magnetic low
anomaly between Paul’s Find and Mt Zephyr North is a high priority drill target.
Exploration
Heron exploration has focused on geological review and limited field sampling (refer
Heron 2015 Annual Report, 27 August 2015).
Heron has held Mt Zephyr as a VMS property, which with the Woodlawn experience
will be re-visited.
Drilling, Sampling, Analysis and Data Verification
The  existing  drilling  database  is  currently  being  upgraded  to  enable  JORC  2012
compliant results to be completed.
Mineral Processing and Metallurgical Testing
These programs are planned following the listing of Ardea.
Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates
The historic drilling is not suited to resource estimation.  These programs are planned
following the listing of Ardea.
Program and Budget
An A$1.4 million two year program is proposed assuming the Proposed Transaction
completes, including 2,100m of diamond drilling, 5,700m of RC drilling and 4,000m
of RAB drilling.
This proposed program will facilitate initial JORC 2012 resource estimates.
4.4
Bardoc Tectonic Zone, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia
Technical Report
Heron  announced  exploration  results  in  accordance  with  the  JORC  Code  2012
(including table 1) on 10 August 2016.
Description, Location and Access
The Bardoc Tectonic Zone (BTZ) Big Four to Ghost Rocks prospects are located from
Bardoc  60km  N of  Kalgoorlie  to  Ghost  Rocks  150km  N  of  Kalgoorlie  in  the Eastern
Goldfields of WA.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 28
The  project  straddles  the  Kalgoorlie  to  Menzies  Highway  and  is  based  upon  the
Kalgoorlie  Nickel  Project  (KNP)  with  JORC  2012-compliant  Mineral  Resource  of
approximately 805Mt at 0.7% Ni and 0.05% Co.
The tenure covers the Walter Williams Formation komatiite (host of the KNP nickel
laterite) at its eastern contact with the Siberia Formation basalt.  This contact has
pervasive gold endowment, with the main gold mining centres from south to north
including  Paddington,  Broad  Arrow,  Bardoc,  Big  Four/Aphrodites,  Goongarrie  and
Lady Shenton/Menzies.
Certain tenements in the Bardoc Tectonic Zone consist of tenement applications or
are currently held by either Heron or its various subsidiaries other than Ardea.  Heron
and Ardea have agreed that these tenements will under the Proposed Transaction be
transferred to Ardea (either directly or through wholly owned subsidiaries).   Apart
from remnant gold rights in the Big Four area, no third party has any nickel-cobalt
laterite mineral rights within Ardea’s tenure.
Details  of  the  tenements  which  together  comprise  the  Bardoc  Tectonic  Zone,
together with Ardea’s interest, encumbrances and risk factors are set out in Schedule
5.
History
Heron acquired its KNP nickel laterite tenure within the BTZ tenements from 1997,
from which time gold exploration effectively ceased (resulting in a large strategic
parcel of ground which simply has never been subject to the modern gold exploration
“boom” which has discovered so many mines on the BTZ since the 2000s).
Geological Setting, Mineralization and Deposit Types
Big  Four-Goongarrie  is  a  line  of  historic  gold  shafts  occurring  over  a  300m  strike
length.    Heron  did  limited  drilling  at  Big  Four  in  2012,  with  drill  hole  BFRC028
intersecting 6m at 8.6g/t Au from 125m within a north plunging shoot in porphyry
intruding  ultramafic  (BFRC0028  was  the  deepest  lode  hole  of  the  program,  140m
deep).
Goongarrie Hill adjoins the historic Goongarrie gold mines located to the immediate
east.  Recent sampling by Heron has identified target zones for follow up.
Ghost Rocks has several substantial historic underground gold mines which require
drill appraisal.  Of particular interest, the projected line of lode extends northwest
beneath soil cover along the shores of Lake Ballard, with the recessive weathering
of otherwise prominent ridge lines suggesting enhanced alteration.
Exploration
Heron exploration has focused on geological review and limited field sampling (refer
Heron 2015 Annual Report, 27 August 2015).
Drilling, Sampling, Analysis and Data Verification
Database validation is current, and has defined several drill targets.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 29
Mineral Processing and Metallurgical Testing
These programs are planned following the listing of Ardea.
Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates
The historic drilling is not suited to gold resource estimation.  These programs are
planned following the listing of Ardea.
Program and Budget
An A$0.6 million two year program, including 800m of diamond drilling and 400m of
RC drilling, is proposed assuming the Proposed Transaction completes.  This program
will facilitate initial prospect ranking.
4.5
Kalgoorlie Nickel Project, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia
Technical Report
Refer Heron press release, 10 August 2016.
Description, Location and Access
The  Kalgoorlie  Nickel  Project  (KNP)  prospects  are  located  from  Bardoc  to  Ghost
Rocks 60-150km north of Kalgoorlie, and 40-60km east of Kalgoorlie from Bulong to
Kalpini, all in the Eastern Goldfields of WA.
The  project  has  excellent  mining  infrastructure  and  resources  are  mainly  within
granted Mining Leases and Exploration Licences and is 100% Heron-owned.
The tenure covers the Walter Williams Formation komatiite which is host of the KNP
nickel laterite.
There are two styles of Ardea tenure for the KNP Tenements:
(a)
Tenure  where  all  mineral  rights  are  owned  100%  unencumbered  by  Ardea,
being the BTZ and Kalgoorlie East projects.
(b)
Tenure  where  Ardea  has  nickel-cobalt  and  all  other  non-gold-silver  rights,
and Heron retains  gold-silver  rights by virtue of pre-existing agreements or
undertakings:
(i)
Heron  is  negotiating  to  sell  the  gold-silver  rights  on  its  Siberia  and
Black  Range  tenure,  which  negotiations  commenced  prior  to  the
Proposed  Transaction  being  announced  and  which  Heron  and  Ardea
will continue to pursue.
(ii)
Heron  has  a  20%  free-carried  joint  venture  interest  in  the  Southern
Gold Bulong project.  It is intended that Ardea will have a first right
of refusal over this project;
(iii)
Heron has agreed to divest its Yerilla tenure to a third party, but still
retains certain rights, upon which it is intended that Ardea will have
a first right of refusal; and
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 30
(iv)
Heron has provided an option for a third party to farm-in for precious
metal  rights  on  its  Lake  Rebecca  tenure,  upon which  it  is  intended
that Ardea will have a first right of refusal.
Certain tenements in the KNP consist of tenement applications or are currently held
by either Heron or its various subsidiaries other than Ardea.  Heron and Ardea have
agreed that these tenements will under the Proposed Transaction be transferred to
Ardea (either directly or through wholly owned subsidiaries).  Apart from as stated
above, no third party has any mineral rights within tenure currently registered under
“Ardea Resources”
Details of the tenements which together comprise the KNP, together with Ardea’s
interest, encumbrances and risk factors are set out in Schedule 5.
History
Vale Inco farmed in to the KNP between 2005 and 2009, expending A$34.5 million to
deliver a Pre-Feasibility Study (PFS) that included some 95,000 metres of drill data,
a  JORC  2004-compliant  Mineral  Resource  estimate,  and  detailed  geo-metallurgy
modelling.
Vale  Inco  concluded  that  a  High  Pressure  Acid  Leach  (HPAL)  was  the  preferred
flowsheet  for  developing  the  KNP  and  modelled  a  2.50  million  tonnes  per  annum
(Mtpa) leach feed flow sheet with pre-production capital costs of A$2.1 billion for
22.2  thousand  tonnes  per  annum  (Ktpa)  nickel  production  in  a  Mixed  Hydroxide
Product  (MHP),  operating  costs  of  US$4.54/lb  of  nickel  (refer  Heron  ASX
announcement dated 8 April 2014).  The Vale Inco study was of a very high quality
and has provided the key data for subsequent studies.
Heron  (with  consultants)  in  2010  developed  an  optimised  HPAL  flow-sheet  with
3.75Mtpa  leach  feed  sourced  from  high  grade  beneficiable  ore,  pre-production
capital costs of A$2.8 billion for 36.7Ktpa nickel production in MHP and operating
costs of US$4.17/lb of nickel (refer Heron ASX announcement dated 8 April 2014).]
Both  Vale  Inco  (2009)  and  Heron  (2010)  only  accessed  ore  from  four  of  the  15
separate KNP deposits, confirming the potential due to the extensive resource base
for longer mine-lives and more aggressive screening to increase the nickel leach feed
grades.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 31
Figure 3
Ardea Resources Limited, Project Locations, Kalgoorlie Nickel Project
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 32
Geological Setting, Mineralization and Deposit Types
The tenure covers olivine adcumulate lithologies in the BTZ and Siberia, and olivine
mesocumulate lithologies and komatiite at Kalgoorlie East and Yerilla.
The  total  KNP Mineral  Resource  is  approximately  805Mt  at  0.70%  Ni  and  0.05% Co
(JORC 2012).
Exploration
Heron  exploration  has  focused on  metallurgical reviews  (refer  Heron  2015  Annual
Report, 27 August 2015).
Drilling, Sampling, Analysis and Data Verification
Database upgrade is current, ahead of completing mine schedule and metallurgical
optimization studies to PFS level.
Mineral Processing and Metallurgical Testing
Simulus Scoping Study 2013-14
Heron signed an agreement with Simulus in July 2013 and its related company CFNP
to undertake sulphuric acid-based hydrometallurgical testwork on various KNP ore-
types.    The  Simulus  technology  seeks  to  change  the  KNP  economics  through  the
recycling  of  a  large  component of  the  sulphuric  acid,  thereby vastly reducing  the
amount of neutralizing agents required in nickel hydrometallurgical processing.
Initial  bench-scale  testwork  on  three  representative  samples  from  KNP  deposits
showed nickel recoveries of between 94-97% for clay-rich and saprolite ore types and
85% for the iron-rich limonite ore types.  Acid recoveries for initial bench-scale tests
were  up  to  70%,  combining  membrane  recovery,  iron  sulphate  hydrolysis  and
magnesium  sulphate  calcining.    The  2014  Scoping  Study  examined  the  flow-sheet
characteristics  for  a  10Ktpa  commercial  scale  nickel  production  plant,  utilizing
Atmospheric Leaching and acid recovery technology (refer Heron ASX announcement
dated 8 April 2014).
Simulus in April 2014 estimated process plant capital from its “off-the-shelf” supplier
responses.    Heron  generated  non-plant  costs  by  scaling  down  the  2010  capital
estimates (from the Heron PFS Optimization, typically applying a factor of 0.45 based
on a generally accepted industry scaling formula).
For  the  base  case  10Ktpa  of  nickel  production,  the  estimated  capital  intensity  is
US$14.54/annual pound of nickel production, which is a “step-change” improvement
in the overall KNP economics.
Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates
The historic drilling is not suited to gold resource estimation.  These programs are
planned following the listing of Ardea.
Program and Budget
Ardea will undertake further feasibility work on the KNP as follows:
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 33
  Up-scaling of the 2014 study from 10Ktpa to 20Ktpa to assess the impact of
economies  of  scale  on  both  operating  costs  and  capital  costs,  including  a
revised mining plan and estimates for mining capital and operating costs;
  Additional  bench-scale  acid  leach  tests  will  be  carried  out  on  the  mining
inventory identified in the up-scale study on the full range of KNP ore types,
aiming  to  better  characterize  geo-metallurgical  performance  under
atmospheric leaching conditions; and
  Ardea will commence partner studies, seeking a partner to commercialize the
“KNP Optimized Flowsheet”.
An  A$1.0  million,  two  year  Pre-feasibility  Study  is  proposed  by  Ardea,  testing
beneficiation,  leaching,  acid  and  metal  recovery,  designing  a  mining  schedule,
updating engineering and studies on environment, tailings, hydrology and heritage.
It is expected that the study, by virtue of the style of technologies being quantified,
would qualify for Commonwealth government R&D reimbursement.
4.6
Competent persons’ statements
A competent person’s statement for the purposes of Listing Rule 5.22 has previously
been announced by the Company for:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Lewis Ponds on 28 August 2015, 2015 Heron Annual Report;
Kalgoorlie  Nickel  Project  on  18  October  2013  and  31  July  2014,  28  August
2015, 2015 Heron Annual Report;
Big Four-Goongarrie on 13 March 2012, 26 June 2012 and 24 July 2012;
Mt Zephyr on 10 August 2016; and
Ardea exploration on 10 August 2016.
Copies of each of these announcements have been lodged with ASIC and are available
from www.heronresources.com.au or by contacting the Company on +61 2 9119 8111
or +61 8 6500 9200, or email to heron@heronresources.com.au.
The  Company  confirms  that  it  is  not  aware  of  any  new  information  or  data  that
materially affects information included in previous announcements, and all material
assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the estimates continue to apply
and have not materially changed.  All projects will be subject to new work programs
following the listing of Ardea, notably drilling and metallurgy.
The  Mineral Resource  for  Lewis Ponds  was prepared  and  first disclosed  under  the
JORC Code 2004. It has not been updated since to comply with the JORC Code 2012
on  the  basis  that  the  information  has  not  materially  changed  since  it  was  last
reported.
The exploration results are based on information reviewed by Mr David von Perger,
who  is  a  Member  of  the  Australian  Institute  of  Mining  and  Metallurgy  (Chartered
Professional – Geology).  Mr von Perger is a full time employee of Heron Resources
Limited and has sufficient experience, which is relevant to the style of mineralisation
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 34
and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking
to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 edition of the “Australasian
Code  for  Reporting  of  Exploration  Results  and  “qualified  person”  as  this  term  is
defined in Canadian National Instrument 43-101 (“NI 43-101”).   Mr von Perger has
reviewed the Notice and consents to the inclusion of the information in the form and
context in which it appears.
4.7
Ardea’s board of directors and management
Heron’s Board is currently considering suitably qualified directors to be appointed to
Ardea’s  Board  and  is  yet  to  finalize  the  composition  of  Ardea’s  Board  following
completion of the Proposed Transaction.  In the meantime, Ardea’s  Board consists
of the following:
(a)
Stephen Dennis (interim Chairperson)
Stephen Dennis has been actively involved in the mining industry for over 30
years.    He  has  held senior  management  positions  at  MIM  Holdings  Limited,
Minara Resources Limited, and Brambles Australia Limited.  Until recently,
Mr  Dennis  was  the  chief  executive  officer  and  managing  director  of  CBH
Resources Limited, the Australian subsidiary of Toho Zinc Co Ltd of Japan.
Mr Dennis is also currently the Chairman (Non-Executive) of Heron Resources
Limited, Rox Resources Limited, Cott Oil & Gas Limited and Graphex Mining
Limited.
(b)
Ian Buchhorn (Non-executive Director)
Ian  Buchhorn  is  a  mineral  economist  and  geologist  with  over  35  years’
experience.  Prior to listing Heron in 1996 as founding Managing Director, Mr
Buchhorn  worked  with  Anglo  American Corporation  in  southern  Africa,  and
Comalco, Shell/Billiton and Elders Resources in Australia, as well as setting
up and managing Australia's first specialist mining grade control consultancy.
For the last 25 years Mr Buchhorn has developed mining projects throughout
the Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia and operated as a Registered Mine
Manager.  Mr Buchhorn is an executive director of Heron and non-executive
director of RBR Group.
(c)
Simon Smith (interim Non-executive Director and Company Secretary)
Simon  Smith  has  been  a  chief  financial  officer  of  both  private  and  public
companies  in  Australia  and  the  USA.  He  brings  20  years’  experience  as  a
Chartered  Accountant  and  holds  a  Bachelor’s  Degree  in  Business  from  the
University of Technology Sydney.  Mr Smith is the General Manager – Finance
and Administration and Company Secretary of Heron.
Ardea’s directors have retained an executive search consultant and are confident of
appointing a managing director shortly.  In the meantime, Ardea has nominated Ian
Buchhorn to manage its exploration programs.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 35
Ardea’s  current  directors  are  either  Directors  or  Officers  of  Heron,  and  are  not
entitled  to  receive  any  fees  from  Ardea  as  a  result  of  their  appointment.    Ardea
proposes to pay reasonable remuneration to any director appointed as part of the
Proposed Transaction.
As  at  the  date  of  this  Explanatory  Statement  and  other  than  as  set  out  in  this
Explanatory Memorandum, no Ardea Director has, or has held at any time during the
last 2 years, an interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of Ardea;
property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the body in connection with:
(i)
its formation or promotion; or
(ii)
the offer of the securities; or
(c)
the offer of securities.
4.8
Risk factors in holding Ardea Shares
Upon completion of the Proposed Transaction, Eligible Heron Shareholders will hold
Ardea Shares, and as a result become exposed to certain risks as set out in Schedule
4.
4.9
Financial information
Set out in Schedule 3 is the unaudited Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
of Ardea and the unaudited Consolidated Pro-Forma Statement of Financial Position,
as at 30 June 2016 and on the basis of the following assumptions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Proposed Transaction was effective on 30 June 2016;
loans of up to A$350,000 to Ardea for costs of the Proposed Transaction and
A$150,000  in  budgeted  tenement  expenses  prior  to  completion  of  the
Proposed Transaction, which are repaid through the issue of 10 million Ardea
Options (exercise price of A$0.25 and three year term);
no further Shares are issued; and
the fees noted in section 4.10 (b) are paid to Azure and Euroz upon successful
completion of the public offering.
4.10  Material contracts
Ardea is a party to the following contracts which are material to it:
(a)
Implementation agreement
Heron and Ardea have agreed to enter an implementation agreement under
which they will agree as follows:
(i)
The  parties  will  fully  co-operate  and  take  all  reasonable  steps  to
implement  the  Proposed  Transaction,  including  by  doing  all  things
reasonably  necessary  so  that  the  Non-Woodlawn  Assets  are  held
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 36
(whether  directly  or  through  wholly  owned  subsidiaries,  or  deed  of
trust) by Ardea.
(ii)
Ardea will issue Heron 41,500,938 fully paid ordinary shares in Ardea
in  consideration  for  the  transfer  of  the  Non-Woodlawn  Assets  to
Ardea.
(iii)
Heron has agreed to lend Ardea up to A$500,000 on an unsecured and
non-interest  bearing  basis  with  funds  advanced  to  be  used  to
implement  the  Proposed  Transaction  and  meet  tenement  holding
costs.    Amounts  advanced  are  repayable  upon  completion  of  the
Proposed  Transaction  through  the  issue of  10  million  Ardea  Options
(exercise price of A$0.25 and three year term).
(iv)
For  a  period  of  2  years  following  completion  of  the  Proposed
Transaction (and 4 years for Heron on the Lewis Ponds Project), each
party  have  the  first  right  to  acquire  any  tenements  dealt  or
relinquished by the other party.
(b)
Mandate
Ardea has appointed  Azure Capital Limited and Euroz Securities Limited as
Ardea’s  Corporate  Advisor  and  Lead  Manager  respectively  to  provide  all
assistance necessary to achieve a successful listing of Ardea on ASX, including
the raising of capital (Capital Raising).
Azure will be paid a corporate advisory fee of A$100,000 payable in cash or
Ardea Shares at Azure’s election.  Euroz will be paid a 1% management fee
payable on the total gross proceeds raised pursuant to the Capital Raising and
a 4% equity raising fee payable on the total gross proceeds raised pursuant to
the  Capital  Raising,  excluding  any  funds  invested  by  existing  Heron
Shareholders.
Azure and Euroz  will each be entitled to  options  to be issued Ardea Shares
equal to 1.50% of the fully diluted issue share capital of Ardea issued at the
time of listing, exercisable at a 25% premium to the capital raising issue price
with an expiry date three years from the listing date.
4.11  Substantial Shareholders
As at the date of this Prospectus, Ardea is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Based on the information known as at the date of this Prospectus and assuming A$6
million is raised under the Capital Raising, the following persons will have a voting
power of 5% or more in Ardea as a result of the Distribution:
Name of Heron Shareholder
Voting power
Ian Buchhorn and related parties
11.2%
6.5%
Heron
Ardea
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 37
Greenstone Heron Holdings LP
13.0
7.5%
4.12  Rights and obligations attaching to Ardea Shares
Ardea Shares to be distributed under the Proposed Transaction will rank equally in
all respects with existing Ardea Shares on issue.
Full details of the rights attaching to Ardea Shares are set out in Ardea’s constitution,
a copy of which can be inspected at the Company’s registered office at Level 1/7
Havelock Street, West Perth WA 6005.
The following is a summary of the principal rights which are proposed to attach to
Ardea Shares:
(a)
Voting
Every  holder  of  Ardea  Shares  present  in  person  or  by  proxy,  attorney  or
representative  at  a  meeting  of  Ardea  Shareholders  has  one vote on  a vote
taken by a show of hands, and, on a poll every holder of Ardea Shares who is
present in person or by proxy, attorney or representative has one vote for
every Ardea Share held by him or her.  At any general meeting a resolution
put to the vote of the meeting must be decided on a show of hands unless a
poll is effectively demanded and the demand is not withdrawn.
(b)
Dividends
Dividends are payable out of Ardea's profits and are declared by the  Ardea
Directors.
Ardea Shareholders are entitled to dividends as a result of ownership of their
Ardea Shares in accordance with the Constitution.
(c)
Transfer of Ardea Shares
An  Ardea  Shareholder  may  transfer  Ardea  Shares  by  a  market  transfer  in
accordance  with  any  computerised  or  electronic  system  established  or
recognised  by  the  Listing  Rules  or  the  Corporations  Act  for  the  purpose  of
facilitating dealings in Ardea Shares or by an instrument in writing in a form
approved by ASX or in any other usual form or in any form approved by the
Ardea Directors.
The  Ardea  Directors  may  refuse  to  register  any  transfer  of  Ardea  Shares,
where Ardea is permitted or required to do so by the Listing Rules or the ASX
Settlement Operating Rules or a Restriction Agreement.
(d)
Meetings and notice
Each Ardea Shareholder is entitled to receive notice of and to attend general
meetings for Ardea and to receive all notices, accounts and other documents
required  to  be  sent  to  Ardea  Shareholders  under  the  Constitution,  the
Corporations Act or the Listing Rules.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 38
(e)
Liquidation rights
Ardea has only issued one class of shares, which all rank equally in the event
of liquidation.  Once all the liabilities of Ardea are satisfied, a liquidator may,
with the authority of a special resolution of Ardea Shareholders divide among
the  Ardea  Shareholders  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  remaining  assets  of
Ardea.  The liquidator can with the sanction of a special resolution of Ardea
Shareholders vest the whole or any part of the assets in trust for the benefit
of shareholders as the liquidator thinks fit, but no shareholder of Ardea can
be  compelled  to  accept  any  shares  or  other  securities  in  respect  of  which
there is any liability.
(f)
Ardea Shareholder liability
Ardea Shares are fully paid shares and are not subject to any calls for money
by the Ardea Directors and will therefore not become liable for forfeiture.
(g)
Alteration to the Constitution
The Constitution can only be amended by a special resolution passed by at
least  three  quarters  of  shareholders  present  and  voting  at  the  general
meeting.  At least 28 days' written notice, specifying the intention to propose
the resolution as a special resolution must be given.
(h)
Listing Rules
If  Ardea  is  admitted  to  the  Official  List  of  ASX,  then  despite  anything  in
Ardea’s constitution, if the Listing Rules prohibit an act being done, the act
must not be done.  Nothing in the Constitution prevents an act being done
that the Listing Rules require to be done.  If the Listing Rules require an act
to be done or not to be done, authority is given for that act to be done or not
to be done (as the case may be).  If the Listing Rules require the constitution
to contain a provision or not to contain a provision the constitution is deemed
to contain that provision or not to contain that provision (as the case may
be).   If  a provision  of  the  constitution  is  or  becomes  inconsistent  with  the
Listing Rules, the constitution is deemed not to contain that provision to the
extent of the inconsistency.
5
RESOLUTION 1 – DISPOSAL OF MAJOR ASSET
Listing Rule 11.4 provides that an entity must not dispose of a major asset if at the
time of the disposal it is aware that the person acquiring the asset intends to issue
or  offer  securities  with  a  view  to  becoming  listed.    This  rule  does  not  apply  if,
amongst other things, the holders of ordinary securities in the entity approve of the
disposal.
Ardea is currently a wholly owned subsidiary of Heron.  The Proposed Transaction is
conditional  upon  Ardea  being  admitted  to  the  Official  List  of  ASX  and,  for  that
reason, Shareholder approval is sought for the purposes of Listing Rule 11.4.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 39
6
RESOLUTION 2 – REDUCTION OF CAPITAL
6.1
Corporations Act requirements
The proposed reduction of capital by way of the In-specie Distribution is an equal
capital reduction.
Under Section 256B of the Corporations Act, a company may only reduce its capital
if it:
(a)
(b)
(c)
is fair and reasonable to shareholders as a whole;
does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its creditors; and
is  approved  by  shareholders  in  accordance  with  section  256C  of  the
Corporations Act.
The  Directors  believe  that  the  Proposed  Transaction  is  fair  and  reasonable  to
Shareholders as a whole and does not materially prejudice the Company’s ability to
pay its creditors.
Under the proposed reduction of capital, each Heron Shareholder is treated equally
and in the same manner since the terms of the reduction of capital are the same for
each  Shareholder.    The  In-specie  Distribution  is  on  a  pro  rata  basis,  and  the
proportionate ownership interest of each Shareholder remains the same before and
after the Proposed Transaction.  Further, the Directors consider that the Proposed
Transaction will not result in the Company being insolvent at the time or after the
In-specie Distribution.
In accordance with the Corporations Act:
(a)
The  proposed  reduction  is  an  equal  reduction  and  requires  approval  by  an
ordinary resolution passed at a general meeting of Heron Shareholders;
(b)
This  Explanatory  Memorandum  and  accompanying  Prospectus  and  previous
ASX announcements set out all information known to Heron that is material
to the decision on how to vote on Resolution 2; and
(c)
Heron has lodged with ASIC a copy of this Notice of Meeting and accompanying
Prospectus.
6.2
ASX Listing Rule requirements
ASX Listing Rule 7.17 provides in part that a listed entity, in offering shareholders an
entitlement to securities, must offer those securities pro rata or in such other way
as, in the ASX's opinion, is fair in all the circumstances.  In addition, there must be
no  restriction  on  the  number  of  securities  which  a  shareholder  holds  before  this
entitlement  accrues.   The Proposed  Transaction  satisfies  the  requirements  of  ASX
Listing Rule 7.17, as the issue of Ardea Shares is being made to Shareholders on a
pro  rata basis,  and  there  is  no  restriction on  the  number  of  Shares  a  Shareholder
must hold before the entitlement to the Ardea Shares accrues.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 40
The  Company  has  sought  waivers  of  Listing  Rule  7.25  to  effect  the  Proposed
Transaction.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 41
SCHEDULE 1  DEFINITIONS
In this Notice and Explanatory Memorandum:
Ardea or Ardea Resources  means Ardea Resources Limited.
Ardea Board
means the board of directors of Ardea.
Ardea Director
means a director of Ardea.
Ardea Option, Option
means an option to be issued an Ardea Share.
Ardea Share
means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of Ardea.
Ardea Shareholder
means the holder of an Ardea Share.
ASIC
ASX
Chairman
Company
means
the  Australian  Securities  and
Investments
Commission.
means  ASX  Limited  or  the  Australian  Securities Exchange
operated by ASX Limited, as the context requires.
means the Chairman of the Company.
means Heron Resources Limited.
Constitution
means the constitution of the Company as amended.
Corporations Act
means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) as amended.
Demerger Relief
has the meaning given in section 3.10.
Director
means a director of the Company.
Effective Date
means the date the distribution of Ardea Shares to Eligible
Heron Shareholders is effected.
Eligible Heron
Shareholder
means a Shareholder on the Record Date with a registered
address in Australia.
Explanatory Memorandum   means this explanatory memorandum.
Heron or Company
means Heron Resources Limited.
Heron Board
means the board of Directors of Heron.
Ineligible Shareholder
Means  a  Heron  Shareholder  on  the  Record  Date  with  a
registered address other than in Australia.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 42
In-specie Distribution or
means the distribution of Ardea Shares to Shareholders on
Distribution
the Record Date, to be effected through an equal capital
reduction the subject of Resolution 2.
Listing Rule
means the listing rules of the ASX.
Meeting
means the meeting convened by this Notice (as adjourned
from time to time).
Non-Woodlawn Assets
has the meaning given in section 3.1, and as detailed in the
Heron ASX announcement dated 10 August 2016.
Notice
means this notice of meeting.
Proposed Transaction
has the meaning given in section 3.1.
Prospectus
means  the  prospectus  prepared  by  the  Company  for  the
purposes of complying with ASIC Regulatory Guide RG 188,
and which accompanies this Notice.
Proxy Form
means the proxy form attached to this Notice.
Record Date
has  the  meaning  given  in  section  3.9,  being  3  October
2016.
Resolution
means a resolution set out in the Notice.
Securities
means a Share or an Option in the capital of Heron.
Share
means  a  fully  paid  ordinary  share  in  the  capital  of  the
Heron.
Shareholder or Heron
means a holder of a Share.
Shareholder
WST
$, A$
means Australian Western Standard Time.
means Australian dollars.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 43
SCHEDULE 2  PRO-FORMA  CONSOLIDATED  STATEMENT  OF  FINANCIAL  POSITION  FOR
HERON AS AT 30 JUNE 2016
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Trade and other receivables
Investments
Property, plant and equipment
Exploration and evaluation costs
carried forward
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES
Accounts Payable
Provisions
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Contributed equity
Option reserve
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
-
-
-
30 June 2016
(A$’000)
Pro-Forma
(A$’000)
22,891
22,891
522
522
23,413
23,413
35
1,907
436
31,068
33,446
56,859
893
882
1,775
55,084
35
1,907
26
22,768
24,736
48,149
893
882
1,775
46,374
138,409
129,699
935
935
(84,260)
(84,260)
55,084
46,374
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 44
SCHEDULE 3  PRO-FORMA  CONSOLIDATED  STATEMENT  OF  FINANCIAL  POSITION  FOR
ARDEA AS AT 30 JUNE 2016
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Property, plant and equipment
Exploration and evaluation costs
carried forward
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts Payable
Loan from Heron
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Contributed equity
Option reserve
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
-
-
-
Pro-forma Financial
Information 30 June 2016
30 June 2016
Min
Max
Subscription
Subscription
A$’000
A$'000
A$'000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3,500
6,000
3,500
6,000
410
410
8,300
8,300
8,700
8,700
12,200
14,700
275
500
775
400
500
900
11,425
13,800
11,700
14,200
-
-
(275)
(400)
11,425
13,800
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 45
SCHEDULE 4  RISKS
The Ardea Shares to be distributed under the Proposed Transaction should be considered
speculative because of the nature of the business activities of Ardea.  Whilst the Directors
commend the Proposed Transaction, potential investors should consider whether the Ardea
Shares offered are a suitable investment having regard to their own personal investment
objectives and financial circumstances and the risk factors set out below.  This list is not
exhaustive and potential investors should read the Notice and Prospectus in their entirety
and if in any doubt consult their professional advisor before deciding whether to participate
in the Proposed Transaction.
4.1
Risks Specific to Ardea and its Projects
Ardea’s exploration projects represent the main business activity and focus of Ardea.
Risks specific to these projects and Ardea’s circumstances include the following:
(a)
Non-renewal of title
Under  both  New  South  Wales  and  Western  Australian  law,  exploration
tenements  are  valid  for  set  periods  of  time  and  renewal  is  subject  to  the
approval of the respective State Minister.  There is no guarantee that Ardea
will be successful in the renewal of exploration tenements as they reach their
expiry date.
If in future tenements are not extended, Ardea may suffer damage through
loss of the opportunity to discover and/or develop any mineral resources.
(b)
Management
Ardea’s  management  presently  consists  of  three  non-executive  Directors.
The Directors have retained an executive search consultant and are confident
of appointing a managing director shortly.  Prior to appointing the full-time
management team, Ian Buchhorn will manage Ardea’s exploration programs.
(c)
Limited exploration
Aside from  Lewis  Ponds  and  the  KNP,  the projects  have been subjected  to
only limited drill testing.  Whilst gold and/or nickel mineralisation as the case
may be has been located in multiple drill intersections, there is a risk that
the  mineralisation  in  adjacent  drill  holes  is  not  continuous  between  drill
holes.  There is also a risk that the presently completed drill holes may not
be  representative  of  the  mineralisation  present.    Further  drill  tests  are
required to determine if mineralisation extends further beyond the geometry
of the currently defined drill pattern.
There is no guarantee that if exploration extends the current resources that
it will be capable of sustaining commercial development.
(d)
Resource estimate
Resource  estimates  are  expressions  of  judgment  based  on  knowledge,
experience and industry practice.  Estimates, which were valid when made,
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 46
may  change  significantly  when  new  information  becomes  available.    In
addition,  resource  estimates  are  imprecise  and  depend  to  some  extent  on
interpretations, which may prove to be inaccurate.  Should Ardea encounter
mineralisation or formations different from those predicted by past sampling
and drilling, resource estimates may have to be adjusted and mining plans
may have to be altered in a way which could have either a positive or negative
effect on Ardea’s operations.
(e)
Exploration and Operating Risks
The current and future operations of Ardea, including exploration, appraisal
and possible production activities may be affected by a range of exploration
and operating factors, including:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
geological conditions;
limitations on activities due to seasonal weather patterns;
alterations to program and budgets;
unanticipated  operational  and  technical  difficulties  encountered  in
geophysical  surveys,  drilling,  metallurgical  laboratory  work  and
production activities;
(e)
mechanical  failure  of  operating  plant  and  equipment;  adverse
weather  conditions,  industrial  and  environmental  accidents,  acts  of
terrorism or political or civil unrest and other force majeure events;
(f)
(g)
industrial action, disputation or disruptions;
unavailability of transport or drilling equipment to allow access and
geological and geophysical investigations;
(h)
failure  of  metallurgical  testing  to  determine  a  commercially  viable
product;
(i)
unavailability  of
suitable
laboratory
facilities
to  complete
metallurgical testwork investigations;
(j)
shortages  or  unavailability  of  manpower  or  appropriately  skilled
manpower;
(k)
unexpected shortages or increases in the costs of consumables, spare
parts, plant and equipment; and
(l)
prevention  or  restriction  of  access  by  reason  of  inability  to  obtain
consents or approvals.
(f)
Commodity Prices
Ardea  expects  to  derive  its  future  revenue  from  the  sale  of  commodity
products, or from the sale of either intermediate or fully-separated products.
Consequently,  any  earnings  will  be  closely  related  to  the  price  of  these
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 47
commodities  together  with  the  terms  of  any  off-take  agreement(s)  under
which Ardea’s products may be sold.
Commodity prices fluctuate and are affected by numerous factors beyond the
control of Ardea.  These factors include worldwide and regional supply and
demand  for  the  specific  commodity,  prevailing  commodity  trading  terms,
general  world  economic  conditions  and  the  outlook  for  interest  rates,
inflation  and  other  economic  factors  on  both  a  regional  and  global  basis.
These factors may have a positive or negative effect on Ardea’s exploration,
project development and production plans and activities, together with the
ability to fund those plans and activities.  Furthermore,  some products are
not  traded  upon  terminal,  liquid,  commodity  exchanges.    There  is  a  risk
therefore  that  Ardea  may  not  be  able  to secure  an  attractive  price for  its
commodity products.
(g)
Environment
The projects are subject to Western Australian, New South Wales and Federal
laws and regulations regarding environmental matters and the discharge of
hazardous  wastes  and  materials.   As  with  all  mining  projects,  the  projects
would  be  expected  to  have  a  variety  of  environmental  impacts  should
development proceed.
Ardea  intends  to  conduct  its  activities  in  an  environmentally  responsible
manner and in accordance with applicable laws and industry standards.  Areas
disturbed  by  Ardea’s  activities  are  rehabilitated  as  required  by  applicable
laws and regulations.
(h)
Mining Tax and Royalties
There  is  a  risk  that  the  Commonwealth,  New  South  Wales  or  Western
Australian Governments may seek to introduce further, or increase existing,
taxes and royalties.
(i)
Encumbrances on Title
Ardea may at a future date be required to encumber part or all of its tenure
to expedite future commercial transactions.
(j)
Funding
At  the  date  of  this  Proposed  Transaction,  Ardea  has  no  income  producing
assets and will generate losses for the foreseeable future.  Until it is able to
develop a project and generate appropriate cashflow, it is dependent upon
being  able  to  obtain  future  equity  or  debt  funding  to  support  long  term
exploration,  after  the  expenditure  of  the  net  proceeds  raised  under  the
Proposed Transaction.  Neither Ardea nor any of the Directors or any other
party  can  provide  any  guarantee  or  assurance  that  if  further  funding  is
required, such funding can be raised on terms acceptable to Ardea.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 48
Any  additional  equity  funding  will  dilute  existing  Shareholders.    Also,  no
guarantee or assurance can be given as to when a project can be developed
to the stage where it will generate cashflow.   As such, a project would be
dependent  on  many  factors,  for  example  exploration  success,  subsequent
mine development, commissioning and operational performance.
Ardea may not be able to earn or maintain proposed equity interests in  its
tenements  if  it  fails  to  meet  the  ongoing  expenditure  commitments.
Accordingly, Ardea may potentially lose entitlement or rights to interests in
the tenements and projects.
(k)
Unforeseen Risks
There may be other risks which the Directors are unaware of at the time of
issuing  this  Notice  and  Prospectus  which  may  impact  on  Ardea  and  its
operations, and on the valuation and performance of Ardea’s Shares.
4.2
General Economic Risks and Business Climate
Share  market  conditions,  may  affect  the  listed  securities  regardless  of  operating
performance.  Share market conditions are affected by many factors such as:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
general economic outlook;
movements in or outlook on interest rates and inflation rates;
currency fluctuations;
commodity prices;
changes in investor sentiment towards particular market sectors; and
the demand and supply for capital.
Commodity  prices  are  influenced  by  physical  and  investment  demand  for  those
commodities.  Fluctuations in commodity prices may influence individual projects in
which Ardea may have an interest.
4.3
Exploration, Development, Mining and Processing Risks
The business of mineral exploration, project development and mining by its nature
contains  elements  of  significant  risk.    Ultimate  and  continuous  success  of  these
activities is dependent on many factors such as:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the discovery and/or acquisition of economically recoverable ore reserves;
successful conclusions to bankable feasibility studies;
access to adequate capital for project development;
design  and construction  of  efficient  mining  and processing  facilities  within
capital expenditure budgets;
(e)
securing and maintaining title to tenements and compliance with the terms
of those tenements;
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 49
(f)
obtaining  consents  and  approvals  necessary  for the  conduct  of  exploration
and mining; and
(g)
access  to  competent  operational  management  and  prudent  financial
administration,  including  the  availability  and  reliability  of  appropriately
skilled and experienced employees, contractors and consultants.
Adverse weather conditions over a prolonged period can adversely affect exploration
and mining operations and the timing of revenues.
Whether  or  not  income  will  result  from  projects  undergoing  exploration  and
development  programs  depends  on  the  successful  establishment  of  mining
operations.  Factors including costs, actual mineralisation, consistency and reliability
of  ore  grades  and  commodity  prices  affect  successful  project  development  and
mining operations.
Mining is an industry which has become subject to increasing legislative regulation
including but not limited to environmental responsibility and liability.  The potential
for liability is an ever present risk.  The use and disposal of chemicals in the mining
industry is under constant legislative scrutiny and regulation.  The introduction of
new laws and regulations or changes to underlying policy may adversely impact on
the operations of Ardea.
4.4
Native Title
The Native Title Act 1993 (Cth) recognises and protects the rights and interests in
Australia of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in land and waters, according
to  their  traditional laws  and  customs.    There  is  significant  uncertainty  associated
with native title in Australia and this may impact on Ardea’s operations and future
plans.
Native title can be extinguished by valid grants of land or waters to people other
than  the  native  title  holders  or  by  valid  use  of  land  or  waters.    It  can  also  be
extinguished if the indigenous group has lost their connection with the relevant land
or waters.  Native title is not extinguished by the grant of mining leases, as they are
not considered to be grants of exclusive possession.  A valid mining lease prevails
over native title to the extent of any inconsistency for the duration of the title.
For tenements to be validly granted (or renewed) after 23 December 1996 the special
“right to negotiate” regime established by the Native Title Act must be followed.
It is important to note that the existence of a native title claim is not an indication
that native title in fact exists to the land covered by the claim, as this is a matter
ultimately determined by the Federal Court.
Ardea  must  also  comply  with  Aboriginal  heritage  legislation  requirements  which
require  heritage  survey  work  to  be  undertaken  ahead  of  the  commencement  of
exploration and mining operations.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 50
SCHEDULE 5  TENEMENTS
New South Wales Tenements
Tenement
Holder
Status
Area
Application
Grant Date
Expiry Date
Required
Notes
Date
Expenditure
Lewis Ponds Project
EL 5583
TriAusMin
Live
146.0 sq km
4/12/1998
25/06/1999
24/06/2017
$81,000 pa
Note 1.
EL 8323
Ochre
Live
172.4 sq km
6/06/2014
27/11/2014
27/11/2017
$50,000 pa
-
ELA 5337
Ardea
Pending
286.0 sq km
10/08/2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Gundagai Project
EL 8061
Ochre
Live
278.1 sq km
14/09/2012
13/03/2013
13/03/2015
$69,500 pa
Renewal,  lodged
on  12/03/2015,
is  pending.  Note
2.
ELA 5323
Ardea Ltd
Pending
132.3 sq km
15/07/2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
Note 2.
Calarie Project
ML 739
TriAusMin
Live
0.0053 sq km
-
23/05/1979
22/05/2021
$35,000 pa
Notes 3, 4 and 5.
EL 7023
Tri Origin
Live
34.4 sq km
6/06/2007
20/01/2008
20/01/2017
$42,000 pa
Note 5.
ELA 5338
Ardea
Pending
100.1 sq km
10/08/2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
Restdown Project
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 51
ELA 5335
Ardea
Pending
271.7 sq km
2/08/2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
-
Western Australian tenements
Tenement
Holder
Status
Area
Application
Date
Grant Date
Expiry Date
Required
Expenditure
Notes
Mt Zephyr Project
E39/1706
Heron
E39/1757
Heron
Live
Live
20 blocks
4-Sep-2012
24-Sep-2013
23-Sep-2018
$20,000
4 blocks
29-Jul-2013
26-Feb-2014
25-Feb-2019
$15,000
Note 13
E39/1854
Heron
Pending
48 blocks
13-Jan-2015
N/A
E39/1985
Ardea
Pending
32 blocks
14-Jul-2016
N/A
E37/1271
Ardea
Pending
24 blocks
14-Jul-2016
N/A
E37/1272
Ardea
Pending
62 blocks
15-Jul-2016
N/A
E37/1273
Ardea
Pending
60 blocks
15-Jul-2016
N/A
E37/1274
Ardea
Pending
64 blocks
15-Jul-2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Note 5
Note 6
Note 6
Note 6
Bardoc Tectonic Zone - Ghost Rocks Project
E29/941
Heron
Live
20 blocks
04-Nov-14
10/06/2017
09/06/2020
$20,000
Bardoc Tectonic Zone - Goongarrie Project
M24/541-I
Heron
Live
352.5 ha
21-Dec-1995
14-Feb-2002
13-Feb-2023
$35,300
Notes 14, 15, 16,
17
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 52
M24/744-I
Heron
M29/167-I
Heron
M29/202-I
Heron
Live
Live
Live
6.68 ha
15-Apr-1998
1-May-2001
30-Apr-2022
$10,000
Notes 15, 16
80.02 ha
19-Sep-1994
25-Jun-1999
24-Jun-2020
$10,000
Notes 15, 16
593.6 ha
27-Sep-1996
11-Apr-2001
10-Apr-2022
$59,400
Notes 15, 16, 18,
19, 20
M29/272-I
Heron
Live
602.6 ha
30-Sep-1999
1-May-2001
30-Apr-2022
$60,300
Notes 15, 16, 21,
22
M29/278-I
Heron
Live
478 ha
24-Jan-2000
1-May-2001
30-Apr-2022
$47,900
Notes 15, 16, 21,
M29/423
KNP
P29/2265
Heron
Live
Live
822.1 ha
27-Aug-2013
1-Jul-2014
30-Jun-2035
$82,300
200 ha
23-Aug-2012
9-Apr-2013
8-Apr-2017
$8,000
22
E29/934
KNP
Pending
43 blocks
28-Jul-2014
N/A
N/A
N/A
Note 7
M24/731-I
Heron
M24/732-I
Heron
M24/778-I
Heron
M29/214-I
Heron
Kalgoorlie East - Taurus Project
M25/151
Heron
M25/187
Hampton
Kalgoorlie East - Kalpini Project
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
116.9 ha
4-Mar-1998
21-Aug-2007
20-Aug-2028
$11,700
Note 23
201.7 ha
4-Mar-1998
21-Aug-2007
20-Aug-2028
$20,200
Note 23
890 ha
21-May-1999
21-Aug-2007
20-Aug-2028
$89,000
Note 23
950 ha
13-Jan-1997
25-Jan-2008
24-Jan-2029
$95,000
Note 17,  24, 25
366 ha
9-Sep-1994
18-Mar-2008
17-Mar-2029
$36,600
50.03 ha
17-Nov-1995
29-Oct-2001
28-Oct-2022
$10,000
Note 26
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 53
E28/1224
Heron
M28/199
Heron
M28/201
Heron
M28/205
Heron
M27/395
Heron
E27/524
Heron
Bedonia Project
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
17 blocks
29-Aug-2001
20-Apr-2005
19-Apr-2016
$70,000
Notes 8, 17
975.7 ha
25-Mar-1998
27-Sep-2001
26-Sep-2022
$97,600
Notes 15, 19, 27
895.5 ha
25-Mar-1998
27-Sep-2001
26-Sep-2022
$89,600
Notes 15, 19,  27
850.3 ha
1-May-1998
27-Sep-2001
26-Sep-2022
$85,100
Note 15, 19
252.6 ha
9-Oct-2000
20-Sep-2006
19-Sep-2027
$25,300
6 blocks
9-Aug-2013
31-Jul-2014
30-Jul-2019
$20,000
Note 9
E63/1787
Atriplex
Pending
70 blocks
2-May-2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
Donnelly River Project
E70/4804
Atriplex
Pending
12 blocks
15-Jan-2016
N/A
N/A
N/A
Ardea Nickel-Cobalt Laterite Rights - Siberia Project
E24/203
Atriplex
Pending
4 blocks
12-Oct-2015
N/A
N/A
N/A
Note 10
E29/889
Heron
M24/634-I
Heron
M24/660
Heron
M24/663
Heron
M24/664
Heron
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
1 block
29-Jul-2013
25-Feb-2014
24-Feb-2019
$10,000
185.2 ha
28-Feb-1997
25-Oct-2000
24-Oct-2021
$18,600
Notes 17, 28
174 ha
23-May-1997
14-Jun-2007
13-Jun-2028
$17,400
Note 11, 12, 29,
30, 31
306 ha
26-May-1997
28-Jan-2011
27-Jan-2032
$30,600
Notes 29, 30
143 ha
26-May-1997
28-Jan-2011
27-Jan-2032
$14,300
Note 29
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 54
M24/686
Heron
M24/915-I
Heron
M24/916
Heron
M24/683-I
Heron
M24/772-I
Heron
M24/797-I
Heron
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
35.61 ha
26-Aug-1997
3-Feb-2011
2-Feb-2032
$21,500
Notes 29, 30
70 ha
25-May-2005
1-Feb-2011
31-Jan-2032
$10,000
277.1 ha
25-May-2005
1-Feb-2011
31-Jan-2032
$54,400
56 ha
23-Jul-1997
1-Feb-2011
31-Jan-2032
$10,000
Notes 17, 28
5568 ha
29-Jan-1999
1-Feb-2011
31-Jan-2032
$19,800
Notes 17, 28
396.3 ha
31-Aug-1999
1-Feb-2011
31-Jan-2032
$39,700
Notes 17, 28
Ardea Nickel-Cobalt Laterite Rights - Black Range Project
M24/757
Heron
P24/4395
Heron
P24/4396
Heron
P24/4400
Heron
P24/4401
Heron
P24/4402
Heron
P24/4403
Heron
Key
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
Live
Ardea
Ardea Resources Pty Ltd
591 ha
21-Oct-1998
5-Jul-2011
4-Jul-2032
$59,100
Notes 17, 28
192 ha
13-Aug-2008
11-Aug-2009
10-Aug-2017
$7,680
164 ha
13-Aug-2008
11-Aug-2009
10-Aug-2017
$6,560
200 ha
13-Aug-2008
11-Aug-2009
10-Aug-2017
$8,000
190 ha
13-Aug-2008
11-Aug-2009
10-Aug-2017
$7,600
172 ha
13-Aug-2008
11-Aug-2009
10-Aug-2017
$6,880
192 ha
13-Aug-2008
11-Aug-2009
10-Aug-2017
$7,680
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 55
Atriplex
Atriplex Pty Ltd
Hampton
Hampton Nickel Pty Ltd
Heron
Heron Resources Ltd
KNP
Kalgoorlie Nickel Project Pty Ltd
Ochre
Ochre Resources Pty Ltd
TriAusMin
TriAusMin Pty Ltd
Tri Origin
Tri Origin Mining Pty Ltd
Notes for New South Wales tenements
The  notes  below  refer  to  particular  conditions  and  endorsements  of  the  Tenements.    It  is  not  an  exhaustive  list.    For  all  conditions  and
endorsements  attached  to  the  Tenements,  a  search  should  be  conducted  of  the  register  maintained  by  the  NSW  Department  of  Industry  –
Resources and Energy (DOIRE).
Each of the Tenements are subject to standard conditions that must be complied with including annual expenditure requirements, payment of
government fees, and the requirement to lodge annual technical reports.  Standard conditions also stipulate that a tenement holder obtain the
consent of an officer of the DOIRE prior to conducting any ground disturbing work, basic environmental and rehabilitation conditions (such as the
removal of all waste, capping of drill holes etc) and prohibitions or restrictions on disturbing existing infrastructure such as roads, powerlines,
aerial landing ground, airstrips and geodetic survey stations.  In addition to these standard conditions, the following applies:
1.
EL 5583 is subject to a finder’s fee, payable to geologist David Timms, following commencement of production, or sale of the EL, capped
at A$2 million. The fee is based on 1/3 of proceeds from sale of the EL, or 1/3 of net profits from production, or 30% of any royalties
received from production.
2.
The Gundagai tenements are subject to Indigenous Land Use Agreement (ILUA) number NIA1998/001, known as the Tumut Brungle Area
Agreement.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 56
Delta Gold Exploration Pty Ltd’s recorded interest in ML 739 Calarie is to be transferred to TriAusMin Pty Ltd.
ML 739 Calarie is pending suspension regarding possible breach of mining operations, labour and expenditure conditions by a former joint
venture partner.
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd has withdrawn from its farm-in to two Calarie tenements.
3.
4.
5.
Notes for Western Australian tenements
6.
7.
8.
9.
Murrin Murrin Holdings Pty Ltd and Glenmurrin Pty Ltd have objected to this application.
Aphrodite Gold Ltd has objected to the grant of this application.
An application to extend the term of this tenement has been lodged but not yet determined.
Kalnorth Gold Mines Ltd holds a caveat over this tenement.
10.
Siberia Mining Corporation Pty Ltd has objected to the grant of this application.
11.
Lewis Lajos Kovacs holds a caveat over this tenement.
12.
Alan Ernest Gallop holds a caveat over this tenement.
13.
An application for exemption from expenditure conditions remains pending against this tenement.
14.
The tenement holder must pay to Tarmoola Australia Pty Ltd a royalty equal to 1.5% of the gold produced from the tenement.
15.
This tenement is subject to a native title agreement with Marjorie May Strickland and Anne Joyce Nudding on behalf of the Maduwongga
People.
16.
This tenement is subject to a native title agreement with the Central West Goldfields People.
17.
Previously subject to the Vale Inco KNP farm-in, no retainer rights by Vale Inco.
18.
The tenement holder must pay to Goongarrie Gold Pty Ltd a royalty equal to $1.50 per dry metric tonne of ore mined from the tenement.
19.
This tenement is subject to a native title agreement with the Central East Goldfields People.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 57
20.
Previously chrysoprase mining tribute, now terminated.
21.
Previously subject to an education bursary payment, no longer active.
22.
Previously subject to a health clinic payment, no longer active.
23.
Placer Dome Asia Pacific Pty Ltd holds a clawback right over this tenement, as well as a right of first refusal and 2% NSR royalty on gold
produced in excess of 300,000 ounces.
24.
Previously encumbrance, no longer registered.
25.
Previously encumbrance, no longer registered.
26.
Previously encumbrance, no longer registered.
27.
The tenement holder must pay a royalty on the first 400,000 tonnes of nickel bearing ore produced from the tenement.
28.
Tenement holder has the rights to explore for and mine nickel and cobalt only.
29.
Previous encumbrance, no longer registered.
30.
The tenement holder must pay Lewis Lajos Kovacs a royalty of $1.00 per tonne of ore mined.
31.
Previously alluvial gold mining tribute, now terminated.
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
Page 58
Prospectus
Heron Resources Limited
ABN 30 068 263 098
For  an  offer  to  transfer  Ardea  Shares  to  Eligible  Shareholders  of  Heron  Resources
Limited pursuant to a capital reduction by way of In-specie Distribution contained in
the Capital Reduction Resolution in the Notice of Meeting dated 26 August 2016 and
to facilitate secondary trading of those shares.
ASX Code: HRR
This Prospectus provides important information about the Company.  You should read the entire document.  If you have any
questions about the Ardea Shares being offered under this Prospectus, or any other matter relating to an investment in Ardea,
you  should  consult  your  professional  adviser.    An  investment  in  the  Ardea  Shares  offered  under  this  Prospectus  is  highly
speculative.
This Prospectus is not for publication or distribution, directly or indirectly, in or into the United States of America (including
its territories and possessions, any state of the US and the District of Columbia).  This Prospectus is not an offer of securities
for sale into the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, US Persons.  The securities referred to herein have not
been and will not be registered under the US Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and may not be offered or sold in the United
States or to, or for the account or benefit of, US Persons.  No public offering of securities is being made in the United States.
Notice  of  Meeting.    Forward-looking  statements 
include those containing such words as ‘anticipate’, 
‘estimate’,  ‘believe’,  ‘should’,  ‘will’,  ‘may’  and 
similar expressions.
Definitions
Certain  terms  and  abbreviations  used  in  this 
Prospectus  have  defined  meanings  which  are 
explained in the Notice of Meeting.
Enquiries
If you have any questions please call the Company 
Secretary on +61 2 9119 8111 or +61 8 6500 9200 at 
any time between 8.00am and 5.00pm  (WST time) 
Monday 
the  Meeting.  
Alternatively,  consult  your  broker,  accountant  or 
other professional adviser.
to  Friday  prior
to
Important Notice
This  Prospectus  is  dated  26  August  2016  and  was 
lodged with ASIC on that date.  Application will be 
made  to  ASX  for  quotation  of  the  Ardea  Shares 
offered under this Prospectus within 7 days of this 
date.
Neither  ASIC,  ASX  nor  any  of  their  respective 
officers take any responsibility for the contents of 
this Prospectus or the merits of the investment to 
which this Prospectus relates.  No securities will be 
transferred  on  the  basis  of  this  Prospectus  later 
than 13 months after the date of this Prospectus.
Nature of this Prospectus
The Company has lodged the Notice of Meeting with 
ASIC.  By reason of section 712 of the Corporations 
Act,  certain  information  included  in  the  Notice  of 
Meeting is taken to be included in this Prospectus.  
This Prospectus identifies the part of the Notice of 
Meeting 
that 
information.
that  contains,  and  describes,
The  Notice  of  Meeting  is  available  from  the 
Company’s  website  (heronresources.com.au  or 
asx.com.au), or by contacting the Company.
Foreign jurisdictions
The  distribution  of  this  Prospectus  in  jurisdictions 
outside  Australia  may  be  restricted  by  law  and 
persons who come into possession of this Prospectus 
should  seek  advice  on  and  observe  any  of  these 
restrictions. 
  Failure  to  comply  with  these 
restrictions may violate securities laws.  Applicants 
who are residents in countries other than Australia 
should  consult  their  professional  advisers  as  to 
whether  any  governmental  or  other  consents  are 
required or whether any other formalities need to 
be considered and followed.  This Prospectus does 
not constitute an offer in any place in which, or to 
any person to whom, it would not be lawful to make 
such an offer.
Disclaimer of representations
No person is authorised to provide any information 
or make any representation in connection with the 
Offer which is not contained in this Prospectus.
Forward looking statements
forward
contains
Prospectus
This 
looking 
statements  that,  despite  being  based  on  the 
Company’s  current  expectations  about  future 
events,  are  subject  to  known  and  unknown  risks, 
uncertainties  and  assumptions,  many  of  which  are 
outside  the  control  of  the  Company  and  the 
Directors.    These  known  and  unknown  risks, 
uncertainties  and  assumptions,  could  cause  actual 
results, performance or achievements to materially 
differ 
results,  performance  or 
achievements  expressed  or  implied  by  forward-
looking statements in this Prospectus.  These risks, 
uncertainties and assumptions include, but are not 
limited  to,  the  risks  outlined  in  Schedule  4  of  the
from
future
Prospectus – Heron Resources Limited
Page 2
1
THE DISTRIBUTION
1.1
Terms and Conditions of the Distribution
The  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Distribution  are  set  out  in  the  Notice  of  Meeting
accompanying this Prospectus. Resolution 2 of the Notice of Meeting is as follows:
“That, subject to Resolution 1 being passed and for the purposes of sections 256B
and 256C of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, the issued share capital
of the Company be reduced by the Company making a pro rata distribution in-specie
of Ardea Shares to all holders of ordinary shares in the Company at the Record Date
and on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Pursuant  to  Resolution  2,  the  Company  is  inviting  Shareholders  to  vote  on  a  reduction  of
capital  by  way  of  an  In-specie  Distribution  of  approximately  41.5  million  Ardea  Shares  to
Company Shareholders on a pro rata basis of 1 Ardea Share for approximately every 10 Heron
Shares held on the Record Date (rounded up to the nearest whole Ardea Share).
The In-specie Distribution will only proceed if the following conditions are met (together, the
In-specie Conditions):
(a)
Heron obtaining shareholder approval under the Corporations Act for the proposed
In-specie Distribution;
(b)
receipt  of  a  draft  class  ruling  from  the  Australian  Taxation  Office  confirming  the
availability of Demerger Relief;
(c)
Ardea receiving subscriptions for an issue of fully paid ordinary shares for an amount
to be determined pursuant to a prospectus to be lodged by Ardea in support of its
application for listing on the ASX (Capital Raising); and
(d)
Ardea obtaining a conditional admission letter from ASX on terms satisfactory to the
Ardea Directors, acting reasonably.
Based  on  ASIC  Regulatory  Guide  188,  the  invitation  to  vote  on  the  Capital  Reduction
Resolution of the Notice of Meeting constitutes an offer to transfer the Ardea Shares for the
purposes of Section 707(3) of the Corporations Act and for which a prospectus is required.
Accordingly, the Company has prepared this Prospectus.
Distribution of Ardea Shares to any Shareholder with a registered address outside Australia
under  the  Capital  Reduction  Resolution  will  be  subject  to  the  legal  and  regulatory
requirements in the relevant jurisdictions of those Shareholders.
If  the  requirements  of  any  jurisdiction  where  an  Heron  Shareholder  is  resident  restrict  or
prohibit the distribution of Ardea Shares as proposed or would impose on Heron an obligation
to prepare a prospectus or other similar disclosure document or otherwise impose on Heron
an undue burden, the Ardea Shares to which the relevant Heron Shareholder is entitled will
be  sold  by  Heron  on  the  Ineligible  Shareholder’s  behalf,  with  the  net  proceeds  (after
deducting the expenses of the sale) paid to the Ineligible Shareholder.
Security prices may vary from time to time (assuming a liquid market is available), and the
net proceeds of sale to Ineligible Shareholders may be more or less than the notional dollar
Prospectus – Heron Resources Limited
Page 3
value of the reduction of capital.  It will be the responsibility of each Heron Shareholder to
comply with the laws to which they are subject in the jurisdictions in which they are resident.
1.2
Effect of the Distribution on the Company
The effect of the Distribution on the Company will be:
(a)
(b)
the Company will cease to hold approximately 41.5 million Ardea Shares;
the Company’s share capital and total and net assets being reduced by approximately
$8.3 million. This figure will vary slightly depending on the fair market value of the
assets being acquired; and
(c)
Shareholders that are registered on the Record Date will receive one Ardea Share for
approximately every 10 Heron Shares held.
1.3
Effect of the Offer on Ardea
The effect of the Offer on Ardea will be that approximately 41.5 million Ardea Shares held
by the Company post-completion of the Proposed Transaction will no longer be held by a sole
shareholder  and  instead  will  be  held  by  Eligible  Shareholders  that  are  registered  on  the
Record Date.
1.4
Action required by Company Shareholders
No action is required by Shareholders under this Prospectus.  Should Shareholder approval be
obtained for the In-specie Distribution, Ardea Shares will be transferred to Shareholders in
accordance with the terms set out in the Notice of Meeting.  In accordance with ASIC Class
Order 07/10, no application form is required to be completed or returned to participate in
the proposed distribution and transfer of Ardea Shares under the Capital Reduction, and no
application form is included in or accompanies this Prospectus.
If you have any queries regarding this Prospectus, please contact the Company Secretary on
+61 2 9119 8111.
2
INFORMATION DEEMED TO BE INCORPORATED IN THIS PROSPECTUS
2.1
Short Form Prospectus
This  Prospectus  is  a  short  form  prospectus  issued  in  accordance  with  section  712  of  the
Corporations  Act.  This  means  that  this  Prospectus  does  not  of  itself  contain  all  the
information that is generally required to be set out in a document of this type, however it
incorporates by reference information contained in a document that has been lodged with
ASIC.
The  Notice  of  Meeting  contains  all  the  information  that  Company  Shareholders  require  in
relation to the Proposal and the Notice of Meeting in its entirety is deemed to be incorporated
in this Prospectus.
The material provisions of the Notice of Meeting are summarised below in section 2.2 of this
Prospectus and will primarily be of interest to Shareholders and their professional advisers.
A copy of the Notice of Meeting has been sent to Shareholders with this Prospectus. However,
Shareholders and their professional advisers may also obtain, free of charge, a copy of the
Prospectus – Heron Resources Limited
Page 4
Notice  of  Meeting  from  the  Company’s  website  (www.heronresources.com.au)  or  by
contacting the Company at its registered office during normal business hours.
2.2
Summary of material provisions of Notice of Meeting
The material provisions of the Notice of Meeting are summarised below. The sections referred
to  below  are  a  reference  to  sections  in  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Notice  of
Meeting:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Section 3.1 – Introduction
Section 3.2 – Conditions to the Proposed Transaction
Section 3.3 – Foreign Shareholders
Section 3.4 – Directors’ recommendation
Section 3.5 – Effect of Proposed Transaction on Heron
Section 3.6 – Effect of the Proposed Transaction on Shareholders
Section 3.7 – Plans for Heron following the Proposed Transaction
Section 3.8 – Advantages and disadvantages of the Proposed Transaction
Section 3.9 – Timetable
Section 3.10 – Taxation consequences
Section 3.11 – Consequences if the Proposed Transaction does not complete
Section 3.12 - Information concerning Heron Shares
(m)
Section 3.13 – Directors’ interests
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
Section 3.14 – Disclosure to ASX and TSX
Section 4.1 – Introduction to Ardea
Section 4.2 – Lewis Ponds, Lachlan Fold Belt, NSW
Section 4.3 - Mt Zephyr, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia
Section 4.4 – Bardoc Tectonic Zone, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia
Section 4.5 – Kalgoorlie Nickel Project, Eastern Goldfields of Western Australia
Section 4.6 - Competent persons’ statements
Section 4.7 - Ardea’s board of directors and management
Section 4.8 - Risk factors in holding Ardea Shares
(w)
Section 4.9 - Financial information
(x)
(y)
(z)
Section 4.10 - Material contracts
Section 4.11 - Substantial Shareholders
Section 4.12 - Rights and obligations attaching to Ardea Shares
Prospectus – Heron Resources Limited
Page 5
3
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
3.1
Interests of promoters and named persons
Except as disclosed in this Prospectus, no expert, promoter or any other person named in this
Prospectus as performing a function in a professional advisory or other capacity in connection
with the preparation or  distribution of the Prospectus,  nor any firm in which  any of those
persons is or was a partner nor any company in which any of those persons is or was associated
with, has now, or has had, in the  2 year period ending on the date of this Prospectus, any
interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in connection with its
formation or promotion or the Distribution; or
(c)
the Distribution,
and no amounts have been paid or agreed to be paid by any person and no benefits have been
given or agreed to be given by any person:
(d)
to a Director or proposed Director to induce him or her to become, or to qualify as,
a Director; or
(e)
for  services  provided  by  a  Director  or  proposed  Director  in  connection  with  the
formation or promotion of the Company or the Distribution.
3.2
Consents
Each of the persons referred to in this section:
(a)
has  given  and  has  not,  before  the  date  of  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus  with  ASIC
withdrawn their written consent:
(i)
to be named in the Prospectus in the form and context which it is named;
and
(ii)
where  applicable,  to  the  inclusion  in  this  Prospectus  of  the  statement(s)
and/or  reports  (if  any)  by  that  person  in  the form  and context  in  which  it
appears in this Prospectus;
has not caused or authorised the issue of this Prospectus;
has not made any statement in this Prospectus or any statement on which a statement
in this Prospectus is based, other than specified below;
(b)
(c)
(d)
to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims all liability in respect
of, makes no representation regarding, and takes no responsibility for, any part of
this Prospectus, other than the references to their name and the statement(s) and/or
report(s) (if any) specified below and included in this Prospectus with the consent of
that person.
Name
Ernst & Young
Role
Heron’s auditor
Prospectus – Heron Resources Limited
Page 6
Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd
David von Perger
Share Registry
Competent person
3.3
Expenses of the Distribution
The  total  expenses  of  the  Distribution  are  estimated  to  be  $30,000,  consisting  of  the
following:
Cost
Legal fees
ASIC and other expenses
Total
$
20,000
10,000
30,000
These expenses have or will be paid by the Company.
3.4
Litigation
As at the date of this Prospectus, the Company is not involved in any legal proceedings of a
material  nature  and  the  Directors  are  not  aware  of  any  legal  proceedings  pending  or
threatened against the Company.
3.5
Dividend policy
The Company does not expect to declare any dividends in the near future as its focus will
primarily be on developing the Woodlawn Zinc-Copper Project.
Any future determination as to the payment of dividends by Ardea will be at the discretion
of the Ardea Directors and will depend on matters such as the availability of distributable
earnings, the operating results and financial condition of Ardea, future capital requirements
and  general  business  and  other  factors  considered  relevant  by  the  Ardea  Directors.  No
assurances can be given by the Company Directors in relation to the payment of dividends by
Ardea or that franking credits may attach to any dividends.
4
DIRECTORS' RESPONSIBILITY AND CONSENT
Each Director and Ardea Director has consented to the lodgement of this Prospectus with the
ASIC and has not withdrawn that consent.
Dated:  26 August 2016
........................................
Signed for and on behalf of
Heron Resources Limited by
Ian Buchhorn
Prospectus – Heron Resources Limited
Page 7
HERON RESOURCES LTD
ACN: 068 263 098
+
REGISTERED OFFICE: 
 
LEVEL 7  
191 CLARENCE STREET 
SYDNEY NSW 2000        
                               
SHARE REGISTRY: 
Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd 
All Correspondence to: 
PO BOX 535, APPLECROSS WA 6953  
AUSTRALIA 
770 Canning Highway, APPLECROSS WA 6153  
AUSTRALIA 
T: +61 8 9315 2333  F: +61 8 9315 2233 
E: registrar@securitytransfer.com.au 
W: www.securitytransfer.com.au
+
»
R
E
B
M
U
N
_
E
C
N
E
R
E
F
E
R
_
T
F
E
«
«ONLINE 
PRX ID»
«Company_code» «Sequence_number»
«Address_unknown»
«Holder_name» 
«Address_line_1» 
«Address_line_2» 
«Address_line_3» 
«Address_line_4» 
«Address_line_5» 
 
PROXY FORM 
THIS DOCUMENT IS IMPORTANT. IF YOU ARE IN DOUBT AS TO HOW TO DEAL WITH IT, PLEASE CONTACT YOUR STOCK BROKER OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ADVISOR.   
«ADDRESS_LINE_5»
«HOLDER_NUM
Holder Number:
BER»
HRR
Code:
VOTE
Lodge your proxy vote securely at www.securitytransfer.com.au
ONLINE
SECTION A: Appointment of Proxy
1. Log into the Investor Centre using your holding details. 
2. Click on "Proxy Voting" and provide your Online Proxy ID to access the voting area.
The meeting chairperson
I/We, the above named, being registered holders of the Company and entitled to attend and vote hereby appoint: 
 
 
 
 
or failing the person named, or if no person is named, the Chairperson of the meeting, as my/our Proxy to act generally at the meeting on my/our behalf and to vote in accordance with the 
 
following directions (or if no directions have been given, as the Proxy sees fit) at the General Meeting of the Company to be held at 2:00pm WST on Thursday 29 September 2016 at Celtic 
Club, 48 Ord Street, West Perth WA 6005 and at any adjournment of that meeting.
OR
SECTION B: Voting Directions
Please mark "X" in the box to indicate your voting directions to your Proxy. The Chairperson of the Meeting intends to vote undirected proxies in FAVOUR of all the resolutions. 
In exceptional circumstances, the Chairperson of the Meeting may change his/her voting intention on any resolution, in which case an ASX announcement will be made. 
RESOLUTION
Against
For
Abstain*
1.  Disposal of Major Asset
2.  Reduction of Capital
If no directions are given my proxy may vote as the proxy thinks fit or may abstain.  * If you mark the Abstain box for a particular item, you are directing your Proxy not to vote on your 
behalf on a show of hands or on a poll and your votes will not be counted in computing the required majority on a poll.
SECTION C: Signature of Security Holder(s)
This section must be signed in accordance with the instructions overleaf to enable your directions to be implemented.
Security Holder 2
Director
Security Holder 3
Director/Company Secretary
Proxies must be received by Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd no later than 2:00pm WST on Tuesday 27 September 2016. 
HRRPX1290916
HRRPX1290916
HRR
1
1
Individual or Security Holder
Sole Director & Sole Company Secretary 
 
+
+
+
My/Our contact details in case of enquiries are: 
Name:
1. NAME AND ADDRESS 
This is the name and address on the Share Register of the Company. If this 
information is incorrect, please make corrections on this form. Shareholders 
sponsored by a broker should advise their broker of any changes. Please note that 
you cannot change ownership of your shares using this form. 
 
2. APPOINTMENT OF A PROXY 
If the person you wish to appoint as your Proxy is someone other than the 
Chairperson of the Meeting please write the name of that person in Section A. 
If you leave this section blank, or your named Proxy does not attend the meeting, 
the Chairperson of the Meeting will be your Proxy. A Proxy need not be a 
shareholder of the Company. 
 
3. DIRECTING YOUR PROXY HOW TO VOTE 
To direct the Proxy how to vote place an "X" in the appropriate box against each 
item in Section B. Where more than one Proxy is to be appointed and the proxies 
are to vote differently, then two separate forms must be used to indicate voting 
intentions. 
 
4. APPOINTMENT OF A SECOND PROXY 
You are entitled to appoint up to two (2) persons as proxies to attend the meeting 
and vote on a poll. If you wish to appoint a second Proxy, an additional Proxy form 
may be obtained by contacting the Company's share registry or you may photocopy 
this form. 
To appoint a second Proxy you must: 
a)       On each of the Proxy forms, state the percentage of your voting rights or
number of securities applicable to that form. If the appointments do not 
specify the percentage or number of votes that each Proxy may exercise, 
each Proxy may exercise half of your votes; and
b)       Return both forms in the same envelope.
+
Number:
)
(
5. SIGNING INSTRUCTIONS 
Individual: where the holding is in one name, the Shareholder must sign. 
Joint Holding: where the holding is in more than one name, all of the 
Shareholders must sign. 
Power of Attorney: to sign under Power of Attorney you must have already lodged 
this document with the Company's share registry. If you have not previously lodged 
this document for notation, please attach a certified photocopy of the Power of 
Attorney to this form when you return it. 
Companies: where the Company has a Sole Director who is also the Sole 
Company Secretary, this form must be signed by that person. If the Company 
(pursuant to section 204A of the Corporations Act 2001) does not have a Company 
Secretary, a Sole Director may sign alone. Otherwise this form must be signed by a 
Director jointly with either another Director or Company Secretary. Please indicate 
the office held in the appropriate place. 
If a representative of the corporation is to attend the meeting the appropriate 
"Certificate of Appointment of Corporate Representative" should be lodged with the 
Company before the meeting or at the registration desk on the day of the meeting. 
A form of the certificate may be obtained from the Company's share registry. 
 
6. LODGEMENT OF PROXY 
Proxy forms (and any Power of Attorney under which it is signed) must be received 
by Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd no later than the date and time stated on the 
form overleaf. Any Proxy form received after that time will not be valid for the 
scheduled meeting. 
 
The proxy form does not need to be returned to the share registry if the votes have 
been lodged online. 
 
Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd 
Online  
 
Postal Address
www.securitytransfer.com.au
PO BOX 535  
Applecross WA 6953 AUSTRALIA 
 
Alexandrea House 
Suite 1, 770 Canning Highway  
Applecross WA 6153 AUSTRALIA 
 
+61 8 9315 2333
+61 8 9315 2233
registrar@securitytransfer.com.au
Street Address
Telephone   
 
Facsimile    
 
Email
PRIVACY STATEMENT 
Personal information is collected on this form by Security Transfer Australia Pty Ltd as the registrar for securities issuers for the purpose of maintaining registers of security 
holders, facilitating distribution payments and other corporate actions and communications. Your personal details may be disclosed to related bodies corporate, to external 
service providers such as mail and print providers, or as otherwise required or permitted by law. If you would like details of your personal information held by Security 
Transfer Australia Pty Ltd or you would like to correct information that is inaccurate please contact them on the address on this form.
+
+