
S-1/A 1 d348030ds1a.htm S-1 AMD. 1 S-1 Amd. 1
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 2, 2012
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Amendment No. 1
to
Form S-1
LINN CO, LLC
LINN ENERGY, LLC
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its charter)
Delaware
Delaware
(State or other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization)
1311
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
45-5166623
65-1177591
(IRS Employer
Identification Number)
600 Travis, Suite 5100
Houston, Texas 77002
(281) 840-4000
(Address, including Zip Code, and Telephone Number including Area Code, of Registrant’s Principal Executive Offices)
Candice J. Wells
600 Travis, Suite 5100
Houston, Texas 77002
(281) 840-4000
Charlene A. Ripley
600 Travis, Suite 5100
Houston, Texas 77002
(281) 840-4000
(Name, Address, including Zip Code, and Telephone Number including Area Code, of Agent for Service)
Kelly Rose
Baker Botts L.L.P.
One Shell Plaza
910 Louisiana Street
Houston, Texas 77002-4995
(713) 229-1234
Copies to:
J. Michael Chambers
Brett E. Braden
Latham & Watkins LLP
811 Main Street
Suite 3700
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 546-5400
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after this Registration Statement becomes effective.
If any of the securities being registered on this form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities
Act of 1933, check the following box.  ¨
If this form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list
the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act
registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act
registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
Indicate whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Linn Co, LLC — Non-accelerated filer
Linn Energy, LLC — Large accelerated filer
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date until the
Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in
accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until the Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the
Securities and Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Table of Contents
EXPLANATORY NOTE
This registration statement contains a prospectus to be used in connection with the offer and sale of common shares
of Linn Co, LLC and the deemed offer and sale of Linn Energy, LLC units to be acquired by Linn Co, LLC with the
proceeds from this offering pursuant to Rule 140 under the Securities Act of 1933.
Table of Contents
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. These securities may not be sold
until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This
prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any
jurisdiction where such offer or sale is not permitted.
PROSPECTUS
Subject to Completion, dated August 2, 2012
Linn Co, LLC
Common Shares
Representing Limited Liability Company Interests
This is the initial public offering of common shares (“shares”) representing limited liability company interests in Linn
Co, LLC (“LinnCo”), a class of equity with indirect voting rights in LINN Energy, LLC (“LINN”). We are offering
                shares in this offering. We are a recently formed limited liability company that has elected to be treated as
a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes. We will use the net proceeds from this offering to acquire a
number of units representing limited liability company interests (“units”) in LINN equal to the number of shares sold in
this offering.
No public market currently exists for our shares. We intend to apply to list our shares on the NASDAQ Global Select
Market under the symbol “LNCO.”
We anticipate that the initial public offering price will be between $         and $         per share and will be determined
based on, among other factors, the trading price of the LINN units, which are listed on the NASDAQ Global Select
Market under the symbol “LINE.” The last reported sale price of LINN units on NASDAQ on                      was
$         per unit.
Investing in our shares involves risks. Please read “Risk Factors” beginning on page 29 of this prospectus.
These risks include the following:
•   Because our only assets will be LINN units, our cash flow and our ability to pay dividends on our shares are
completely dependent upon the ability of LINN to make distributions to its unitholders.
•   We will incur corporate income tax liabilities on income allocated to us by LINN with respect to LINN units we
own, which may be substantial.
•   An active trading market for our shares may not develop, and even if such a market does develop, the market
price of our shares may be less than the price you paid for your shares and less than the market price of the
LINN units.
•   Our shareholders will only be able to indirectly vote on matters on which LINN unitholders are entitled to vote,
and our shareholders are not entitled to vote to elect our directors. Therefore, you will only be able to indirectly
influence the management and board of directors of LINN, and you will not be able to directly influence or
change our management or board of directors.
•   Your shares are subject to certain call rights that could require you to involuntarily sell your shares at a time
or price that may be undesirable.
•   Our limited liability company agreement limits the fiduciary duties owed by our officers and directors to our
shareholders, and LINN’s limited liability company agreement limits the fiduciary duties owed by LINN’s
directors to its unitholders, including us.
Price to the public
Underwriting discounts and commissions
Proceeds to us
Per Share  Total
  $               $            
  $
  $
$
  $
We have granted the underwriters an option for a period of 30 days to purchase up to an additional                 shares
on the same terms and conditions set forth above.
Affiliates of certain of the underwriters in this offering are lenders under LINN’s revolving credit facility and,
accordingly, if LINN elects to use the proceeds it receives from LinnCo to repay debt outstanding under that facility,
those lenders would indirectly receive a portion of the net proceeds from this offering. Please read “Underwriting—
Conflicts of Interest.”
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any other regulatory body has approved or disapproved of these
securities or passed on the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal
offense.
Barclays, on behalf of the underwriters, expects to deliver the shares on or about                     , 2012.
Table of Contents
Barclays
Prospectus dated                     , 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
Overview
LinnCo
LINN
Business Strategy
Competitive Strengths
Recent Developments
Questions and Answers about LinnCo
Risk Factors
Management of LinnCo
Comparison of LINN Units with LinnCo Shares
Ownership of LINN
Principal Executive Offices and Internet Address
The Offering
Summary Historical and Pro Forma Financial and Operating Data of LINN
Summary Reserve and Operating Data
RISK FACTORS
Risks Related to LINN’s Business
Risks Inherent in an Investment in LinnCo
Tax Risks to Shareholders
USE OF PROCEEDS
CAPITALIZATION OF LINNCO
CAPITALIZATION OF LINN
1  
 
1  
 
1  
 
3  
 
5  
 
6  
 
7  
 
 
8  
  10  
  11  
  11  
  15  
  15  
  16  
  21  
  24  
  29  
  29  
  37  
  42  
  45  
  46
CAPITALIZATION OF LINN
OUR DIVIDEND POLICY
Our Dividend Policy
LINN’s Distribution Policy
LINN’s Historical Distributions
SELECTED HISTORICAL FINANCIAL AND OPERATING DATA OF LINN
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
LinnCo
LINN
BUSINESS
LinnCo
LINN
MANAGEMENT
Our Board of Directors
Executive Compensation
Director Compensation
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Our Relationship with Linn Energy, LLC
Indemnification of Officers and Directors
DESCRIPTION OF OUR SHARES
Voting Rights
Dividends
Issuance of Additional Shares
Maintenance of Ratio of Shares to Units
Transfer Agent and Registrar
Transfer of Shares
Table of Contents
i
DESCRIPTION OF THE LINN UNITS
LINN’s Cash Distribution Policy
Timing of Distributions
Issuance of Additional Units
Voting Rights
Exchange Listing
Transfer Agent and Registrar
Transfer of Units
DESCRIPTION OF THE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY AGREEMENTS
Our Limited Liability Company Agreement
LINN’s Limited Liability Company Agreement
Comparison of LINN’s Units with Our Shares
SHARES ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
ERISA CONSIDERATIONS
UNDERWRITING
VALIDITY OF THE SHARES
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Appendix A—Glossary of Terms
47  
  48
48  
  48  
  49  
  50
53  
  53  
  54  
  93  
  93  
  93  
 106  
 108  
 109  
 132  
 134  
 135  
 135  
 135  
 136  
 136  
 136  
 136  
 136  
 137  
 137
138  
 138  
 138  
 138  
 138  
 139  
 139  
 139  
 140  
 140  
 149  
 158  
 161  
 162  
 169  
 171  
 178  
 178  
 178  
 179  
  F-1  
 A-1
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. We have not, and the underwriters have not,
authorized anyone to provide you with different information. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent
information, you should not rely on it. We are not, and the underwriters are not, making an offer to sell these securities
in any jurisdiction where an offer or sale is not permitted. You should assume that the information appearing in this
prospectus is accurate as of the date on the front cover of this prospectus. Our business, financial condition, results
of operations and prospects may have changed since that date.
The market data and certain other statistical information used throughout this prospectus are based on independent
industry publications, government publications or other published independent sources. Some data is also based on
our good faith estimates.
Table of Contents
ii
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this prospectus. It does not contain all of the information
you should consider before buying shares in this offering. Therefore, you should read this entire prospectus carefully,
including the risks discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 29 and the historical financial
statements of Linn Energy, LLC (“LINN”) and the notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this
prospectus. This prospectus also contains important information about LINN, including information about its
businesses and financial and operating data, all of which you should read carefully before buying shares in this
offering. Unless indicated otherwise, the information presented in this prospectus assumes (1) an initial public offering
price of $                 per share (the midpoint of the range set forth on the cover page of this prospectus) and (2) that
the underwriters do not exercise their option to purchase additional shares. We include a glossary of some of the
terms used in this prospectus as Appendix A.
DeGolyer and MacNaughton, independent petroleum engineers, provided the estimates of LINN’s proved oil and
natural gas reserves as of December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 as well as estimates of proved reserves associated
with the Hugoton Acquisition and the East Texas Acquisition (each as defined below). All other reserve information
included herein is based on internal estimates. As used herein, “Pro Forma Proved Reserves” represent the sum of
(i) LINN’s estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2011 and (ii) the estimated proved reserves acquired in the
2012 Acquisitions (as defined below). For information regarding the dates and commodity prices at which reserve
information for the 2012 Acquisitions was calculated, see the table on page 4. As used in this prospectus, the term
“LinnCo” and the terms “we,” “our,” “us” and similar terms refer to Linn Co, LLC, unless the context otherwise requires.
In addition, the term “LINN” refers to Linn Energy, LLC. As used in this prospectus, the term “shares” refers to
common shares representing limited liability company interests in LinnCo and “units” refers to units representing
limited liability company interests in LINN.
Overview
LinnCo
We are a recently formed Delaware limited liability company that has elected to be treated as a corporation for United
States (“U.S.”) federal income tax purposes. Our sole purpose is to own LINN units and we expect to have no assets
or operations other than those related to our interest in LINN. As a result, our financial condition and results of
operations will depend entirely upon the performance of LINN. We will use the net proceeds from this offering to
acquire a number of LINN units equal to the number of LinnCo shares sold in this offering.
At the closing of this offering, we will own one LINN unit for each of our outstanding shares, and our limited liability
company agreement requires that we maintain a one-to-one ratio between the number of our shares outstanding and
the number of LINN units we own. When LINN makes distributions on the units, we will pay a dividend on our shares
of the cash we receive in respect of our LINN units, net of reserves for income taxes payable by us. For the periods
ending December 31, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015, we estimate that our income tax liability will not exceed     % of the
cash distributed to us. On July 24, 2012, LINN declared a regular quarterly cash distribution of $0.725 per unit, or
$2.90 per unit on an annualized basis. Accordingly, if LINN were to maintain its current annualized distribution of
$2.90 per unit through 2015, the amount reserved to pay income taxes of LinnCo is estimated to be no more than
$         per share for the periods ending December 31, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
Like shareholders of a corporation, our shareholders will receive a Form 1099-DIV and will be subject to U.S. federal
income tax, as well as any applicable state or local income tax, on taxable dividends received by them. We estimate
that if you own the shares that you purchase in this offering through December 31, 2015, you will recognize, on a
cumulative basis, an amount of taxable dividend income that will be     % or less of the cash
Table of Contents
1
dividends paid to you during that period. The excess of the cash dividends that you receive over your taxable dividend
income during that period will reduce your tax basis in your shares, or will be taxable as capital gain to the extent they
exceed your tax basis in your shares. Our shareholders will not report our items of income, gain, loss and deduction,
nor will they receive a Schedule K-1. Our shareholders also will not be subject to state income tax filings in the
various states in which LINN conducts operations as a result of owning our shares. Please read “Material U.S. Federal
Income Tax Consequences” for additional details.
We will submit to a vote of our shareholders any matter submitted by LINN to a vote of its unitholders, including any
election of LINN’s directors. We will vote LINN units that we hold in the same manner as the owners of our shares
vote (or refrain from voting) their shares on those matters. In addition, our shareholders will be entitled to vote on
certain fundamental matters affecting LinnCo. Our shareholders will not be entitled to vote to elect our board of
directors. The sole voting share that is entitled to vote to elect our board of directors is owned by LINN through one of
its wholly-owned subsidiaries. Our initial board of directors will be identical to LINN’s board of directors, and our initial
officers will be the individuals who serve as officers of LINN. Please see “Description of the Limited Liability Company
Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement” for a detailed description of these matters.
Table of Contents
2
LINN
LINN is one of the largest publicly traded, U.S.-focused, independent oil and natural gas companies and is the largest
publicly traded upstream oil and natural gas company that is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax
purposes. LINN is focused on the development and acquisition of long-life oil and natural gas properties, which
complement its asset profile in various producing basins within the U.S. LINN’s properties are currently located in
eight operating regions in the U.S.:
•   Mid-Continent, which includes properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and the eastern portion of the Texas
Panhandle (including the Granite Wash and Cleveland horizontal plays);
•   Hugoton Basin, which includes properties located primarily in Kansas and the Shallow Texas Panhandle;
•   Green River Basin, which includes properties located in southwest Wyoming;
•   Permian Basin, which includes areas in west Texas and southeast New Mexico;
•   Michigan/Illinois, which includes the Antrim Shale formation in the northern part of Michigan and oil properties
in southern Illinois;
•   California, which includes the Brea Olinda Field of the Los Angeles Basin;
•   Williston/Powder River Basin, which includes the Bakken formation in North Dakota and the Powder River
Basin in Wyoming; and
•   East Texas, which includes properties located in east Texas.
LINN’s total proved reserves at December 31, 2011 were 3.4 Tcfe, of which approximately 34% were oil, 50% were
natural gas and 16% were NGL. Approximately 60% of LINN’s total proved reserves were classified as proved
developed, with a total standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows of $6.6 billion. At December 31,
2011, LINN operated 7,759, or 69%, of its 11,230 gross productive wells and had an average proved reserve-life index
of approximately 22 years, based on LINN’s total proved reserves at December 31, 2011 and annualized production
for the three months ended December 31, 2011.
On July 31, 2012, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the Green River
Basin area of southwest Wyoming (the “Jonah Acquisition”) for total consideration of approximately $990 million. The
Jonah Acquisition includes approximately 703 Bcfe of estimated proved reserves. The estimated proved reserves for
the Jonah Acquisition were based on LINN’s preliminary internal evaluation of information provided by the seller.
On May 1, 2012, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in east Texas (the
“East Texas Acquisition”) for total consideration of approximately $168 million. On March 30, 2012, LINN completed
the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the Hugoton Basin area of southwestern Kansas (the
“Hugoton Acquisition”) for total consideration of approximately $1.17 billion. On April 3, 2012, LINN entered into a joint
venture agreement (the “Anadarko Joint Venture”) with an affiliate of Anadarko Petroleum Corporation (“Anadarko”)
whereby LINN will participate as a partner in the CO2-enhanced oil recovery development of the Salt Creek field,
located in the Powder River Basin of Wyoming. As part of this joint venture, Anadarko assigned LINN 23% of its
interest in the field in exchange for future funding by LINN of $400 million of Anadarko’s development costs. See “—
Recent Developments.” Giving effect to the East Texas
Table of Contents
3
Acquisition, the Hugoton Acquisition, the Anadarko Joint Venture and the Jonah Acquisition, LINN’s pro forma proved
reserves are approximately 5.0 Tcfe, of which approximately 25% are oil, 55% are natural gas and 20% are NGL, with
approximately 66% proved developed.
LINN generated adjusted EBITDA of approximately $998 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and $621
million for the six months ended June 30, 2012. See “—Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of
adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss). For 2012, LINN estimates its total capital expenditures, excluding acquisitions,
will be approximately $1.1 billion, including approximately $1.05 billion related to its oil and natural gas capital
program. This estimate is under continuous review and is subject to ongoing adjustments. LINN expects to fund these
capital expenditures primarily with cash flow from operations and borrowings under LINN’s revolving credit facility.
The following table sets forth certain information with respect to LINN’s proved reserves at December 31, 2011 and
Pro Forma Proved Reserves and average daily production for the six months ended June 30, 2012:
Proved
Reserves At
December 31,
Proved
Reserves
2012
2011
Acquisitions
Region
Mid-Continent
Hugoton Basin(2)
Green River
Basin(3)
Permian Basin
Michigan/Illinois
California
Williston/Powder
River Basin(2)
East Texas(4)
Total
(Bcfe)(1)
1,860   
380
—   
527   
317   
193
93   
—
3,370
Average Daily
Production For The
Six Months Ended
June 30, 2012
(MMcfe/d)
290  
95
—  
84  
35  
13
25  
8  
 
550
Pro Forma Proved
Reserves (Bcfe)(1)   
1,884   
 
 
1,081
Pro Forma
% Oil and NGL
41%  
47%
Pro Forma
% Proved
Developed
53%  
87%
(Bcfe)(1)
24   
701
703   
—   
—   
—
96   
110
1,634
703   
527   
317   
193
27%  
79%  
4%  
93%
54%  
56%  
91%  
93%
189   
110
5,004
92%  
3%
45%
63%  
100%
66%
(1) Except as otherwise noted, proved reserves for oil and natural gas assets were calculated on December 31,
2011, the reserve report date, and use a price of $4.12/MMBtu for natural gas and $95.84/Bbl for oil, which
represent the unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for each of the twelve months immediately
preceding December 31, 2011.
(2) Pro forma proved reserves for the Hugoton Acquisition (in the Hugoton Basin region) and the Anadarko Joint
Venture (in the Williston/Powder River Basin region) were calculated using a price of $3.73/MMBtu for natural gas
and $98.02/Bbl for oil, which represent the unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for each of the
twelve months ending March 1, 2012, the most recent twelve-month period prior to the closing of each of those
transactions. The proved reserves for the Anadarko Joint Venture were based on LINN’s preliminary internal
evaluation.
(3) Pro forma proved reserves for the Jonah Acquisition (in the Green River Basin region) were calculated using a
price of $3.15/MMBtu for natural gas and $95.63/Bbl for oil, which represents the unweighted average of the first-
day-of-the-month prices for each of the twelve months ending June 1, 2012, the most recent twelve-month period
prior to the signing of the Jonah Acquisition. The estimated proved reserves for the Jonah Acquisition were based
on LINN’s preliminary internal evaluation of information provided by the seller.
(4) Pro forma proved reserves for the East Texas Acquisition were calculated using a price of $3.54/MMBtu for
natural gas and $97.65/Bbl for oil, which represent the unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for
each of the twelve months ending April 1, 2012, the most recent twelve-month period prior to the closing of the
East Texas Acquisition.
Table of Contents
4
LINN was formed as a Delaware limited liability company in March 2003 by Michael C. Linn, Quantum Energy
Partners and non-affiliated equity investors with an aggregate equity investment of $16 million. In January 2006, LINN
completed its $261 million initial public offering. Since its initial public offering, LINN has successfully executed on its
strategy, and substantially grown its asset base and distributions on its units. LINN has increased its quarterly cash
distribution by approximately 81% from $0.40 per unit, or $1.60 per unit on an annualized basis, at the time of its
initial public offering, to $0.725 per unit, or $2.90 per unit on an annualized basis. At the time of its initial public
offering, LINN’s assets consisted primarily of oil and natural gas properties in the Appalachian Basin, mainly in
Pennsylvania, West Virginia, New York and Virginia (subsequently sold in 2008) with proved reserves of
approximately 190 Bcfe as of September 30, 2005 and average daily production of approximately 13 MMcfe/d for the
three months ended September 30, 2005. Since then, LINN has successfully grown and diversified its asset base to
include properties across eight operating regions with total Pro Forma Proved Reserves of approximately 5.0 Tcfe and
average daily production for the six months ended June 30, 2012 of approximately 550 MMcfe/d.
Business Strategy
LINN’s primary goal is to provide stability and growth of distributions for the long-term benefit of its unitholders. The
following is a summary of the key elements of LINN’s business strategy:
•   Grow through acquisition of long-life, high quality properties;
•   Efficiently operate and develop acquired properties; and
•   Reduce cash flow volatility through hedging.
LINN’s business strategy is discussed in more detail below.
Grow Through Acquisition of Long-Life, High Quality Properties. LINN’s acquisition program targets oil and
natural gas properties that it believes will be financially accretive and offer stable, long-life, and high quality production
with relatively predictable decline curves, as well as lower-risk development opportunities. LINN evaluates
acquisitions based on decline profile, reserve life, operational efficiency, field cash flow, development costs and rate
of return. As part of this strategy, LINN continually seeks to optimize its asset portfolio, which may include the
divestiture of non-core assets. This allows LINN to redeploy capital into projects to develop lower-risk, long-life and
low-decline properties that are better suited to its business strategy.
Since January 1, 2007, LINN has completed 39 acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties and related gathering and
pipeline assets, acquiring proved reserves totaling approximately 4.4 Tcfe at the date of acquisition, at an average
aggregate cost of approximately $2.06 per Mcfe.
LINN continually evaluates potential acquisition opportunities that would further its strategic objectives and engages
from time to time in discussions with potential sellers. Assets acquired in one or more of such transactions may have
a material effect on LINN’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Efficiently Operate and Develop Acquired Properties. LINN has centralized the operation of its acquired properties
into defined operating regions to minimize operating costs and maximize production and capital efficiency. LINN
maintains a large inventory of drilling and optimization projects within each operating region to achieve organic growth
from its capital development program. LINN generally seeks to be the operator of its properties so that it can develop
drilling programs and optimization projects that not only replace production, but add value through reserve and
production growth and future operational synergies. LINN’s development program is focused on lower-risk, repeatable
drilling opportunities to maintain and/or grow cash flow. Many of the wells
Table of Contents
5
are completed in multiple producing zones with commingled production and long economic lives. In addition, LINN’s
experienced workforce and scalable infrastructure facilitate the efficient development of its properties.
Reduce Cash Flow Volatility Through Hedging. LINN seeks to hedge a significant portion of its forecasted
production to reduce exposure to fluctuations in the prices of oil and natural gas and provide long-term cash flow
predictability to pay distributions, service debt and manage its business. By removing a significant portion of the price
volatility associated with future production, LINN expects to mitigate, but not eliminate, the potential effects of
variability in cash flow from operations due to fluctuations in commodity prices.
These commodity hedging transactions are primarily in the form of swap contracts and put options that are designed
to provide a fixed price (swap contracts) or fixed price floor with the opportunity for upside (put options) that LINN will
receive as compared to floating market prices. As of June 30, 2012, LINN had derivative contracts in place for 2012
through 2017 at average prices ranging from a low of $89.10 per Bbl to a high of $97.26 per Bbl for oil and from a low
of $4.48 per MMBtu to a high of $5.29 per MMBtu for natural gas. Additionally, LINN has derivative contracts in place
covering a substantial portion of its natural gas basis exposure to Panhandle, MichCon and Permian differentials
through 2015 and Houston Ship Channel and NWPL–Rockies differentials through 2016 and its timing risk exposure
on Mid-Continent, Hugoton Basin and Permian Basin oil sales through 2017.
In addition, LINN may from time to time enter into derivative contracts in the form of interest rate swaps to minimize
the effects of fluctuations in interest rates. Currently, LINN has no outstanding interest rate swaps.
Competitive Strengths
LINN believes the following strengths provide significant competitive advantages:
Large and High Quality Asset Base with a Long Reserve Life. LINN’s reserve base is characterized by lower
geologic risk and well-established production histories and exhibits low production decline rates. Based on LINN’s
total proved reserves at December 31, 2011, and annualized production for the three months ended December 31,
2011, LINN had an average reserve-life index of approximately 22 years. LINN’s Pro Forma Proved Reserves are also
diversified by product with approximately 25% oil, 55% natural gas and 20% natural gas liquids (“NGL”), with
approximately 66% classified as proved developed.
Significant Inventory of Lower-Risk Development Opportunities. LINN has a significant inventory of projects in its
core areas that it believes will support its development activity. At December 31, 2011, LINN had approximately 6,450
identified drilling locations, of which approximately 2,300 were proved undeveloped drilling locations and the remainder
were unproved drilling locations. During the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN drilled a total of 294 gross wells with
an approximate 99% success rate.
Significant Scale of Operations. As of June 1, 2012, LINN had interests in approximately 15,000 gross productive
wells (approximately 71% operated) and approximately 1.8 million net acres across seven regions in the U.S. The
Mid-Continent, Hugoton Basin and Permian Basin regions account for approximately 70% of LINN’s Pro Forma
Proved Reserves. The scale of operations allows LINN to benefit from economies of scale in both drilling and
production operations and capitalize on acquired technical knowledge to lower production costs and maintain a high
success rate on its drilling program. Furthermore, LINN owns integrated gathering and transportation infrastructure in
the Mid-Continent and Hugoton Basin regions, which improves LINN’s cost structure.
Multi-Year Organic Growth Opportunities. In addition to growth through acquisitions, LINN’s asset base provides
significant opportunities to grow production organically. Key drivers of LINN’s organic growth potential include its
properties in the Granite Wash play in the Mid-Continent region and the Wolfberry trend in
Table of Contents
6
the Permian Basin region. LINN has approximately 95,000 net acres in the Granite Wash play, which covers a trend
extending from the Texas Panhandle eastward into southwestern Oklahoma. The Granite Wash play is characterized
by liquids-rich multi-layer reservoirs which provide for attractive horizontal development opportunities. Since the
inception of LINN’s horizontal drilling program in the Granite Wash in 2009, LINN has increased production to
approximately 137 MMcfe/d (43% liquids). As of March 31, 2012, LINN had identified more than 600 horizontal drilling
locations in the Granite Wash and multiple vertical infill drilling locations, representing a 10-plus year drilling inventory.
LINN is also evaluating several oil-bearing intervals in the Texas Panhandle including the Hogshooter, Lansing,
Cleveland and Tonkawa formations. As a result of technical mapping, LINN has already identified approximately 50
additional well locations in the Hogshooter interval. In the Permian Basin region, LINN owns 31,000 net acres in the
Wolfberry trend (targeting the liquids-rich Spraberry and Wolfcamp zones). The Wolfberry trend offers significant
growth potential driven primarily by infill drilling and downspacing. Since entering the Permian Basin in the fall of 2009,
LINN has increased production to approximately 14,800 Boepd as of the first quarter of 2012 through a combination of
organic development and acquisitions. LINN estimates that it has a four-year drilling inventory with approximately 400
future drilling locations in the Wolfberry trend.
High Percentage of Production Hedged. Currently, LINN hedges its production with swap contracts and put options
to minimize its cash flow volatility while maintaining optionality for future upward movement in commodity prices.
Swap contracts provide a fixed price and put options provide a fixed price floor with opportunity for upside that LINN
will receive as compared to floating market prices. Based on current production estimates, LINN is approximately
100% hedged on expected natural gas production through 2017 and 100% hedged on expected oil production through
2016.
High Percentage of Operated Properties. For the year ended December 31, 2011, approximately 82% of LINN’s
production came from wells over which it had operating control. Maintaining control of its properties allows LINN to
use its technical and operational expertise to manage overhead, production, drilling costs and capital expenditures
and to control the timing of development activities.
Competitive Cost of Capital and Financial Flexibility. Unlike many master limited partnerships, LINN does not
have any incentive distribution rights, or IDRs, that entitle the IDR holders to increasing percentages of cash
distributions as unit distributions grow. LINN believes that its lack of IDRs provides it with a lower cost of equity,
thereby enhancing its ability to compete for future acquisitions.
Additionally, LINN has regularly and successfully raised significant capital throughout different financial cycles. Since
LINN’s initial public offering in January 2006, it has raised approximately $5.0 billion in follow-on equity offerings and
approximately $5.4 billion in debt offerings. Furthermore, as of July 25, 2012, LINN’s revolving credit facility had a
$3.5 billion borrowing base, subject to a maximum commitment of $3 billion. LINN believes this financial flexibility and
access to the capital markets provides LINN with a substantial competitive advantage in consummating acquisitions.
Acquisitions
Recent Developments
Jonah Acquisition. On July 31, 2012, LINN completed the Jonah Acquisition for total consideration of approximately
$990 million. The Jonah Acquisition includes approximately 703 Bcfe of estimated proved reserves. The estimated
proved reserves for the Jonah Acquisition were based on LINN’s preliminary internal evaluation of information provided
by the seller.
Table of Contents
7
East Texas Acquisition. On May 1, 2012, LINN completed the East Texas Acquisition for total consideration of
approximately $168 million. The properties acquired in east Texas include (1) proved reserves of approximately 110
Bcfe, all of which are proved developed producing; (2) approximately 430 producing wells on approximately 19,800
contiguous acres; and (3) average daily production of approximately 24 MMcfe/d (97% natural gas).
Hugoton Acquisition. On March 30, 2012, LINN completed the Hugoton Acquisition for total consideration of
approximately $1.17 billion. The properties acquired in the Hugoton Acquisition included: (1) proved reserves of
approximately 701 Bcfe, of which 100% is proved developed; (2) approximately 2,400 producing wells with average
daily production of approximately 110 MMcfe/d, of which approximately 63% is natural gas and 37% is NGL; (3) more
than 800 future drilling locations, including over 400 proved locations; and (4) the JayHawk Natural Gas Processing
Plant, which processes substantially all of the production from the acquired properties, with 450 MMcf/d of processing
capacity.
Joint Venture
Anadarko Joint Venture. On April 3, 2012, LINN entered into the Anadarko Joint Venture, whereby LINN will
participate as a partner in the CO2-enhanced oil recovery development of the Salt Creek field, located in the Powder
River Basin of Wyoming. Anadarko assigned LINN 23% of its interest in the field in exchange for future funding by
LINN of $400 million of Anadarko’s development costs. LINN expects to invest a total of $600 million in the joint
venture over the next three to six years, which includes the $400 million of Anadarko’s costs and $200 million net to
LINN’s assigned interest. Anadarko has been utilizing CO2 to develop this field since 2004. The acquisition included
approximately 16 MMBoe (96 Bcfe) of proved reserves as of the agreement date.
The acquisitions and joint venture described above are referred to in this prospectus as the “2012 Acquisitions.”
Questions and Answers About LinnCo
Why is LinnCo being created?
LinnCo is being created to enhance LINN’s ability to raise additional equity capital to execute on its acquisition and
growth strategy. As LINN continues to grow, the size of individual acquisitions it pursues and its related financing
needs are expected to increase. LINN believes that the LinnCo structure will allow LINN to expand its investor base
through offerings of LinnCo shares, the proceeds of which will go to LINN for use in executing its strategy, in return for
a number of LINN units equal to the number of LinnCo shares sold.
Why does LINN believe that LinnCo will enhance LINN’s ability to raise equity?
LinnCo will be taxed as a corporation, which will enable holders of LinnCo shares to invest indirectly in LINN without
the associated tax-related obligations of owning a LINN unit. For example, holders of LinnCo shares will receive a
Form 1099-DIV rather than a Schedule K-1, will generally not have unrelated business taxable income, or UBTI, and
will not be required to file state income tax returns as a result of owning LinnCo shares. LINN believes that this
structure will appeal to investors that would like to invest in a dividend-paying oil and natural gas exploration and
production company, but currently do not invest in LINN units because of UBTI consequences and more onerous tax
reporting requirements.
Why doesn’t LINN just increase the size of its LINN unit offerings?
While LINN has been one of the most active energy-focused master limited partnership equity issuers in recent years,
we believe that expanding the investor base to include institutions, individual retirement accounts, foreign investors
and tax-exempt investors will provide LINN with equity-raising opportunities significantly beyond its current capacity.
Table of Contents
8
How will LinnCo quarterly dividends be determined?
LinnCo will own a number of LINN units equal to the number of LinnCo shares outstanding and will receive the same
distribution per LINN unit as all other LINN unitholders. When LinnCo receives a quarterly distribution from LINN, it will
reserve an amount equal to LinnCo’s estimated income tax liability, and will distribute the balance as a dividend to
LinnCo shareholders. We currently estimate that for the periods ending December 31, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015,
LinnCo’s income tax liability will not exceed         % of the cash LINN distributes to us. Accordingly, if LINN were to
maintain its current annualized distribution of $2.90 per unit through 2015, the annual LinnCo dividend would not be
less than $             per share.
What rights will LinnCo shareholders have with respect to the governance of LINN and LinnCo?
LinnCo will submit to a vote of its shareholders any matter submitted by LINN to a vote of its unitholders, which will
include the annual election of the LINN board of directors. LinnCo will vote the LINN units it holds in the same manner
as our shareholders vote on those matters. Our shareholders will also be entitled to vote on certain fundamental
matters affecting LinnCo, but will not have the right to elect the LinnCo board of directors. LINN holds the sole voting
share in LinnCo, and therefore will elect the LinnCo board. LinnCo’s initial board of directors will be composed of the
same members as LINN’s board of directors.
Will there be future offerings of LinnCo shares?
As LINN continues to execute on its acquisition and growth strategy, it expects to continue to require additional equity
capital. LinnCo may make future sales of LinnCo shares to facilitate this strategy, and such future sales may be
made separately or in tandem with future sales of LINN units depending on, among other factors, the amount of equity
capital to be raised and the relative trading prices of the LinnCo shares and the LINN units. Any proceeds from the
sale of both LinnCo shares and LINN units will ultimately be used by LINN to execute its strategy.
Table of Contents
9
Risk Factors
An investment in our shares involves risks. You should carefully consider the risks described in “Risk Factors”
beginning on page 29 of this prospectus and the other information in this prospectus before deciding whether to invest
in our shares.
Risks Related to LINN’s Business
•   LINN actively seeks to acquire oil and natural gas properties. Acquisitions involve potential risks that could
adversely impact its future growth and its ability to increase or pay distributions at the current level, or at all.
•   LINN has significant indebtedness. LINN’s revolving credit facility and the indentures governing LINN’s
outstanding senior notes have substantial restrictions, and LINN may have difficulty obtaining additional
credit, which could adversely affect its operations, its ability to make acquisitions and its ability to pay
distributions to its unitholders, including us.
•   Commodity prices are volatile, and a significant decline in commodity prices for a prolonged period would
reduce LINN’s revenues, cash flow from operations and profitability and it may have to lower its distribution or
may not be able to pay distributions at all, which would in turn reduce or eliminate our ability to pay dividends
to you.
•   LINN’s estimated reserves are based on many assumptions that may prove to be inaccurate. Any material
inaccuracies in these reserve estimates or underlying assumptions will materially affect the quantities and
present value of LINN’s reserves.
•   LINN’s development operations require substantial capital expenditures, which will reduce its cash available
for distribution. LINN may be unable to obtain needed capital or financing on satisfactory terms, which could
lead to a decline in its reserves.
•   Drilling for and producing oil, natural gas and NGL are high risk activities with many uncertainties that could
adversely affect LINN’s financial position or results of operations and, as a result, its ability to pay
distributions to its unitholders.
Risks Inherent in an Investment in LinnCo
•   Because our only assets will be LINN units, our cash flow and our ability to pay dividends on our shares are
completely dependent upon the ability of LINN to make distributions to its unitholders.
•   We will incur corporate income tax liabilities on income allocated to us by LINN with respect to LINN units we
own, which may be substantial.
•   An active trading market for our shares may not develop, and even if such a market does develop, the market
price of our shares may be less than the price you paid for your shares and less than the market price of LINN
units.
•   Our shareholders will only be able to indirectly vote on matters on which LINN unitholders are entitled to vote,
and our shareholders are not entitled to vote to elect our directors. Therefore, you will only be able to indirectly
influence the management and board of directors of LINN, and you will not be able to directly influence or
change our management or board of directors.
•   LINN may issue additional units or other classes of units, and we may issue additional shares without your
approval, which would dilute our direct and your indirect ownership interest in LINN and your ownership
interest in us.
10
Table of Contents
•   Your shares are subject to limited call rights that could result in your having to involuntarily sell your shares at
a time or price that may be undesirable.
•   Our limited liability company agreement limits the fiduciary duties owed by our officers and directors to our
shareholders, and LINN’s limited liability company agreement limits the fiduciary duties owed by LINN’s
officers and directors to its unitholders, including us.
•
The terms of our shares may be changed in ways you may not like, because our board of directors will have
The terms of our shares may be changed in ways you may not like, because our board of directors will have
the power to change the terms of our shares in ways our board determines, in its sole discretion, are not
materially adverse to you.
•   Our shares may trade at a substantial discount to the trading price of LINN units.
Tax Risks to Shareholders
•   If LINN were subject to a material amount of entity-level income taxes or similar taxes, whether as a result of
being treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, the value of LINN units
would be substantially reduced and, as a result, the value of our shares could be substantially reduced.
Management of LinnCo
LINN owns our sole voting share (the “voting share,” and collectively with any additional shares of the same class
issued in the future, the “voting shares”) and will be entitled to elect our entire board of directors.
Our initial board of directors will be identical to LINN’s board of directors, and all of our officers are also officers of
LINN. Our shareholders will be able to indirectly vote on matters on which LINN unitholders are entitled to vote. Our
shareholders are not entitled to vote to elect our directors. Under NASDAQ’s listing rules, we are considered a
“controlled company” such that our board of directors will be exempt from the requirement that it have a majority of
independent directors meeting the NASDAQ’s independence standards. We will, however, be required to have an audit
committee of the board of directors composed entirely of independent directors. At the completion of this offering, our
board of directors will be comprised of seven directors, including five independent directors constituting our audit
committee. For information about our executive officers and directors, please read “Management” beginning on page
106.
Comparison of LINN Units with LinnCo Shares
You should be aware of the following ways in which an investment in LINN units is different from an investment in our
shares. The table below should be read together with “Description of Our Shares,” “Description of the LINN Units,”
Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements,” and “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
Business and Assets
Table of Contents
Voting
LINN Units
LINN is in the business of acquiring
and developing oil and natural gas
assets.
11
LINN Units
LinnCo Shares
Our sole purpose is to own LINN units. We will
not have any other assets at closing and do
not intend to own assets other than LINN units
and reserves for income taxes payable by us.
As a result, our financial condition and results
of operations will depend entirely on the
performance of LINN.
LinnCo Shares
Unitholders have the right to vote
with respect to the election of
LINN’s board of directors, certain
amendments to its limited liability
company agreement, the merger of
We will submit to a vote of our shareholders
any matter submitted by LINN to a vote of its
unitholders. We will vote the LINN units that
we hold in the same manner as the owners of
our shares vote (or refrain from voting) their
LINN or the sale of all or
substantially all of its assets and
the dissolution and winding up of
LINN.
shares on those matters. In addition, our
shareholders will be entitled to vote on certain
fundamental matters affecting us, such as
certain amendments to our limited liability
company agreement or the Omnibus
Agreement (as defined below), certain
mergers, the sale of all or substantially all of
our assets and our dissolution and winding up.
LINN, as the holder of our sole voting share,
will have the right to elect the members of our
board of directors, and our shareholders will
have no right to vote in that election.
LINN’s business and affairs are
managed under the direction of
LINN’s board of directors, which
has the power to appoint our
officers.
Our initial board of directors will be composed
of the same members as LINN’s board of
directors, and our initial officers will be the
same individuals who serve as officers of
LINN.
The authority and function of
LINN’s board of directors and
officers is, with certain exceptions,
identical to the authority and
functions of a board of directors
and officers of a corporation
organized under the General
Corporation Law of the State of
Delaware, or DGCL.
Our business and affairs will be managed
under the direction of our board of directors,
which has the power to appoint our officers.
The authority and function of our board of
directors and officers will be identical to the
authority and functions of a board of directors
and officers of a corporation organized under
the DGCL, except for certain limitations on
their fiduciary duties. Please read “Description
of Limited Liability Company Agreements—Our
Limited Liability Company Agreement—
Fiduciary Duties” on page 146.
LinnCo Shares
On a quarterly basis, LinnCo is required to pay
a dividend equal to the amount of cash
received from LINN in respect of the LINN
units owned by LinnCo, less reserves for
income taxes payable by LinnCo.
We will incur corporate income tax liability on
income allocated to us by LINN with respect to
LINN units we own. Accordingly, the quarterly
Board of Directors and
Officers
12
Table of Contents
Distributions and Dividends
LINN Units
On a quarterly basis, LINN is
required to distribute to the owners
of its units an amount equal to its
available cash.
Income Tax
Table of Contents
Taxation Schedules
cash dividend you receive will be less than the
quarterly per unit distribution of cash that we
receive from LINN. For the periods ending
December 31, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015, we
estimate that LinnCo’s income tax liability will
not exceed     % of the cash distributed to
LinnCo.
Our federal taxable income will be subject to a
corporate level tax at a maximum rate of 35%,
under current law (and a 20% alternative
minimum tax on our alternative minimum
taxable income in certain cases), and we may
be liable for state income taxes at varying
rates in states in which LINN operates.
Our shareholders will be subject to U.S. federal
income tax, as well as any applicable state or
local income tax, on taxable dividends
received by them, or on any gain when they
sell our shares. Our shareholders will not report
our items of income, gain, loss and deduction
on their U.S. federal income tax returns. We
estimate that if you own the shares that you
purchase in this offering through December 31,
2015, you will recognize, on a cumulative
basis, an amount of taxable dividend income
that will be     % or less of the cash dividends
paid to you during that period. The excess of
the cash dividends that you receive over your
taxable dividend income during that period will
reduce your tax basis in your shares, or will be
taxable as capital gain to the extent they
exceed your tax basis in your shares.
LinnCo Shares
Like shareholders of a corporation, LinnCo
shareholders will receive a Form 1099-DIV
reflecting dividends of cash or other property
we paid to them. Our shareholders will not
receive a Schedule K-1 from us because they
will not be allocated our items of income, gain,
loss, and deduction.
A tax-exempt organization, including an
employee benefit plan, generally will not have
unrelated business taxable income upon the
receipt of dividends from us.
LINN is taxed as a partnership for
U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Although LINN is not subject to
entity level federal income tax,
each unitholder is required to report
as income his allocable share of
LINN’s income, gains, losses and
deductions for LINN’s taxable year
or years ending with or within his
taxable year.
13
LINN Units
Unitholders receive a Schedule K-1
from LINN reflecting the
unitholders’ share of LINN’s items
of income, gain, loss, and
deduction.
Any net income or gain of LINN
allocated to a tax-exempt
organization, including an
employee benefit plan, will
constitute unrelated business
taxable income of that
Dividend income and gain from our shares
generally will be qualifying income to a
regulated investment company or mutual fund.
organization.
Net income and gain from LINN
units generally will be qualifying
income to a regulated investment
company or mutual fund, subject to
certain limitations that do not apply
to income or gain with respect to
stock of a corporation.
14
Ownership of LINN
Table of Contents
The following diagram depicts LINN’s simplified organizational and ownership structure after giving effect to this
offering and to the subsequent purchase of LINN units by us.
Public Units (             )
Units held by LinnCo (            )
Total
% 
      % 
 100%
* Held by a wholly-owned subsidiary of Linn Energy, LLC.
Principal Executive Offices and Internet Address
Our principal executive offices are located at 600 Travis, Suite 5100, Houston, Texas 77002, and our telephone
number is (281) 840-4000. Our website is located at www.                .com and will be activated immediately following
this offering. We expect to make available our periodic reports and other information filed with or furnished to the
Securities and Exchange Commission, which we refer to as the SEC, free of charge through our website, as soon as
reasonably practicable after those reports and other information are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC.
Information on our website or any other website is not incorporated by reference herein and does not constitute a part
of this prospectus.
Table of Contents
15
The Offering
LinnCo
We are a Delaware limited liability company recently formed to hold units
of LINN.
Shares offered to the public
shares, or                 shares if the underwriters exercise their
option to purchase additional shares in full.
Shares outstanding after this offering
shares (or                 shares if the underwriters exercise their
option to purchase additional shares in full) representing a 100%
economic interest in us.
One voting share of LinnCo owned by LINN. Our voting share is a non-
economic interest.
LINN units held by LinnCo after this offering                 units (or                 units if the underwriters exercise their
option to purchase additional shares in full) representing a     % limited
liability company interest in LINN.
Use of proceeds
We will use all of the net proceeds from this offering of approximately
$         million ($         million if the underwriters exercise their option to
purchase additional shares in full), after deducting underwriting discounts,
to purchase from LINN a number of LINN units equal to the number of
shares sold in this offering. LINN will pay the expenses of this offering.
LINN will use the proceeds it receives from the sale of LINN units to us
for general corporate purposes, including financing its acquisition
strategy, repaying debt and paying the expenses of this offering.
Affiliates of certain of the underwriters in this offering are lenders under
LINN’s revolving credit facility and, accordingly, if LINN elects to use the
proceeds it receives from LinnCo to repay any such debt outstanding
under that facility, those lenders would indirectly receive a portion of the
net proceeds from this offering. Please read “Underwriting—FINRA
Rules.”
Proposed NASDAQ symbol
We intend to apply to list the shares on the NASDAQ Global Select
Market under the symbol “LNCO.”
Our dividend policy
Our limited liability company agreement requires us to pay dividends on
our shares of the cash we receive as distributions in respect of our LINN
units, net of reserves for income taxes payable by us, within five
business days after we receive such distributions.
LINN’s limited liability company agreement requires it to make quarterly
distributions to unitholders of all of its “available cash,” which is defined
to mean, for each fiscal quarter, all cash on hand at the end of the
quarter less the amount of cash reserves established by the LINN board
of directors to:
•   provide for the proper conduct of business (including reserves for
future capital expenditures, future debt service requirements, and
for anticipated credit needs); and
16
•   comply with applicable laws, debt instruments or other agreements;
plus all cash on hand on the date of determination of available cash for
the quarter resulting from working capital borrowings made after the end
of the quarter for which the determination is being made.
Because we will be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax
purposes, our shareholders will receive a Form 1099-DIV and will be
subject to federal income tax, as well as any applicable state or local
income tax, on taxable dividends paid to them. An owner of our shares
will not report on its U.S. federal income tax return any of our items of
income, gain, loss and deduction. An owner of our shares will not receive
a Schedule K-1 and will not be subject to state tax filings in the various
states in which LINN conducts business as a result of owning our
shares. A tax-exempt investor’s ownership or sale of our shares
generally will not generate income derived from an unrelated trade or
business regularly carried on by the tax-exempt investor, which generally
is referred to as unrelated business taxable income, or “UBTI.” The
ownership or sale of our shares by a regulated investment company, or
mutual fund, will generate qualifying income to it. Furthermore, the
ownership of our shares by a mutual fund will be treated as a qualifying
asset. There generally will be no taxes imposed on gain from the sale of
our shares by a non-U.S. person provided it has owned no more than 5%
of our shares and our shares are regularly traded on a nationally
recognized securities exchange. Dividends to non-U.S. persons will be
subject to withholding tax of 30% (or a lower treaty rate, if applicable).
See “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
LINN distribution policy
Table of Contents
U.S. federal income tax matters associated
with our shares
Our covenants
Our covenants
Table of Contents
Relationship with LINN
Our limited liability company agreement provides that our activities will
be limited to owning LINN units. It requires that our issuance of shares of
classes other than (i) the class of shares being sold in this offering and
(ii) the class of voting shares currently owned by LINN, be approved by
the owners of our outstanding shares, voting as separate classes, and
further includes covenants that prohibit us from (otherwise than in
connection with a Terminal Transaction):
•   borrowing money or issuing debt;
•   selling, pledging or otherwise transferring any LINN units;
•   issuing options, warrants or other securities entitling the holder to
purchase our shares, except in connection with employee benefit
plans;
•   liquidating, merging or recapitalizing;
•   revoking or changing our election to be treated as a corporation for
U.S. federal income tax purposes; or
•   using the proceeds from sales of our shares other than to purchase
LINN units.
17
See “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—Our
Limited Liability Company Agreement.” In addition, these provisions can
be amended or waived by the owners of our shares as described under
“—Voting rights” below.
Under our limited liability company agreement, LINN has agreed that
neither it nor any of its subsidiaries will take any action that would result
in LINN and its subsidiaries ceasing to control LinnCo, except in
connection with a Terminal Transaction.
Under an Omnibus Agreement between LINN and us (the “Omnibus
Agreement”), LINN will pay on our behalf (directly or indirectly) any legal,
accounting, tax advisory, financial advisory and engineering fees, printing
costs or other administrative and out-of-pocket expenses we incur, along
with any other expenses incurred in connection with this offering or
incurred as a result of being a publicly traded entity, including costs
associated with annual, quarterly and other reports to holders of our
shares, tax return and Form 1099 preparation and distribution, NASDAQ
listing fees, independent auditor fees and registrar and transfer agent
fees. LINN will also agree to indemnify us for damages suffered or costs
incurred (other than income taxes payable by us) in connection with
carrying out our activities.
These covenants can be amended or waived by the owners of our shares
as described under “—Voting rights” below.
Terminal Transactions involving LINN
Mergers. If the LINN unitholders are asked to approve a merger of LINN
with another entity, we will submit the merger to a vote of our
shareholders and will vote our LINN units in the same manner that our
shareholders vote (or refrain from voting) their shares.
Cash Consideration. In a merger involving LINN in which unitholders
receive cash, you will be entitled to receive any cash we receive for our
LINN units, net of income taxes payable by us. In the event of an all-
cash merger of LINN, we will dissolve and wind up our affairs after such
distribution.
Non-Cash Consideration. In a merger involving LINN in which LINN
unitholders receive securities of another entity, you will be entitled to
receive the securities received in connection with such merger. In the
event of such a merger in which LINN is not the surviving entity, we will
dissolve and wind up our affairs unless:
•   LINN’s successor would be treated as a partnership for U.S. federal
income tax purposes; and
•   the surviving entity agrees to assume the obligations of LINN under
our limited liability company agreement and the Omnibus
Agreement.
18
Table of Contents
Tender Offers. If a third party makes a tender offer for LINN units, LINN
may, but will not be obligated to, cooperate with such third party to
extend such tender offer to our shareholders or otherwise facilitate
participation of our shareholders in the tender offer for LINN units.
Going Private Transaction. If at any time a person owns more than 90%
of the outstanding LINN units, such person may elect to purchase all, but
not less than all, of the remaining outstanding LINN units at a price equal
to the higher of the current market price (as defined in LINN’s limited
liability company agreement) and the highest price paid by such person
or any of its affiliates for any LINN units purchased during the 90-day
period preceding the date notice was mailed to the LINN unitholders
informing them of such election. In this case, we will be required to
tender all of our outstanding LINN units and distribute the cash we
receive, net of income taxes payable by us, to our shareholders.
Following such distribution, we will cancel all of our outstanding shares
and dissolve and wind up our affairs.
Sale of All or Substantially All of LINN’s Assets. If LINN sells all or
substantially all of its assets in one or more transactions for cash and
makes a distribution of such cash to its unitholders, we will distribute the
cash we receive, net of income taxes payable by us, to our shareholders.
Following such distribution, we will cancel all of our outstanding shares
and dissolve and wind up our affairs.
Change in Tax Treatment of LINN. If LINN or its successor ceases to be
treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, LINN or
such successor will have the right to cause us to merge with and into
LINN, in which case each of our shareholders will receive distributions in
kind of LINN units and other property we own, if any, after payments to
creditors and satisfaction of other obligations.
The transactions described above are referred to as “Terminal
Transactions.”
Limited call rights
If LINN or any of its affiliates owns 80% or more of our outstanding
shares, LINN has the right, which it may assign to any of its affiliates, to
purchase all of our outstanding shares, at a purchase price not less than
the then-current market price of our shares.
If any person acquires more than 90% of the outstanding LINN units,
such person may require us to tender all of our outstanding LINN units, in
which case we will distribute the cash we receive to our shareholders.
Following such distribution, we will cancel all of our outstanding shares
and dissolve and wind up our affairs. See “—Terminal Transactions
involving LINN” above.
19
We will submit to a vote of the owners of our shares any matter
submitted to us by LINN for a vote of the LINN units held by us. We will
vote the LINN units that we own in the same manner that the owners of
our shares vote (or refrain from voting) their shares. The LINN units we
hold will have the same voting rights as all other LINN units.
Owners of the shares being sold in this offering will have no right to elect
our directors. LINN owns the sole voting share entitled to elect our
directors, which we refer to as the “voting share,” and which has no
economic interest in us. Owners of the shares of the class being sold in
this offering are entitled to vote on the following matters related to us:
•   amendments to our limited liability company agreement and the
Omnibus Agreement with LINN, but only if the amendment would
have a material adverse effect on the preferences or rights of our
shareholders (as determined in the sole discretion of our board of
directors), would reduce the time for any notice to which the owners
of our shares are entitled, enlarges the obligations of our
shareholders, alters the circumstances under which LinnCo could
be dissolved or wound up or changes the term of existence of
LinnCo;
•   an amendment or waiver of LINN’s covenant regarding its continued
ownership of more than 50% of the total voting power of LinnCo;
•   an amendment or waiver of the covenants described above under
“Our covenants”;
•   our issuance of classes of shares other than shares of the class
being sold in this offering and the class of the voting share
currently owned by LINN;
•   a merger of LinnCo or the sale of all or substantially all of our
assets (other than in connection with a Terminal Transaction); and
•   our dissolution (other than in connection with a Terminal
Transaction).
Table of Contents
Voting rights
The matters described above, other than amendment or waiver of the
covenants described above under “Our covenants,” also require approval
by the holders of a majority of our voting shares.
Ratio of LinnCo shares to LINN units
Our limited liability company agreement requires that the number of our
outstanding shares and the number of LINN units we own always be
equal.
Table of Contents
20
Summary Historical and Pro Forma Financial and Operating Data of LINN
The following table shows summary historical and pro forma financial and operating data of LINN as of the dates and
for the periods indicated. The selected historical financial data presented as of December 31, 2010 and 2011 and for
the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 are derived from the historical audited financial statements that
are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The selected historical financial data of LINN presented as of June 30,
2012 and for the six months ended June 30, 2011 and 2012 are derived from the unaudited interim financial
statements that are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The summary pro forma financial data presented for the
year ended December 31, 2011 and the six months ended June 30, 2012 are derived from the unaudited pro forma
condensed combined financial statements that are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The pro forma financial data
presented for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the six months ended June 30, 2012 give effect to the Hugoton
Acquisition as if it had been completed as of January 1, 2011 and certain other 2011 acquisitions as if they had been
completed as of January 1, 2010. The following table should be read together with, and is qualified in its entirety by
reference to, the historical and unaudited financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this
prospectus. The table should also be read together with “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations.”
The unaudited pro forma financial statements do not purport to represent what LINN’s results of operations would have
actually been had such acquisitions occurred on the dates noted above, or to project LINN’s results of operations as
of any future date or for any future periods. The pro forma adjustments are based on available information and certain
assumptions that LINN believes are reasonable. The adjustments are directly attributable to the acquisition of oil and
natural gas properties from the Hugoton Acquisition included and are expected to have a continuing impact on LINN’s
results of operations. In our opinion, all adjustments necessary to present fairly the unaudited pro forma condensed
combined financial statements have been made.
Table of Contents
21
Because of rapid growth through acquisitions and development of properties, LINN’s historical results of operations
and period-to-period comparisons of these results and certain other financial data may not be meaningful or indicative
of future results. The results of LINN’s Appalachian Basin and Mid Atlantic Well Service, Inc. operations, which were
disposed of in 2008, are classified as discontinued operations, due to post-closing adjustments, for the year ended
December 31, 2009. Unless otherwise indicated, results of operations information presented herein relates only to
continuing operations.
Historical
Pro Forma
Historical
Pro Forma
At or for the Year Ended
For the Year
Ended
December 31,
2010
2011
December 31,
(Unaudited)
2011
At or for the Six
Months Ended
June 30,
2011
2012
(Unaudited)
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
2009
For the
Six
Months
Ended
June 30,
2012
(Unaudited)
$ 408,219    $ 690,054    $1,162,037    $ 1,649,701   $ 543,097    $696,122    $753,004
(141,374)
75,211
449,940
449,940     (163,961)     441,678      441,678
201,782      238,532
334,084
436,786     145,711      260,782      277,430
92,701      193,510
259,725
359,547     125,825      171,909      191,296
(295,841)     (114,288)
438,439
532,939     (209,573)     230,884      220,419
(2,351)
—       
    (298,192)     (114,288)
—       
438,439
(2.48)    
(2.48)
(0.02)    
(0.02)
(2.50)    
(2.50)
(0.80)    
(0.80)
—       
—
(0.80)    
(0.80)
2.52     
2.51
—       
—
2.52     
2.51
2.52
2.55
2.70
—
—    
532,939     (209,573)     230,884      220,419
—
—
3.04    
3.03
—      
—      
 
3.04    
3.03
(1.25)    
(1.25)
—       
—       
 
(1.25)    
(1.25)
1.17     
1.16
—       
—       
 
1.17     
1.16
1.32
1.415
1.11  
1.11
—    
—
1.11  
1.11
119,307      142,535     
    119,307      142,535
172,004     
172,729
173,728     169,104      195,382      195,382  
174,453     169,104      196,039      196,039
Statement of operations
data:
Oil, natural gas and natural
gas liquids sales
Gains (losses) on oil and
natural gas derivatives
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Interest expense, net of
amounts capitalized
Income (loss) from
continuing operations
Income (loss) from
discontinued operations,
net of taxes(1)
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per unit—
continuing operations:
Basic
Diluted
Income (loss) per unit—
discontinued operations:
Basic
Diluted
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Distributions declared per
unit
Weighted average units
outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
Table of Contents
2009
Cash flow data:
Net cash provided by (used in):
Operating activities(2)
Investing activities
Financing activities
Balance sheet data:
$ 426,804   
(282,273)  
  
(150,968)
Total assets
22
Historical
At or for the Year Ended
December 31,
2010
(in thousands)
$
270,918   
  (1,581,408)  
  1,524,260
2011
$
518,706   
  (2,130,360)  
  1,376,767
Historical
At or for the Six
Months Ended June 30,
2012
2011
(Unaudited)
(in thousands)
303,762    $
$
  (1,081,736)  
 
611,741
(122,429) 
(2,265,931) 
2,389,129
Total assets
Long-term debt
Unitholders’ capital
$4,340,256   
  1,588,831   
  
  2,452,004
$ 5,933,148   
  2,742,902   
  2,788,216
$ 8,000,137   
  3,993,657   
  3,428,910
$  11,180,102  
6,005,547
4,131,663
(1) Includes gains (losses) on sale of assets, net of taxes.
(2) Includes premiums paid for derivatives of approximately $94 million, $120 million and $134 million for the years
ended December 31, 2009, December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2011, respectively, and approximately $583
million for the six months ended June 30, 2012.
23
Table of Contents
Summary Reserve and Operating Data
The following table presents summary unaudited operating data with respect to LINN’s production and sales of oil and
natural gas for the periods presented and summary information with respect to LINN’s estimated proved oil and natural
gas reserves at year end. DeGolyer and MacNaughton, independent petroleum engineers, provided the estimates of
LINN’s proved oil and natural gas reserves as of December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 set forth below.
Average daily production—continuing
operations:
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Oil (MBbls/d)
NGL (MBbls/d)
Total (MMcfe/d)
Weighted average prices (hedged):(1)
Natural gas ($/Mcf)
Oil ($/Bbl)
NGL ($/Bbl)
Expenses ($/Mcfe):
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
General and administrative expenses(2)
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes, other than income taxes
Year Ended
December 31,
2010
2009
125    
9.0    
6.5    
218
$ 8.27    
  110.94    
  28.04
$ 1.67    
0.23    
 
1.08    
 
2.53    
 
 
0.35
137    
  13.1    
 
8.3    
265
$ 8.52    
  94.71    
  39.14
$ 1.64    
  0.20    
  1.02    
  2.46    
  0.47
2011
175    
  21.5    
  10.8    
369
$ 8.20    
  89.21    
  42.88
$ 1.73    
  0.21    
  0.99    
  2.48    
  0.58
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2011             2012
163      
19.3      
9.3      
335
273  
27.2  
19.1  
550
8.68     $
$
5.93  
  88.35       92.86  
  44.70       33.21
1.69     $
0.20      
1.02      
2.40      
0.59
$
1.42  
0.32  
0.84  
2.60  
0.56
Estimated proved reserves—continuing operations:(3)
Natural gas (Bcf)
Oil (MMBbls)
NGL (MMBbls)
Total (Bcfe)
Percent proved developed reserves (%)
Estimated reserve life (in years)(4)
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows ($ in millions)(5)
2009
774  
 
 
102  
 
 
54  
 
  1,712  
 
71%  
 
 
22  
 
$1,723
2010
1,233  
 
 
156  
 
 
71  
 
  2,597  
 
64%  
 
 
23  
 
$4,224
2011
1,675  
 
189  
 
94  
  3,370  
60% 
 
 
22  
$6,615
(1)
Includes the effect of realized gains on derivatives of approximately $401 million (excluding $49 million realized
net gains on canceled contracts), $308 million, $230 million (excluding $27 million realized gains on canceled
contracts), $98 million and $173 million (excluding approximately $18 million realized gain on recovery of
bankruptcy claim) for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 and the six months ended June 30,
2011 and 2012, respectively.
(2) General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 and the six months
ended June 30, 2011 and 2012 include approximately $15 million, $13 million, $21 million, $11 million and $14
million of noncash unit-based compensation expenses, respectively. General and administrative expenses
excluding these amounts were $0.90 per Mcfe, $0.88 per Mcfe, $0.83 per Mcfe, $0.85 per Mcfe and $0.70 per
Mcfe for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 and the six months ended June 30, 2011 and 2012,
respectively. This is a non-GAAP measure used by LINN’s management to analyze its performance.
Table of Contents
24
(3)
In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves at December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 were estimated using the
average price during the 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month
price for each month, unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon
future conditions. The price used to estimate reserves is held constant over the life of the reserves.
(4) Based on annualized average daily production from continuing operations for the fourth quarter of each respective
year.
(5) Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is the present value of estimated future net revenues
to be generated from the production of proved reserves, discounted using an annual discount rate of 10% and
determined in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC without giving effect to non-property related
expenses such as general and administrative expenses, debt service, future income tax expenses or
depreciation, depletion and amortization. Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows does not give
effect to derivative transactions. However, LINN estimates the discounted present value, or PV-10, of its
approximately 3.4 Tcfe of proved reserves at December 31, 2011, to be approximately $7.1 billion, based on oil
and natural gas hedge values for 2012-2016 and strip prices as of December 31, 2011. This calculation of PV-10
differs from the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows determined in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the SEC in that it is presented including the impacts of commodity derivatives and
current strip prices, rather than market prices and without giving effect to derivatives. LINN calculates PV-10 in
this manner because a large percentage of its forecasted oil and natural gas production is hedged for multiple-
year periods, and management therefore believes that LINN’s PV-10 calculation more accurately reflects the
discounted present value of its estimated future net revenues. The information used to calculate PV-10 is not
derived directly from data determined in accordance with authoritative accounting guidance regarding disclosure
about oil and natural gas producing activities. LINN’s calculation of PV-10 should not be considered as an
alternative to the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows determined in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the SEC. For a reconciliation of PV-10 to the standardized measure of discounted future
net cash flows see “—PV-10.”
Table of Contents
25
LINN defines adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus the following adjustments:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
•   Net operating cash flow from acquisitions and divestitures, effective date through closing date;
•   Interest expense;
•   Depreciation, depletion and amortization;
•   Impairment of long-lived assets;
•   Write-off of deferred financing fees;
•   (Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net;
•   Provision for legal matters;
•   Loss on extinguishment of debt;
•   Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity derivatives;
•   Unrealized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
•   Realized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
•   Realized (gains) losses on canceled derivatives;
•   Realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim;
•   Unit-based compensation expenses;
•   Exploration costs;
•   Income tax (benefit) expense; and
•   Discontinued operations.
Adjusted EBITDA is a measure used by LINN’s management to indicate (prior to the establishment of any reserves
by the board of directors) the cash distributions LINN expects to make to its unitholders. Adjusted EBITDA is also a
quantitative measure used throughout the investment community with respect to publicly traded partnerships and
limited liability companies.
Table of Contents
26
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA (unaudited):
Year Ended December 31,
Six Months Ended June 30,
 
        2011                2012         
 
230,884
2009
2010
2011        
(in thousands)
57,966   
  249,085   
 
10,640   
  334,084   
 
—     
1,189
42,846   
  129,691   
 
63,819   
  238,532   
38,600   
 
 
2,076
3,708   
 
74,185   
 
 
18,516   
  201,782   
—     
 
 
204
36,359     
  125,181     
 
644     
  145,711     
—       
 
 
1,189
$(298,192)   $(114,288)   $ 438,439    $ (209,573)   $
Net income (loss)
Plus:
Net operating cash flow from acquisitions and
divestitures, effective date through closing
date
Interest expense, cash
Interest expense, noncash
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Write-off of deferred financing fees
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other,
net
Provision for legal matters
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity
derivatives
Unrealized (gains) losses on interest rate
derivatives
Realized losses on interest rate derivatives
Realized (gains) losses on canceled
derivatives
—       
 
Realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim  
—       
Unit-based compensation expenses
11,181     
 
Exploration costs
995     
 
Income tax (benefit) expense
5,868     
 
Discontinued operations
—       
 
 
      
  $ 566,235    $ 732,131    $ 997,621    $ 473,602    $
123,865   
—     
 
 
13,792   
5,168   
 
4,241   
 
—
(48,977)  
—     
15,089   
7,169   
(4,221)  
2,351
(26,752)  
—     
22,243   
2,390   
5,466   
—
(916)    
740     
94,372
(23,051)  
—     
—
591,379
232,376
(192,951)
261,851
124   
1,086   
94,612
3,008   
4,362   
—
(16,588)  
42,881
(63,978)  
8,021
Adjusted EBITDA
—     
—
—       
—
45,127  
129,652  
42,257  
260,782  
146,499  
7,889
991  
795  
—
(250,406)
—    
—
—    
(18,277) 
14,834  
817  
9,430  
—    
 
621,274
Table of Contents
27
PV-10
PV-10 represents the present value, discounted at 10% per year, of estimated future net revenues. LINN’s calculation
of PV-10 differs from the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows determined in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the SEC in that it is presented including the impacts of its oil and natural gas hedge values for
2012-2016 and strip prices as of December 31, 2011, rather than the average price during the 12-month period,
determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month, and without giving effect to
derivatives. LINN calculates PV-10 value in this manner because such a large percentage of its forecasted oil and
natural gas production is hedged for multiple-year periods, and management therefore believes that its PV-10
calculation more accurately reflects the value of its estimated future net revenues. The information used to calculate
PV-10 is not derived directly from data determined in accordance with the provisions of applicable accounting
standards. LINN’s calculation of PV-10 should not be considered as an alternative to the standardized measure of
discounted future net cash flows determined in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC. The following
presents a reconciliation of standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows to LINN’s calculation of PV-10
at December 31, 2011 (in millions):
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
Plus: Difference due to oil and natural gas hedge prices and strip prices for unhedged volumes
PV-10
Table of Contents
28
RISK FACTORS
$6,615  
450  
 
   
 
$7,065
An investment in our shares involves risks. You should carefully consider the following risk factors together with all of
the other information included in this prospectus in evaluating an investment in our shares. If certain of the following
risks were to occur, LINN’s business, financial condition or results of operations, and ours, as a result, could be
materially adversely affected. In that case, LINN might not be able to pay any distribution on its units, the trading
price of our shares could decline and you could lose all or part of your investment in us. In addition, if certain of the
following risks were to occur, our financial condition or the price of our shares could be materially adversely affected.
Risks Related to LINN’s Business
LINN actively seeks to acquire oil and natural gas properties. Acquisitions involve potential risks that could
adversely impact its future growth and its ability to increase or pay distributions at the current level, or at all.
Any acquisition involves potential risks, including, among other things:
•   the risk that reserves expected to support the acquired assets may not be of the anticipated magnitude or
may not be developed as anticipated;
•   the risk of title defects discovered after closing;
•   inaccurate assumptions about revenues and costs, including synergies;
•   significant increases in LINN’s indebtedness and working capital requirements;
•   an inability to transition and integrate successfully or timely the businesses LINN acquires;
•   the cost of transition and integration of data systems and processes;
•   the potential environmental problems and costs;
•   the assumption of unknown liabilities;
•   limitations on rights to indemnity from the seller;
•   the diversion of management’s attention from other business concerns;
•   increased demands on existing personnel and on the corporate structure;
•   disputes arising out of acquisitions;
•   customer or key employee losses of the acquired businesses; and
•   the failure to realize expected growth or profitability.
The scope and cost of these risks may ultimately be materially greater than estimated at the time of the acquisition.
Further, LINN’s future acquisition costs may be higher than those it has achieved historically. Any of these factors
could adversely impact its future growth and its ability to increase or pay distributions.
If LINN does not make future acquisitions on economically acceptable terms, then its growth and ability to
increase distributions will be limited.
LINN’s ability to grow and to increase distributions to its unitholders is partially dependent on its ability to make
acquisitions that result in an increase in available cash flow per unit. It may be unable to make such acquisitions
because it is:
•   unable to identify attractive acquisition candidates or negotiate acceptable purchase contracts with them;
•   unable to obtain financing for these acquisitions on economically acceptable terms; or
•   outbid by competitors.
29
Table of Contents
In any such case, LINN’s future growth and ability to increase distributions will be limited. Furthermore, even if LINN
does make acquisitions that it believes will increase available cash flow per unit, these acquisitions may nevertheless
result in a decrease in available cash flow per unit.
LINN has significant indebtedness under its Senior Notes and from time to time, its Credit Facility. The Credit
Facility and the indentures governing the Senior Notes have substantial restrictions and LINN may have
difficulty obtaining additional credit, which could adversely affect its operations, its ability to make
acquisitions and its ability to pay distributions to its unitholders, including us.
As of June 30, 2012, LINN had an aggregate of approximately $6.1 billion in outstanding senior notes (“Senior Notes”)
and borrowings under its Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“Credit Facility”) with additional borrowing
capacity of approximately $646 million under its Credit Facility, which includes a $4 million reduction in availability for
outstanding letters of credit and a $200 million reduction in availability related to a restriction on swap agreements
outstanding associated with the Jonah Acquisition, which no longer applies since the acquisition has closed. As a
result of its indebtedness, LINN will use a portion of its cash flow to pay interest and principal when due, which will
reduce the cash available to finance its operations and other business activities and could limit its flexibility in
planning for or reacting to changes in its business and the industry in which it operates.
The Credit Facility restricts LINN’s ability to incur additional indebtedness, create liens on its properties, make
distributions, make investments, sell assets, enter into commodity and interest rate derivative contracts and engage
in business combinations. LINN is also required to demonstrate compliance quarterly with certain financial covenants
and ratios, including a ratio of EBITDA to Interest Expense of 2.5 to 1.0 and a Current Ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 (as such
terms are defined in the Credit Facility which is filed as an exhibit to our registration statement filed with the SEC in
connection with this offering). Its ability to comply with these restrictions and covenants in the future is uncertain and
will be affected by the levels of cash flow from its operations and events or circumstances beyond its control. LINN’s
failure to comply with any of the above restrictions and covenants could result in an event of default, which, if it
continues beyond any applicable cure periods, could cause all of its existing indebtedness to be immediately due and
payable.
LINN depends, in part, on its Credit Facility for future capital needs. LINN has drawn on its Credit Facility to fund or
partially fund quarterly cash distribution payments, since it uses operating cash flow primarily for drilling and
development of oil and natural gas properties and acquisitions and borrows as cash is needed. Absent such
borrowing, it would have at times experienced a shortfall in cash available to pay its declared quarterly cash
distribution amount. If there is a default by LINN under its Credit Facility that continues beyond any applicable cure
period, it would be unable to make borrowings to fund distributions. In addition, LINN may finance acquisitions through
borrowings under its Credit Facility or the incurrence of additional debt. To the extent that LINN is unable to incur
additional debt under its Credit Facility or otherwise because it is not in compliance with the financial covenants in the
Credit Facility, it may not be able to complete acquisitions, which could adversely affect its ability to maintain or
increase distributions. Furthermore, to the extent LINN is unable to refinance its Credit Facility on terms that are as
favorable as those in its existing Credit Facility, or at all, its ability to fund its operations and its ability to pay
distributions could be affected.
The borrowing base under LINN’s Credit Facility is determined semi-annually at the discretion of the lenders and is
based in part on oil, natural gas and NGL prices. Significant declines in oil, natural gas or NGL prices may result in a
decrease in its borrowing base. The lenders can unilaterally adjust the borrowing base and therefore the borrowings
permitted to be outstanding under the Credit Facility. Any increase in the borrowing base requires the consent of all
the lenders. Outstanding borrowings in excess of the borrowing base must be repaid immediately, or LINN must
pledge other properties as additional collateral. LINN does not currently have substantial unpledged properties, and it
may not have the financial resources in the future to make any mandatory principal prepayments required under the
Credit Facility. Significant declines in LINN’s production or significant declines in realized oil, natural gas or NGL
prices for prolonged periods and resulting decreases in its borrowing base may force it to reduce or suspend
distributions to its unitholders.
Table of Contents
30
LINN’s ability to access the capital and credit markets to raise capital and borrow on favorable terms will be
affected by disruptions in the capital and credit markets, which could adversely affect its operations, its ability
to make acquisitions and its ability to pay distributions to its unitholders.
Disruptions in the capital and credit markets could limit LINN’s ability to access these markets or significantly
increase its cost to borrow. Some lenders may increase interest rates, enact tighter lending standards, refuse to
refinance existing debt at maturity on favorable terms or at all and may reduce or cease to provide funding to
borrowers. If LINN is unable to access the capital and credit markets on favorable terms, its ability to make
acquisitions and pay distributions could be affected.
LINN’s variable rate indebtedness subjects it to interest rate risk, which could cause its debt service
obligations to increase significantly.
Borrowings under LINN’s Credit Facility bear interest at variable rates and expose LINN to interest rate risk. If interest
rates increase and LINN is unable to effectively hedge its interest rate risk, its debt service obligations on the variable
rate indebtedness would increase even though the amount borrowed remained the same, and its net income and cash
available for servicing its indebtedness would decrease.
Increases in interest rates could adversely affect the demand for LINN’s units.
An increase in interest rates may cause a corresponding decline in demand for equity investments, in particular for
yield-based equity investments such as LINN units. Any such reduction in demand for LINN units resulting from other
more attractive investment opportunities may cause the trading price of LINN units to decline.
LINN’s commodity derivative activities could result in financial losses or could reduce its income, which may
adversely affect its ability to pay distributions to its unitholders.
To achieve more predictable cash flow and to reduce its exposure to adverse fluctuations in the prices of oil and
natural gas, LINN enters into commodity derivative contracts for a significant portion of its production. Commodity
derivative arrangements expose it to the risk of financial loss in some circumstances, including situations when
production is less than expected. If LINN experiences a sustained material interruption in its production or if it is
unable to perform its drilling activity as planned, it might be forced to satisfy all or a portion of its derivative
obligations without the benefit of the cash flow from its sale of the underlying physical commodity, resulting in a
substantial reduction of its liquidity, which may adversely affect its ability to pay distributions to its unitholders.
Counterparty failure may adversely affect LINN’s derivative positions.
LINN cannot be assured that its counterparties will be able to perform under its derivative contracts. If a counterparty
fails to perform and the derivative arrangement is terminated, LINN’s cash flow and ability to pay distributions could
be impacted.
Commodity prices are volatile, and a significant decline in commodity prices for a prolonged period would
reduce LINN’s revenues, cash flow from operations and profitability and it may have to lower its distribution
or may not be able to pay distributions at all, which would in turn reduce or eliminate our ability to pay
dividends to you.
LINN’s revenue, profitability and cash flow depend upon the prices of and demand for oil, natural gas and NGL. The
oil, natural gas and NGL market is very volatile and a drop in prices can significantly affect LINN’s financial results
and impede its growth. Changes in oil, natural gas and NGL prices have a significant impact on the value of LINN’s
reserves and on its cash flow. Prices for these commodities may fluctuate widely in response to relatively minor
changes in the supply of and demand for them, market uncertainty and a variety of additional factors that are beyond
LINN’s control, such as:
•   the domestic and foreign supply of and demand for oil, natural gas and NGL;
31
Table of Contents
•   the price and level of foreign imports;
•   the level of consumer product demand;
•   weather conditions;
•   overall domestic and global economic conditions;
•   political and economic conditions in oil and natural gas producing countries, including those in the Middle East
and South America;
•   the ability of members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to agree to and maintain price
and production controls;
•   the impact of the U.S. dollar exchange rates on oil, natural gas and NGL prices;
•
technological advances affecting energy consumption;
technological advances affecting energy consumption;
•   domestic and foreign governmental regulations and taxation;
•   the impact of energy conservation efforts;
•   the proximity and capacity of pipelines and other transportation facilities; and
•   the price and availability of alternative fuels.
In the past, the prices of oil, natural gas and NGL have been extremely volatile, and LINN expects this volatility to
continue. If commodity prices decline significantly for a prolonged period, LINN’s cash flow from operations will
decline, and it may have to lower its distribution or may not be able to pay distributions at all, which would in turn
reduce or eliminate our ability to pay dividends to you.
Future price declines or downward reserve revisions may result in a write down of LINN’s asset carrying
values, which could adversely affect its results of operations and limit its ability to borrow funds.
Declines in oil, natural gas and NGL prices may result in LINN having to make substantial downward adjustments to
its estimated proved reserves. If this occurs, or if LINN’s estimates of development costs increase, production data
factors change or drilling results deteriorate, accounting rules may require it to write down, as a noncash charge to
earnings, the carrying value of its properties for impairments. LINN capitalizes costs to acquire, find and develop its
oil and natural gas properties under the successful efforts accounting method. LINN is required to perform impairment
tests on its assets periodically and whenever events or changes in circumstances warrant a review of its assets. To
the extent such tests indicate a reduction of the estimated useful life or estimated future cash flows of LINN’s assets,
the carrying value may not be recoverable and therefore would require a write down. LINN may incur impairment
charges in the future, which could have a material adverse effect on its results of operations in the period incurred and
on its ability to borrow funds under its Credit Facility, which in turn may adversely affect its ability to make cash
distributions to its unitholders.
Unless LINN replaces its reserves, its reserves and production will decline, which would adversely affect its
cash flow from operations and its ability to make distributions to its unitholders.
Producing oil, natural gas and NGL reservoirs are characterized by declining production rates that vary depending
upon reservoir characteristics and other factors. The overall rate of decline for LINN’s production will change if
production from its existing wells declines in a different manner than its has estimated and can change when it drills
additional wells, makes acquisitions and under other circumstances. Thus, LINN’s future oil, natural gas and NGL
reserves and production and, therefore, its cash flow and income, are highly dependent on its success in efficiently
developing its current reserves and economically finding or acquiring additional recoverable reserves. LINN may not
be able to develop, find or acquire additional reserves to replace its current and future production at acceptable costs,
which would adversely affect its cash flow from operations and its ability to make distributions to its unitholders.
Table of Contents
32
LINN’s estimated reserves are based on many assumptions that may prove to be inaccurate. Any material
inaccuracies in these reserve estimates or underlying assumptions will materially affect the quantities and
present value of LINN’s reserves.
No one can measure underground accumulations of oil, natural gas and NGL in an exact manner. Reserve engineering
requires subjective estimates of underground accumulations of oil, natural gas and NGL and assumptions concerning
future oil, natural gas and NGL prices, production levels and operating and development costs. As a result, estimated
quantities of proved reserves and projections of future production rates and the timing of development expenditures
may prove to be inaccurate. Independent petroleum engineering firms prepare estimates of our proved reserves.
Some of LINN’s reserve estimates are made without the benefit of a lengthy production history, which are less reliable
than estimates based on a lengthy production history. Also, LINN makes certain assumptions regarding future oil,
natural gas and NGL prices, production levels and operating and development costs that may prove incorrect. Any
significant variance from these assumptions by actual amounts could greatly affect LINN’s estimates of reserves, the
economically recoverable quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL attributable to any particular group of properties, the
classifications of reserves based on risk of recovery and estimates of the future net cash flows. Numerous changes
over time to the assumptions on which LINN’s reserve estimates are based, as described above, often result in the
actual quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL LINN ultimately recovers being different from its reserve estimates.
The present value of future net cash flows from LINN’s proved reserves is not necessarily the same as the current
market value of its estimated oil, natural gas and NGL reserves. LINN bases the estimated discounted future net cash
flows from its proved reserves on an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month during the
12-month calendar year and year-end costs. However, actual future net cash flows from its oil and natural gas
properties also will be affected by factors such as:
•   actual prices we receive for oil, natural gas and NGL;
•   the amount and timing of actual production;
•   the timing and success of development activities;
•   supply of and demand for oil, natural gas and NGL; and
•   changes in governmental regulations or taxation.
In addition, the 10% discount factor required to be used under the provisions of applicable accounting standards when
calculating discounted future net cash flows, may not be the most appropriate discount factor based on interest rates
in effect from time to time and risks associated with LINN or the oil and natural gas industry in general.
LINN’s development operations require substantial capital expenditures, which will reduce its cash available
for distribution. LINN may be unable to obtain needed capital or financing on satisfactory terms, which could
lead to a decline in its reserves.
The oil and natural gas industry is capital intensive. LINN makes and expects to continue to make substantial capital
expenditures in its business for the development and production of oil, natural gas and NGL reserves. These
expenditures will reduce LINN’s cash available for distribution. LINN intends to finance its future capital expenditures
with cash flow from operations and, to the extent necessary, with equity and debt offerings or bank borrowings. LINN’s
cash flow from operations and access to capital are subject to a number of variables, including:
•   its proved reserves;
•   the level of oil, natural gas and NGL it is able to produce from existing wells;
•   the prices at which it is able to sell its oil, natural gas and NGL; and
•   its ability to acquire, locate and produce new reserves.
33
Table of Contents
If LINN’s revenues or the borrowing base under its Credit Facility decrease as a result of lower oil, natural gas and
NGL prices, operating difficulties, declines in reserves or for any other reason, it may have limited ability to obtain the
capital necessary to sustain its operations at current levels. LINN’s Credit Facility restricts its ability to obtain new
financing. If additional capital is needed, it may not be able to obtain debt or equity financing on terms favorable to it,
or at all. If cash flow from operations or cash available under the Credit Facility is not sufficient to meet LINN’s capital
requirements, the failure to obtain additional financing could result in a curtailment of its development operations,
which in turn could lead to a possible decline in its reserves.
LINN may decide not to drill some of the prospects it has identified, and locations that it decides to drill may
not yield oil, natural gas and NGL in commercially viable quantities.
LINN’s prospective drilling locations are in various stages of evaluation, ranging from a prospect that is ready to drill
to a prospect that will require additional geological and engineering analysis. Based on a variety of factors, including
future oil, natural gas and NGL prices, the generation of additional seismic or geological information, the availability of
drilling rigs and other factors, LINN may decide not to drill one or more of these prospects. As a result, LINN may not
be able to increase or maintain its reserves or production, which in turn could have an adverse effect on its business,
financial position, results of operations and its ability to pay distributions. In addition, the SEC’s reserve reporting
rules include a general requirement that, subject to limited exceptions, proved undeveloped reserves may only be
booked if they relate to wells scheduled to be drilled within five years of the date of booking. At December 31, 2011,
LINN had 2,302 proved undeveloped drilling locations. To the extent that LINN does not drill these locations within five
years of initial booking, they may not continue to qualify for classification as proved reserves, and LINN may be
required to reclassify such reserves as unproved reserves. The reclassification of such reserves could also have a
negative effect on the borrowing base under the Credit Facility.
The cost of drilling, completing and operating a well is often uncertain, and cost factors can adversely affect the
economics of a well. LINN’s efforts will be uneconomic if it drills dry holes or wells that are productive but do not
produce enough oil, natural gas and NGL to be commercially viable after drilling, operating and other costs. If LINN
drills future wells that it identifies as dry holes, its drilling success rate would decline, which could have an adverse
effect on its business, financial position or results of operations.
LINN’s business depends on gathering and transportation facilities. Any limitation in the availability of those
facilities would interfere with its ability to market the oil, natural gas and NGL it produces, and could reduce
its cash available for distribution and adversely impact expected increases in oil, natural gas and NGL
production from our drilling program.
The marketability of LINN’s oil, natural gas and NGL production depends in part on the availability, proximity and
capacity of gathering and pipeline systems. The amount of oil, natural gas and NGL that can be produced and sold is
subject to limitation in certain circumstances, such as pipeline interruptions due to scheduled and unscheduled
maintenance, excessive pressure, physical damage to the gathering or transportation system, or lack of contracted
capacity on such systems. The curtailments arising from these and similar circumstances may last from a few days
to several months. In many cases, LINN is provided only with limited, if any, notice as to when these circumstances
will arise and their duration. In addition, some of its wells are drilled in locations that are not serviced by gathering and
transportation pipelines, or the gathering and transportation pipelines in the area may not have sufficient capacity to
transport additional production. As a result, LINN may not be able to sell the oil, natural gas and NGL production from
these wells until the necessary gathering and transportation systems are constructed. Any significant curtailment in
gathering system or pipeline capacity, or significant delay in the construction of necessary gathering and
transportation facilities, would interfere with LINN’s ability to market the oil, natural gas and NGL it produces, and
could reduce its cash available for distribution and adversely impact expected increases in oil, natural gas and NGL
production from its drilling program.
Table of Contents
34
LINN depends on certain key customers for sales of our oil, natural gas and NGL. To the extent these and
other customers reduce the volumes they purchase from LINN or delay payment, LINN’s revenues and cash
available for distribution could decline. Further, a general increase in nonpayment could have an adverse
impact on its financial position and results of operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2011, Enbridge Energy Partners, L.P. and DCP Midstream Partners, LP accounted
for approximately 21% and 19%, respectively, of LINN’s total production volumes, or 40% in the aggregate. For the
year ended December 31, 2010, DCP Midstream Partners, LP, Enbridge Energy Partners, L.P. and ConocoPhillips
accounted for approximately 19%, 17% and 12%, respectively, of LINN’s total volumes, or 48% in the aggregate. To
the extent these and other customers reduce the volumes of oil, natural gas or NGL that they purchase from LINN, its
revenues and cash available for distribution could decline.
Many of LINN’s leases are in areas that have been partially depleted or drained by offset wells.
LINN’s key project areas are located in some of the most active drilling areas of the producing basins in the U.S. As a
result, many of its leases are in areas that have already been partially depleted or drained by earlier offset drilling.
This may inhibit its ability to find economically recoverable quantities of reserves in these areas.
LINN’s identified drilling location inventories are scheduled out over several years, making them susceptible to
uncertainties that could materially alter the occurrence or timing of their drilling, resulting in temporarily lower cash
from operations, which may impact LINN’s ability to pay distributions.
LINN’s management has specifically identified and scheduled drilling locations as an estimation of LINN’s future multi-
year drilling activities on its existing acreage. As of December 31, 2011, LINN had identified 6,456 drilling locations, of
which 2,302 were proved undeveloped locations and 4,154 were other locations. These identified drilling locations
represent a significant part of LINN’s growth strategy. Its ability to drill and develop these locations depends on a
number of factors, including the availability of capital, seasonal conditions, regulatory approvals, oil, natural gas and
NGL prices, costs and drilling results. In addition, DeGolyer and MacNaughton has not estimated proved reserves for
the 4,154 other drilling locations LINN has identified and scheduled for drilling, and therefore there may be greater
uncertainty with respect to the success of drilling wells at these drilling locations. LINN’s final determination on
whether to drill any of these drilling locations will be dependent upon the factors described above as well as, to some
degree, the results of its drilling activities with respect to its proved drilling locations. Because of these uncertainties,
LINN does not know if the numerous drilling locations it has identified will be drilled within its expected timeframe or
will ever be drilled or if it will be able to produce oil, natural gas and NGL from these or any other potential drilling
locations. As such, LINN’s actual drilling activities may materially differ from those presently identified, which could
adversely affect its business.
Drilling for and producing oil, natural gas and NGL are high risk activities with many uncertainties that could
adversely affect LINN’s financial position or results of operations and, as a result, its ability to pay
distributions to its unitholders.
LINN’s drilling activities are subject to many risks, including the risk that it will not discover commercially productive
reservoirs. Drilling for oil, natural gas and NGL can be uneconomic, not only from dry holes, but also from productive
wells that do not produce sufficient revenues to be commercially viable. In addition, LINN’s drilling and producing
operations may be curtailed, delayed or canceled as a result of other factors, including:
•   the high cost, shortages or delivery delays of equipment and services;
•   unexpected operational events;
•   adverse weather conditions;
•   facility or equipment malfunctions;
35
Table of Contents
•   title problems;
•   pipeline ruptures or spills;
•   compliance with environmental and other governmental requirements;
•   unusual or unexpected geological formations;
•   loss of drilling fluid circulation;
•   formations with abnormal pressures;
•   fires;
•   blowouts, craterings and explosions; and
•
uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas and NGL or well fluids.
uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas and NGL or well fluids.
Any of these events can cause increased costs or restrict LINN’s ability to drill the wells and conduct the operations
which it currently has planned. Any delay in the drilling program or significant increase in costs could impact LINN’s
ability to generate sufficient cash flow to pay quarterly distributions to its unitholders at the current distribution level or
at all. Increased costs could include losses from personal injury or loss of life, damage to or destruction of property,
natural resources and equipment, pollution, environmental contamination, loss of wells and regulatory penalties. LINN
ordinarily maintains insurance against certain losses and liabilities arising from its operations. However, it is
impossible to insure against all operational risks in the course of LINN’s business. Additionally, LINN may elect not to
obtain insurance if it believes that the cost of available insurance is excessive relative to the perceived risks
presented. Losses could therefore occur for uninsurable or uninsured risks or in amounts in excess of existing
insurance coverage. The occurrence of an event that is not fully covered by insurance could have a material adverse
impact on LINN’s business activities, financial position and results of operations.
Because LINN handles oil, natural gas and NGL and other hydrocarbons, it may incur significant costs and
liabilities in the future resulting from a failure to comply with new or existing environmental regulations or an
accidental release of hazardous substances into the environment.
The operations of LINN’s wells, gathering systems, turbines, pipelines and other facilities are subject to stringent and
complex federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations. Failure to comply with these laws and
regulations may trigger a variety of administrative, civil and criminal enforcement measures, including the assessment
of monetary penalties, the imposition of remedial requirements, and the issuance of orders enjoining future operations.
There is an inherent risk that LINN may incur environmental costs and liabilities due to the nature of its business and
the substances it handles. Certain environmental statutes, including the RCRA, CERCLA and analogous state laws
and regulations, impose strict, joint and several liability for costs required to clean up and restore sites where
hazardous substances have been disposed of or otherwise released. In addition, an accidental release from one of
LINN’s wells or gathering pipelines could subject it to substantial liabilities arising from environmental cleanup and
restoration costs, claims made by neighboring landowners and other third parties for personal injury and property
damage and fines or penalties for related violations of environmental laws or regulations.
Moreover, the possibility exists that stricter laws, regulations or enforcement policies could significantly increase
LINN’s compliance costs and the cost of any remediation that may become necessary, and these costs may not be
recoverable from insurance. For a more detailed discussion of environmental and regulatory matters impacting LINN’s
business, please read “Business—LINN—Environmental Matters and Regulation.”
LINN is subject to complex federal, state, local and other laws and regulations that could adversely affect the
cost, manner or feasibility of doing business.
LINN’s operations are regulated extensively at the federal, state and local levels. Environmental and other
governmental laws and regulations have increased the costs to plan, design, drill, install, operate and abandon oil
Table of Contents
36
and natural gas wells. Under these laws and regulations, LINN could also be liable for personal injuries, property
damage and other damages. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in the suspension or
termination of LINN’s operations and subject it to administrative, civil and criminal penalties. Moreover, public interest
in environmental protection has increased in recent years, and environmental organizations have opposed, with some
success, certain drilling projects.
Part of the regulatory environment in which LINN operates includes, in some cases, legal requirements for obtaining
environmental assessments, environmental impact studies and/or plans of development before commencing drilling
and production activities. In addition, LINN’s activities are subject to the regulations regarding conservation practices
and protection of correlative rights. These regulations affect LINN’s operations and limit the quantity of oil, natural gas
and NGL it may produce and sell. A major risk inherent in LINN’s drilling plans is the need to obtain drilling permits
from state and local authorities. Delays in obtaining regulatory approvals or drilling permits, the failure to obtain a
drilling permit for a well or the receipt of a permit with unreasonable conditions or costs could have a material adverse
effect on LINN’s ability to develop its properties. Additionally, the regulatory environment could change in ways that
might substantially increase the financial and managerial costs of compliance with these laws and regulations and,
consequently, adversely affect LINN’s ability to pay distributions to its unitholders. For a description of the laws and
regulations that affect us, please read “Business—LINN—Environmental Matters and Regulation.”
Federal and state legislation and regulatory initiatives related to hydraulic fracturing could result in increased
costs and operating restrictions or delays.
Hydraulic fracturing is an important and common practice that is used to stimulate production of hydrocarbons from
tight formations. Due to concerns raised relating to potential impacts of hydraulic fracturing on groundwater quality,
legislative and regulatory efforts at the federal level and in some states have been initiated to render permitting and
compliance requirements more stringent for hydraulic fracturing or prohibit the activity altogether. For example, the
EPA has asserted federal regulatory authority over hydraulic fracturing involving diesel additives under the Safe
Drinking Water Act’s Underground Injection Control Program and has begun the process of drafting guidance
documents related to this newly asserted regulatory authority. In addition, both Texas and Louisiana have adopted
disclosure regulations requiring varying degrees of disclosure of the constituents in hydraulic fracturing fluids. Such
efforts could have an adverse effect on LINN’s oil and natural gas production activities. For a more detailed
discussion of hydraulic fracturing matters impacting LINN’s business, please read “Business—LINN—Environmental
Matters and Regulation.”
Risks Inherent in an Investment in LinnCo
Our cash flow consists exclusively of distributions from LINN.
Our only assets will be units representing limited liability company interests in LINN that we own. Our cash flow will be
therefore completely dependent upon the ability of LINN to make distributions to its unitholders. The amount of cash
that LINN can distribute to its unitholders, including us, each quarter principally depends upon the amount of cash it
generates from its operations, which will fluctuate from quarter to quarter based on, among other things:
•   produced volumes of oil, natural gas and NGL;
•   prices at which oil, natural gas and NGL production is sold;
•   level of its operating costs;
•   payment of interest, which depends on the amount of its indebtedness and the interest payable thereon; and
•   level of its capital expenditures.
37
Table of Contents
In addition, the actual amount of cash that LINN will have available for distribution will depend on other factors, some
of which are beyond its control, including:
•   availability of borrowings on acceptable terms under its credit facility to pay distributions;
•   the costs of acquisitions, if any;
•   fluctuations in its working capital needs;
•   timing and collectibility of receivables;
•   restrictions on distributions contained in its credit facility and the indentures governing its senior notes;
•   prevailing economic conditions;
•   access to credit or capital markets; and
•   the amount of cash reserves established by its board of directors for the proper conduct of its business.
Because of these factors, LINN may not have sufficient available cash each quarter to pay the current distribution of
$0.725 per quarter or any other amount. Furthermore, the amount of cash that LINN has available for distribution
depends primarily upon its cash flow, including cash flow from financial reserves and working capital borrowings, and
is not solely a function of profitability, which will be affected by non-cash items. As a result, LINN may be able to
make cash distributions during periods when it records net losses and may not be able to make cash distributions
during periods when it records net income. Please read “—Risks Related to LINN’s Business” for a discussion of risks
affecting LINN’s ability to generate distributable cash flow.
We will incur corporate income tax liabilities on income allocated to us by LINN with respect to LINN units we
own, which may be substantial.
We are classified as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes and, in most states in which LINN does
business, for state income tax purposes. Under current law, we will be subject to U.S. federal income tax at rates of
up to 35% (and a 20% alternative minimum tax in certain cases), and to state income tax at rates that vary from state
to state, on the net income allocated to us by LINN with respect to the LINN units we own. The amount of cash
available for distribution to you will be reduced by the amount of any such income taxes payable by us for which we
establish reserves.
Although we currently estimate that our income tax liability for each of the periods ending December 31, 2012, 2013,
2014 and 2015 will not exceed     % of the distributions we receive from LINN with respect to the applicable period
(please read “Our Dividend Policy”), that estimate is based upon a number of assumptions regarding LINN’s earnings
from its operations, the amount of those earnings allocated to us, our income tax liabilities and the amount of the
distributions paid to us by LINN that may prove incorrect, including:
•   LINN will not significantly decrease its drilling activity;
LINN will not significantly decrease its drilling activity;
•   there will not be an issuance of significant additional units by LINN without a corresponding increase in the
aggregate tax deductions generated by LINN;
•   proposed legislation that would eliminate the current deduction of intangible drilling costs and other tax
incentives to the oil and natural gas industry will not be enacted; and
•   there will not be a significant increase in oil and natural gas prices.
Events inconsistent with our assumptions could cause our income tax liabilities to be substantially higher than
estimated (and could therefore cause our quarterly dividends to be substantially lower than the quarterly distributions
on LINN units). Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences—Consequences to U.S. Holders—
Distributions on the Shares.”
Moreover, after December 31, 2015, our income tax liabilities may increase substantially. For example, distributions
that we receive with respect to our LINN units that exceed the net income allocated to us by LINN
Table of Contents
38
with respect to those units decrease our tax basis in those units. When our tax basis in our LINN units is reduced to
zero and any loss or other carryovers are fully utilized, the distributions we receive from LINN in excess of net income
allocated to us by LINN will effectively be fully taxable to us, without any deductions.
Changes to current U.S. federal tax laws may affect our ability to take certain tax deductions.
Substantive changes to the existing U.S. federal income tax laws have been proposed that, if adopted, would affect,
among other things, our ability to take certain deductions related to LINN’s operations, including deductions for
intangible drilling costs and percentage depletion and deductions for costs associated with U.S. production activities.
We are unable to predict whether any changes, or other proposals to such laws, ultimately will be enacted. Any such
changes could negatively impact the value of an investment in our shares.
There is no existing market for our shares. Following this offering, an active trading market for our shares
may not develop, and even if such a market does develop, the market price of our shares may be less than the
price you paid for your shares and less than the market price of LINN units. The market price of our shares
may fluctuate significantly, and you could lose all or part of your investment.
Prior to this offering, there has been no public market for our shares. After this offering, there will be only
                publicly traded shares, assuming no exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We
do not know the extent to which investor interest will lead to the development of a trading market or how liquid that
market might be. You may not be able to resell your shares at or above the initial public offering price.
The initial public offering price for the shares will be determined by negotiations between us and the representatives of
the underwriters and may not be indicative of the market price of the shares that will prevail in the trading market. The
market price of our shares may decline below the initial public offering price. The market price of our shares may also
be influenced by many factors, some of which are beyond our control, including:
the trading price of LINN units;
•   the trading price of LINN units;
•   the level of LINN’s quarterly distributions and our quarterly dividends;
•   LINN’s quarterly or annual earnings or those of other companies in its industry;
•   the loss of a large customer by LINN;
•   announcements by LINN or its competitors of significant contracts or acquisitions;
•   changes in accounting standards, policies, guidance, interpretations or principles;
•   general economic conditions;
•   future sales of our shares; and
•   other factors described in these “Risk Factors.”
Our shareholders will only be able to indirectly vote on matters on which LINN unitholders are entitled to
vote, and our shareholders are not entitled to vote to elect our directors.
Our shareholders will only be able to indirectly vote on matters on which LINN unitholders are entitled to vote, and our
shareholders are not entitled to vote to elect our directors. Therefore, you will only be able to indirectly influence the
management and board of directors of LINN, and you will not be able to directly influence or change our management
or board of directors. If our shareholders are dissatisfied with the performance of our directors, they will have no ability
to remove the directors and will have no right on an annual or ongoing basis to elect our board of directors. Rather, our
board of directors will be appointed by the holder of our voting share, which will be LINN. As a result of these
limitations, the price at which the shares will trade could be lower because of the absence or reduction of a takeover
premium in the trading price. Our limited liability company agreement also contains provisions limiting the ability of
holders of our shares to call meetings or to obtain information about our operations, as well as other provisions limiting
the ability of holders of our shares to influence the manner or direction of management.
Table of Contents
39
LINN may issue additional units without your approval or other classes of units, and we may issue additional
shares, which would dilute our direct and your indirect ownership interest in LINN and your ownership
interest in us.
LINN’s limited liability company agreement does not limit the number of additional limited liability company interests,
including interests that rank senior to the LINN units, that it may issue at any time without the approval of its
unitholders. The issuance by LINN of additional units or other equity securities of equal or senior rank will have the
following effects:
•   our proportionate ownership interest in LINN will decrease;
•   the amount of cash available for distribution on each LINN unit may decrease, resulting in a decrease in the
amount of cash available to pay dividends to you;
•   the relative voting strength of each previously outstanding unit, including the LINN units we hold and vote in
accordance with the vote of our unitholders, will be diminished; and
•   the market price of the LINN units may decline, resulting in a decline in the market price of our shares.
In addition, our limited liability company agreement does not limit the number of additional shares that we may issue
at any time without your approval. The issuance by us of additional shares will have the following effects:
•   your proportionate ownership interest in us will decrease;
•   the relative voting strength of each previously outstanding share you own will be diminished; and
•   the market price of our shares may decline.
Your shares are subject to limited call rights that could result in your having to involuntarily sell your shares
at a time or price that may be undesirable.
If LINN or any of its affiliates owns 80% or more of our outstanding shares, LINN has the right, which it may assign to
any of its affiliates, to purchase all of our remaining outstanding shares, at a purchase price not less than the then-
current market price of our shares. If LINN exercises any of its rights to purchase our shares, you may be required to
sell your shares at a time or price that may be undesirable, and you could receive less than you paid for your shares.
Any sale of our shares, to LINN or otherwise, for cash will be a taxable transaction to the owner of the shares sold.
Accordingly, a gain or loss will be recognized on the sale equal to the difference between the cash received and the
owner’s tax basis in the shares sold.
In addition, if at any time a person owns more than 90% of the outstanding LINN units, such person may elect to
purchase all, but not less than all, of the remaining outstanding LINN units at a price equal to the higher of the current
market price (as defined in LINN’s limited liability company agreement) and the highest price paid by such person or
any of its affiliates for any LINN units purchased during the 90-day period preceding the date notice was mailed to the
LINN unitholders informing them of such election. In this case, we will be required to tender all of our outstanding
LINN units and distribute the cash we receive, net of income taxes payable by us, to our shareholders. Following such
distribution, we will dissolve and wind up our affairs. Thus, upon the election of a holder of 90% of the outstanding
LINN units, you may receive a distribution that is effectively less than the price at which you would prefer to sell your
shares.
The terms of our shares may be changed in ways you may not like, because our board of directors will have
the power to change the terms of our shares in ways our board determines, in its sole discretion, are not
materially adverse to you.
As an owner of our shares, you may not like the changes made to the terms of our shares, if any, and you may
disagree with our board of directors’ decision that the changes are not materially adverse to you as a
Table of Contents
40
shareholder. Your recourse if you disagree will be limited because our limited liability company agreement gives broad
latitude and discretion to our board of directors and limits the fiduciary duties that our officers and directors otherwise
would owe to you.
Our limited liability company agreement limits the fiduciary duties owed by our officers and directors to our
shareholders, and LINN’s limited liability company agreement limits the fiduciary duties owed by LINN’s
officers and directors to its unitholders, including us.
Our limited liability company agreement has modified, waived and limited the fiduciary duties of our directors and
officers that would otherwise apply at law or in equity and replaced such duties with a contractual duty requiring our
directors and officers to act in good faith. For purposes of our limited liability company agreement, a person shall be
deemed to have acted in good faith if the action or omission of action was taken with the belief that it was in, or not
opposed to, the best interests of LinnCo and our shareholders. In addition, any action or omission shall be deemed to
be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of LinnCo and our shareholders if such action or omission of action would
be in, or not opposed to, the best interest of LINN and all its unitholders, taken together.
The above modifications of fiduciary duties are expressly permitted by Delaware law. Thus, we and our shareholders
will only have recourse and be able to seek remedies against our board of directors if they breach their obligations
pursuant to our limited liability company agreement. Furthermore, even if there has been a breach of the obligations
set forth in our limited liability company agreement, that agreement provides that our directors and officers will not be
liable to us or our shareholders, except for acts or omissions not in good faith.
These provisions restrict the remedies available to our shareholders for actions that without those limitations might
constitute breaches of duty, including fiduciary duties. In addition, LINN’s limited liability company agreement also
limits the fiduciary duties owed by LINN’s officers and directors to its unitholders, including us.
Our shares may trade at a substantial discount to the trading price of LINN units.
We cannot predict whether our shares will trade at a discount or premium to the trading price of LINN units. If we incur
substantial corporate income tax liabilities on income allocated to us by LINN with respect to LINN units we own, the
quarterly dividend of cash you receive per share will be substantially less than the quarterly per unit distribution of
cash that we receive from LINN. In addition, upon a Terminal Transaction, the net proceeds you receive from us per
share may, as a result of our corporate income tax liabilities on the transaction and other factors, be substantially
lower than the net proceeds per unit received by a direct LINN unitholder. As a result of these considerations, our
shares may trade at a substantial discount to the trading price of LINN units. See “Description of the Limited Liability
Company Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement—Terminal Transactions Involving LINN.”
We will be a “controlled company” within the meaning of the NASDAQ rules and intend to rely on exemptions
from various corporate governance requirements immediately following the closing of this offering.
We intend to apply to list our shares on the NASDAQ Global Select Market. A company of which more than 50% of
the voting power for the election of directors is held by an individual, a group or another company is a “controlled
company” within the meaning of the NASDAQ rules. A “controlled company” may elect not to comply with various
corporate governance requirements of NASDAQ, including the requirement that a majority of its board of directors
consist of independent directors, the requirement that its nominating and governance committee consist of all
independent directors and the requirement that its compensation committee consist of all independent directors.
Following this offering, we believe that we will be a “controlled company” since LINN will hold our sole voting share
and will have the sole power to elect our board of directors. See “Description of the Limited
Table of Contents
41
Liability Company Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement—Voting Rights.” Because we intend to rely
on certain of the “controlled company” exemptions and will not have a compensation committee or a nominating and
corporate governance committee, you may not have the same corporate governance advantages afforded to
stockholders of companies that are subject to all of the corporate governance requirements of NASDAQ.
Tax Risks to Shareholders
Upon a Terminal Transaction, we may be entitled to a smaller distribution per LINN unit we own than other
LINN unitholders, and we may incur substantial corporate income tax liabilities in the transaction or upon the
distribution of the proceeds from the transaction to you, in which case the net proceeds you receive from us
per share may be substantially lower than the net proceeds per unit received by a direct LINN unitholder.
Upon a liquidation of LINN, LINN unitholders will receive distributions in accordance with the positive balances in their
respective capital accounts in their units. Please read “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—
LINN’s Limited Liability Company Agreement—Liquidation and Distribution of Proceeds.” As a result of the
underwriting discount and offering expenses incurred in connection with this offering, we will acquire LINN units at a
price lower than the current market price of LINN units. Therefore, our capital account in the LINN units that we will
own initially will be lower than the capital accounts of other LINN unitholders in their LINN units. Therefore, we would
be entitled upon a dissolution of LINN to a smaller distribution per LINN unit we own than other LINN unitholders,
unless adjustments were made to our capital accounts in the LINN units that we will own.
Each time LINN issues or redeems units, it is required to adjust the capital accounts in all outstanding LINN units
upward to the extent of the “unrealized gains” in LINN’s assets or downward to the extent of the “unrealized losses” in
LINN’s assets immediately prior to such issuance or redemption. In general, the difference between the fair market
value of each such asset and its adjusted tax basis equals the unrealized gain (if the fair market value exceeds the
adjusted tax basis) or the unrealized loss (if the adjusted tax basis exceeds the fair market value). Unrealized gains
and unrealized losses generally are allocated among the LINN unitholders in the same manner as other items of LINN
income, gain, deduction or loss.
The board of directors of LINN, however, is authorized to make disproportionate allocations of income and deductions,
including allocations of unrealized gains and unrealized losses, to the extent necessary to cause the capital accounts
of all LINN units to be the same. We anticipate that there will be sufficient unrealized gains or unrealized losses in
connection with future issuances or redemptions of LINN units in order for LINN to allocate to us sufficient unrealized
gains, or to allocate sufficient unrealized losses to other holders of LINN units, to cause the capital accounts in the
LINN units that we will own to be the same as the capital accounts of all other LINN units and result in our being
entitled upon the dissolution of LINN to the same distribution per LINN unit we will own as other LINN unitholders.
However, there can be no assurance that such adjustments will occur or that any adjustments that do occur will be
sufficient to eliminate the difference between our capital account in the LINN units that we will own and the capital
accounts of other LINN unitholders in their LINN units.
We are classified as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes and, in most states in which LINN does
business, for state income tax purposes. Upon a Terminal Transaction, we will be required to liquidate and distribute
the net after-tax proceeds of the transaction to you. Please read “Description of the Limited Liability Company
Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement—Terminal Transactions Involving LINN.” We may incur
substantial corporate income tax liabilities upon such a transaction or upon our distribution to you of the proceeds of
the transaction. The tax liability we incur will depend in part upon the amount by which the value of the LINN units we
own exceeds our tax basis in the units. We expect our tax basis in our LINN units to decrease over time as we
receive distributions that exceed the net income allocated to us by LINN with respect to those units. As a result, we
may incur substantial income tax liabilities upon such a transaction even if LINN
Table of Contents
42
units decrease in value after we purchase them. The amount of cash or other property available for distribution to you
upon our liquidation will be reduced by the amount of any such income taxes paid by us. See “Description of the
Limited Liability Company Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement—Terminal Transactions Involving
LINN.”
As a result of these factors, upon a Terminal Transaction, the net proceeds you receive from us per share may be
substantially lower than the net proceeds per unit received by a direct LINN unitholder.
Your tax gain on the disposition of our shares could be more than expected, or your tax loss on the
disposition of our shares could be less than expected.
If you sell your shares, or you receive a liquidating distribution from us, you will recognize a gain or loss for U.S.
federal income tax purposes equal to the difference between the amount realized and your tax basis in those shares.
Because distributions in excess of your allocable share of our earnings and profits decrease your tax basis in your
shares, the amount, if any, of such prior excess distributions with respect to the shares you sell or dispose of will, in
effect, become taxable gain to you if you sell such shares at a price greater than your tax basis in those shares, even
if the price you receive is less than your original cost. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences.”
If you are a U.S. holder of our shares, the IRS Forms 1099-DIV that you receive from your broker may over-
report your dividend income with respect to our shares for U.S. federal income tax purposes, and failure to
over-report your dividend income in a manner consistent with the IRS Forms 1099-DIV that you receive from
your broker may cause the IRS to assert audit adjustments to your U.S. federal income tax return. If you are a
non-U.S. holder of our shares, your broker or other withholding agent may overwithhold taxes from dividends
paid to you, in which case you would have to file a U.S. tax return if you wanted to claim a refund of the
overwithheld tax.
Dividends we pay with respect to our shares will constitute “dividends” for U.S. federal income tax purposes only to
the extent of our current and accumulated earnings and profits. Dividends we pay in excess of our earnings and
profits will not be treated as “dividends” for U.S. federal income tax purposes; instead, they will be treated first as a
tax-free return of capital to the extent of your tax basis in your shares and then as capital gain realized on the sale or
exchange of such shares. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences.” We may be unable to
timely determine the portion of our distributions that is a “dividend” for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
If you are a U.S. holder of our shares, we may be unable to persuade brokers to prepare the IRS Forms 1099-DIV that
they send to you in a manner that is consistent with our determination of the amount that constitutes a “dividend” to
you for U.S. federal income tax purposes. We will attempt to timely notify you of available information to assist you
with your income tax reporting (such as posting the correct information on our web site). However, the information that
we provide to you may be inconsistent with the amounts reported to you by your broker on IRS Form 1099-DIV, and
the IRS may disagree with any such information and may make audit adjustments to your tax return.
If you are a non-U.S. holder of our shares, “dividends” for U.S. federal income tax purposes will be subject to
withholding of U.S. federal income tax at a 30% rate (or such lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income
tax treaty) unless the dividends are effectively connected with your conduct of U.S. trade or business. Please read
“Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences—Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders.” Because we may be unable
to timely determine the portion of our distributions that is a “dividend” for U.S. federal income tax purposes or we may
be unable to persuade your broker or withholding agent to withhold taxes from distributions in a manner consistent
with our determination of the amount that constitutes a “dividend” for such purposes, your broker or other withholding
agent may overwithhold taxes from distributions paid to you. In such a case, you would have to file a U.S. tax return
to claim a refund of the overwithheld tax.
43
Table of Contents
If LINN were subject to a material amount of entity-level income taxes or similar taxes, whether as a result of
being treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, the value of LINN units
would be substantially reduced and, as a result, the value of our shares would be substantially reduced.
The anticipated benefit of an investment in LINN units depends largely on the assumption that LINN will not be
subject to a material amount of entity-level income taxes or similar taxes, and the anticipated benefit of an investment
in our shares depends largely upon the value of LINN units.
LINN may be subject to material entity-level U.S. federal income tax and state income taxes if it is treated as a
corporation, rather than as a partnership, for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Because LINN’s units are publicly
traded, Section 7704 of the Internal Revenue Code requires that LINN derive at least 90% of its gross income each
year from the marketing of oil and natural gas, or from certain other specified activities, in order to be treated as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. We believe that LINN has satisfied this requirement and will
continue to do so in the future, so we believe LINN is and will be treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax
purposes. However, we have not obtained a ruling from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service regarding LINN’s treatment
as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Moreover, current law or the business of LINN may change so
as to cause LINN to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise subject LINN to
material entity-level U.S. federal income taxes, state income taxes or similar taxes. For example, one recent
legislative proposal would eliminate the qualifying income exception upon which LINN relies for its treatment as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Any modification to current law or interpretations thereof may or
may not be applied retroactively and could make it more difficult or impossible to meet the requirements for
partnership status, affect or cause LINN to change its business activities, change the character or treatment of
portions of LINN’s income and adversely affect our investment in LINN units.
If LINN were treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, it would be subject to U.S. federal income
tax at rates of up to 35% (and a 20% alternative minimum tax in certain cases), and to state income tax at rates that
vary from state to state, on its taxable income. Distributions from LINN would generally be taxed again as corporate
distributions, and no income, gain, loss, deduction or credit would flow through to LINN unitholders. Any income taxes
or similar taxes imposed on LINN as an entity, whether as a result of LINN’s treatment as a corporation for U.S.
federal income tax purposes or otherwise, would reduce LINN’s cash available for distribution to its unitholders. Any
material reduction in the anticipated cash flow and after-tax return to LINN unitholders would reduce the value of the
LINN units we own and the value of our shares. In addition, if LINN were treated as a corporation for U.S. federal
income tax purposes, that would constitute a Terminal Transaction. See “Description of the Limited Liability Company
Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement—Terminal Transactions Involving LINN.”
Also, because of widespread state budget deficits and other reasons, several states are evaluating ways to subject
partnerships and limited liability companies to entity level taxation through the imposition of state income, franchise or
other forms of taxation. For example, LINN is required to pay Texas franchise tax at a maximum effective rate of
0.7% of its total revenue apportioned to Texas in the prior year. Imposition of a tax on LINN by any other state would
reduce the amount of cash available for distribution to us.
Table of Contents
44
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will use the estimated net proceeds of approximately $        million from this offering ($        million if the
underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional shares in full), after deducting underwriting discounts, to
purchase from LINN a number of LINN units equal to the number of shares sold in this offering. The per unit price we
will pay for such LINN units will be equal to the net proceeds we receive on a per share basis. LINN will pay our
expenses incurred in connection with this offering.
LINN intends to use the proceeds it receives from the sale of LINN units to repay debt outstanding under its revolving
credit facility, finance its acquisition strategy and pay estimated expenses of this offering. LINN intends to retain the
remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Intended Use
Repay borrowings outstanding under LINN’s revolving credit
facility
Finance LINN’s acquisition strategy
Pay estimated offering expenses
General corporate purposes
Intended Amount
Dedicated
to Such Use
(in millions)
$                                                         
$                                                         
$                                                         
$
As of June 30, 2012, LINN had approximately $1.2 billion of indebtedness outstanding under its revolving credit
facility, with a weighted average interest rate of 2.02%. The revolving credit facility matures in April 2017, and, at
LINN’s election, borrowings bear interest at either the London Interbank Offered Rate, plus an applicable margin
between 1.5% and 2.5% per annum (depending on the then-current level of borrowings under the revolving credit
facility), or at a base rate, plus an applicable margin between 0.5% and 1.5% per annum (depending on the then-
current level of borrowings under the revolving credit facility). Borrowings made under LINN’s revolving credit facility
within the past twelve months were used primarily to finance LINN’s acquisition strategy.
Affiliates of certain of the underwriters in this offering are lenders under LINN’s Credit Facility and, accordingly, if LINN
elects to use the proceeds it receives from LinnCo to repay debt outstanding under its Credit Facility, those lenders
would indirectly receive a portion of the net proceeds from this offering. Please read “Underwriting—FINRA Rules.”
Table of Contents
45
The following table sets forth our capitalization as of April 30, 2012:
CAPITALIZATION OF LINNCO
•   on an historical basis; and
•   on an adjusted basis to give effect to the sale of                 shares offered by us at an assumed initial public
offering price of $        per share (the midpoint of the range set forth on the cover page of this prospectus),
after deducting underwriting discounts, and the application of the net proceeds as described in “Use of
Proceeds.”
You should read this table together with “Use of Proceeds” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations.”
Equity
Voting share
Non-voting shares
Total capitalization
46
At April 30, 2012
As Adjusted
Historical    
  
$ 1,000    
  —      
   
    
$ 1,000
$
1,000
$
Table of Contents
CAPITALIZATION OF LINN
The following table sets forth the cash and cash equivalents and consolidated capitalization of Linn Energy, LLC at
June 30, 2012:
•   on an historical basis; and
•   on an adjusted basis to give effect to the offering and sale of                 LINN units to LinnCo at an assumed
price of $        per LINN unit (based on the midpoint of the range set forth on the cover page of this
prospectus), after deducting estimated offering expenses, and the application of the net proceeds as
described in “Use of Proceeds.”
The following table is unaudited and should be read together with “Use of Proceeds,” “Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and LINN’s historical financial statements and the related
notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Cash and cash equivalents(1)
Long-term debt:
Credit Facility(2)
2017 notes, net
2018 notes, net
May 2019 notes, net
November 2019 notes, net
2020 notes, net
2021 notes, net
Total long-term debt, net
Total unitholders’ capital
Total capitalization
At June 30, 2012
Historical
(in thousands)
As Adjusted 
 
$
$
$
$
1,883    
    
  
$ 1,150,000    
39,288    
 
 
13,926    
 
744,875    
  1,799,808    
  1,272,958    
 
984,692    
   
    
  6,005,547    
  4,131,663    
   
    
$10,137,210
(1) As of                     , 2012, LINN had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $        million.
(2) As of                     , 2012, LINN had total borrowings of approximately $        outstanding under its Credit
Facility.
Table of Contents
47
OUR DIVIDEND POLICY
In addition to the following discussion of our dividend policy, please read “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk
Factors” for information regarding statements that do not relate strictly to historical or current facts and certain risks
inherent in LINN’s business and our shares. For additional information regarding the historical operating results of
LINN, you should refer to the historical financial statements of LINN included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Our Dividend Policy
Within five business days after we receive a distribution on our LINN units, we will pay dividends on our shares of the
cash we receive as distributions in respect of our LINN units, net of reserves for income taxes payable by us. If
distributions are made on the LINN units other than in cash, we will pay a dividend on our shares in substantially the
same form, provided that if LINN makes a distribution on the LINN units in the form of additional LINN units, we would
distribute an equal number of additional shares to our shareholders, such that, immediately following such
distributions, the number of our shares outstanding is equal to the number of LINN units we hold.
Because we have elected to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, we are obligated to pay
U.S. federal income tax on the net income allocated to us by LINN with respect to the LINN units we own, and we
may be subject to a 20% alternative minimum tax on our alternative minimum taxable income to the extent that the
alternative minimum tax exceeds our regular income tax. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences—LinnCo U.S. Federal Income Taxation.” We are also classified as a corporation in most states in
which LINN does business for state income tax purposes and will be subject to state income tax at rates that vary
from state to state on the net income allocated to us by LINN with respect to the LINN units we own.
The reserves for income taxes payable by us will account for the U.S. federal income taxes, any alternative minimum
taxes, and the state income taxes described in the preceding paragraph. We have estimated that for each of the
periods ending December 31, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 the amount of such taxes (and, therefore, the amount of
such reserves) will not exceed an amount equal to     % of the cash we receive as distributions in respect of our LINN
units.
This estimate is based on a number of assumptions regarding LINN’s earnings from its operations, the amount of
those earnings allocated to us, our income tax liabilities and the amount of the distributions paid to us by LINN that
may prove incorrect, including:
•   LINN will not significantly decrease its drilling activity;
•   there will not be an issuance of significant additional units by LINN without a corresponding increase in the
aggregate tax deductions generated by LINN;
•   proposed legislation that would eliminate the current deduction of intangible drilling costs and other tax
incentives to the oil and natural gas industry will not be enacted; and
•   there will not be a significant increase in oil and natural gas prices.
Events inconsistent with our assumptions could cause our tax liabilities to be substantially higher than estimated
(and, therefore, cause our reserves for taxes to be higher than estimated and dividends on our shares to be lower than
estimated). Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences—Consequences to U.S. Holders—
Distributions on the Shares.”
LINN’s Distribution Policy
LINN will make quarterly distributions to its unitholders of all “available cash.”
Table of Contents
48
“Available cash” means, for each fiscal quarter, all cash on hand at the end of the quarter less the amount of cash
reserves established by the LINN board of directors to:
•   provide for the proper conduct of business (including reserves for future capital expenditures, future debt
service requirements and anticipated credit needs); and
•   comply with applicable laws, debt instruments or other agreements;
plus all cash on hand on the date of determination of available cash for the quarter resulting from working capital
borrowings made after the end of the quarter for which the determination is being made. Working capital borrowings
are borrowings that will be made under LINN’s credit facility and in all cases are used solely for working capital
purposes or to pay distributions to unitholders.
LINN’s Historical Distributions
The following sets forth LINN’s historical distributions for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010 and for the
six months ended June 30, 2012. Distributions declared during each quarter are presented.
Quarter
2012 (1)
April 1 – June 30
January 1 – March 31
2011:
October 1 – December 31
July 1 – September 30
Cash
Distributions
Declared
Per Unit
$
$
$
0.725  
0.69
0.69
July 1 – September 30
April 1 – June 30
January 1 – March 31
2010:
October 1 – December 31
July 1 – September 30
April 1 – June 30
January 1 – March 31
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
0.69  
0.66  
0.66
0.66  
0.63  
0.63  
0.63
(1) On July 24, 2012, LINN declared a cash distribution of $0.725 per unit, which will be paid on August 14, 2012, to
unitholders of record at the close of business on August 7, 2012.
Table of Contents
49
SELECTED HISTORICAL FINANCIAL AND OPERATING DATA OF LINN
The following table shows summary historical financial and operating data of LINN as of the dates and for the periods
indicated. The selected historical financial data presented for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2008 are
derived from LINN’s historical audited financial statements. The selected historical financial data presented as of
December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 and for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011 are derived from the
historical audited financial statements that are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The selected historical financial
data of LINN presented as of June 30, 2012 and for the six months ended June 30, 2011 and 2012 are derived from
the unaudited historical financial statements that are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The following table should
be read together with, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, the historical and unaudited financial statements
and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this prospectus. The table should also be read together with
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Because of rapid growth through acquisitions and development of properties, LINN’s historical results of operations
and period-to-period comparisons of these results and certain other financial data may not be meaningful or indicative
of future results. The results of LINN’s Appalachian Basin and Mid Atlantic Well Service, Inc. operations, which were
disposed of in 2008, are classified as discontinued operations, due to post-closing adjustments, for the years ended
December 31, 2007 through December 31, 2009. Unless otherwise indicated, results of operations information
presented herein relates only to continuing operations.
Statement of operations data:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas
liquids sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural
gas derivatives
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Interest expense, net of amounts
capitalized
Income (loss) from continuing
operations
Income (loss) from discontinued
At or for the Year Ended December 31,
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
At or for the Six
Months Ended
June 30,
2011
2012
(Unaudited)
$ 255,927    $755,644    $ 408,219    $ 690,054    $1,162,037    $ 543,097    $696,122
(345,537)     662,782      (141,374)
75,211
449,940      (163,961)     441,678
69,081      194,093      201,782      238,532
334,084      145,711      260,782
38,974      94,517
92,701      193,510
259,725      125,825      171,909
(356,194)     825,657      (295,841)     (114,288)
438,439      (209,573)     230,884
(8,155)     173,959
—       
    (364,349)     999,616      (298,192)     (114,288)
(2,351)
—
—    
438,439      (209,573)     230,884
—
(5.17)    
(5.17)
(0.12)    
(0.12)    
 
(5.29)    
(5.29)    
2.18
7.18     
7.18
1.52     
1.52     
 
8.70     
8.70     
2.52
(2.48)    
(2.48)
(0.02)    
(0.02)    
 
(2.50)    
(2.50)    
2.52
(0.80)    
(0.80)
—       
—       
 
(0.80)    
(0.80)    
2.55
2.52     
2.51
—       
—       
 
2.52     
2.51     
2.70
(1.25)    
(1.25)
—       
—       
 
(1.25)    
(1.25)    
1.32
1.17  
1.16
—    
—
1.17  
1.16  
1.415
68,916      114,140      119,307      142,535     
68,916      114,158      119,307      142,535
50
At or for the Year Ended December 31,
2008
2010
2009
2011
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
172,004      169,104      195,382  
172,729      169,104      196,039
At or for the Six
Months Ended
June 30,
2011
2012
(Unaudited)
Income (loss) from discontinued
operations, net of taxes(1)
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per unit—
continuing operations:
Basic
Diluted
Income (loss) per unit—
discontinued operations:
Basic
Diluted
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Distributions declared per unit
Weighted average units
outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
Table of Contents
2007
Cash flow data:
Net cash provided
by (used in):
Operating
activities(2)
Investing activities     (2,892,420)    
Financing
activities
2,932,080
$
(44,814)   $ 179,515    $ 426,804    $
(35,550)
518,706     $    303,762    $ (122,429) 
(282,273)     (1,581,408)     (2,130,360)     (1,081,736)     (2,265,931)
270,918    $
(116,738)
(150,968)     1,524,260      1,376,767
611,741      2,389,129
Balance sheet
data:
 
 
  $ 3,807,703    $4,722,020    $4,340,256    $ 5,933,148    $ 8,000,137   
Total assets
Long-term debt
    1,443,830      1,653,568      1,588,831      2,742,902      3,993,657   
Unitholders’ capital    2,026,641      2,760,686      2,452,004      2,788,216      3,428,910
$11,180,102  
    6,005,547  
    4,131,663
(1) Includes gains (losses) on sale of assets, net of taxes.
(2) Includes premiums paid for derivatives of approximately, $279 million, $130 million, $94 million, $120 million and
$134 million and for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively, and
approximately $583 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012.
The following table presents summary unaudited operating data with respect to our production and sales of oil and
natural gas for the periods presented and summary information with respect to LINN’s estimated proved oil and natural
gas reserves at year-end. DeGolyer and MacNaughton, independent petroleum engineers, provided the estimates of
LINN’s proved oil and natural gas reserves as of December 31, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011 set forth below.
Production data:
Average daily production—continuing
operations:
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Oil (MBbls/d)
NGL (MBbls/d)
Total (MMcfe/d)
Average daily production—discontinued
operations:
Total (MMcfe/d)
Estimated proved reserves—continuing
operations:(1)
Natural gas (Bcf)
Oil (MMBbls)
NGL (MMBbls)
Total (Bcfe)
Estimated proved reserves—discontinued
operations:(1)
Total (Bcfe)
At or for the Year Ended
At or for the Six
Months Ended
December 31,
2007     2008     2009     2010     2011             2011                    2012
June 30
51      124      125      137      175     
3.4     
9.0      13.1      21.5     
2.7     
8.3      10.8     
6.5     
87      212      218      265      369
8.6     
6.2
24
12      —        —        —
833      851      774     1,233     1,675   
84      102      156      189   
   
   
51     
94   
   1,419     1,660     1,712     2,597     3,370
55     
43
54
71
197      —        —        —        —
163     
19.3     
9.3     
335
—
273  
27.2  
19.1  
550
—
(1)
In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves at December 31, 2009, December 31, 2010, and December 31,
2011, were estimated using the average price during the 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average
of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month, unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements,
excluding escalations based upon future conditions. In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves for all prior
years were estimated using year-end prices. The price used to estimate reserves is held constant over the life of
the reserves.
51
Table of Contents
The following table sets forth certain information with respect to LINN’s proved reserves at December 31, 2011 and
Pro Forma Proved Reserves and average daily production for the six months ended June 30, 2012:
Proved Reserves
At December
Proved
Reserves
2012
Acquisitions
Pro Forma Proved
Reserves (Bcfe)
Pro Forma
31, 2011
(Bcfe)(1)
1,860
(Bcfe)(1)
24
(1)
1,884
Pro Forma
% Proved
Developed
% Oil and NGL
41%
53%
Average Daily Production
For The Six Months
Ended June 30, 2012
Region
Mid-Continent
Hugoton
Basin(2)
Green River
Basin(3)
   
Permian Basin    
Michigan/Illinois    
California
   
Williston/Powder
River Basin(2)
East Texas(4)
380
701
1,081
47%
87%
—     
527     
317     
193
703      
—      
—      
—
93
96
703      
527      
317      
193
189
27%    
79%    
4%    
93%
54%    
56%    
91%    
93%
92%
63%
(MMcfe/d)
290
95
—  
84  
35  
13
25
—     
     
3,370
110      
       
1,634
110      
     
5,004
3%    
    
 
45%
East Texas(4)
Total
100%    
  
66%
8  
 
550
(1) Except as otherwise noted, proved reserves for the legacy oil and natural gas assets were calculated on
December 31, 2011, the reserve report date, and use a price of $4.12/MMBtu for natural gas and $95.84/Bbl for
oil, which represent the unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for each of the twelve months
immediately preceding December 31, 2011.
(2) Pro forma proved reserves for the Hugoton Acquisition (in the Hugoton Basin region) and the Anadarko Joint
Venture (in the Williston/Powder River Basin region) were calculated using a price of $3.73/MMBtu for natural gas
and $98.02/Bbl for oil, which represent the unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for each of the
twelve months ending March 1, 2012, the most recent twelve-month period prior to the closing of each of those
transactions. The proved reserves for the Anadarko Joint Venture were based on LINN’s preliminary internal
evaluation.
(3) Pro forma proved reserves for the Jonah Acquisition (in the Green River Basin region) were calculated using a
price of $3.15/MMBtu for natural gas and $95.63/Bbl for oil, which represents the unweighted average of the first-
day-of-the-month prices for each of the twelve months ending June 1, 2012, the most recent twelve-month period
prior to the closing of the Jonah Acquisition. The proved reserves for the Jonah Acquisition were based on LINN’s
preliminary internal evaluation of information provided by the seller.
(4) Pro forma proved reserves for the East Texas Acquisition were calculated using a price of $3.54/MMBtu for
natural gas and $97.65/Bbl for oil, which represent the unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for
each of the twelve months ending April 1, 2012, the most recent twelve-month period prior to the closing of the
East Texas Acquisition.
Table of Contents
52
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion analyzes the financial condition and results of operations of us and LINN. The historical
financial statements and the unaudited interim financial statements included in this prospectus reflect the assets,
liabilities and operations of LINN. You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations of us and LINN in conjunction with the historical financial statements, the unaudited interim
financial statements, and the notes thereto, included elsewhere in this prospectus.
LinnCo
We are a recently formed limited liability company that has elected to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal
income tax purposes.
Our Business
We will use all of the proceeds from this offering to purchase a number of units representing limited liability company
interests in LINN equal to the number of our shares sold in this offering, and we will have no assets or operations
other than those related to our ownership of LINN units. Our limited liability company agreement requires that we
maintain a one-to-one ratio between the number of our shares outstanding and the number of LINN units we own.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our authorized capital structure consists of two classes of shares: (1) common shares with indirect voting rights in
LINN, which are the shares being issued in this offering and (2) voting shares, 100% of which are currently held by
LINN. At                     , 2012, our issued capitalization consisted of $1,000 contributed by LINN in connection with
our formation and in exchange for its voting share.
LINN has agreed to pay on our behalf all legal, accounting, tax advisory, financial advisory and engineering fees,
printing costs or other administrative and out-of-pocket expenses we incur, along with any other expenses incurred in
connection with this offering or incurred as a result of being a publicly traded entity, including costs associated with
annual, quarterly and other reports to holders of our shares, tax return and Form 1099 preparation and distribution,
NASDAQ listing fees, independent auditor fees and registrar and transfer agent fees. In addition, LINN will also agree
to indemnify us for damages suffered or costs incurred (other than income taxes payable by us) in connection with
carrying out our activities, as described in “Certain Relationships and Related Transactions—Our Relationship with
LINN Energy, LLC—Omnibus Agreement.”
If we issue additional shares in the future, we will immediately use the net proceeds from those sales to purchase a
number of additional LINN units equal to the number of shares sold in such offering. Accordingly, we do not anticipate
any other sources of or needs for additional liquidity. We are not permitted to borrow money or incur debt without the
prior approval of holders owning a majority of our outstanding shares.
Results of Operations
Upon completion of our initial offering of shares to the public and the purchase of LINN units, our results of operations
will consist of our equity in earnings of LINN. When this offering is completed, we will own approximately     % of all of
LINN’s outstanding units (assuming no exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares). See “Risk
Factors—Risks Inherent in an Investment in LinnCo—LINN may issue additional units or other classes of units, and
we may issue additional shares without your approval, which would dilute our direct and your indirect ownership
interest in LINN and your ownership interest in us.”
Table of Contents
Executive Overview
53
LINN
LINN’s mission is to acquire, develop and maximize cash flow from a growing portfolio of long-life oil and natural gas
assets. LINN is an independent oil and natural gas company that began operations in March 2003 and completed its
initial public offering in January 2006. LINN’s properties are currently located in eight operating regions in the U.S.:
•   Mid-Continent, which includes properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and the eastern portion of the Texas
Panhandle (including the Granite Wash and Cleveland horizontal plays);
•   Hugoton Basin, which includes properties located primarily in Kansas and the Shallow Texas Panhandle;
•   Green River Basin, which includes properties located in southwest Wyoming;
•   Permian Basin, which includes areas in west Texas and southeast New Mexico;
•   Michigan/Illinois, which includes the Antrim Shale formation in the northern part of Michigan and oil properties
in southern Illinois;
•   California, which includes the Brea Olinda Field of the Los Angeles Basin;
•   Williston/Powder River Basin, which includes the Bakken formation in North Dakota and the Powder River
Basin in Wyoming; and
•   East Texas, which includes properties in east Texas.
Results for the year ended December 31, 2011, included the following:
•   oil, natural gas and NGL sales of approximately $1.2 billion compared to $690 million in 2010;
•   average daily production of 369 MMcfe/d compared to 265 MMcfe/d in 2010;
•   realized gains on commodity derivatives of approximately $257 million compared to $308 million in 2010;
•   adjusted EBITDA of approximately $998 million compared to $732 million in 2010;
•   adjusted net income of approximately $313 million compared to $219 million in 2010;
•   capital expenditures, excluding acquisitions, of approximately $697 million compared to $263 million in 2010;
and
•   294 wells drilled (292 successful) compared to 139 wells drilled (138 successful) in 2010.
Results for the six months ended June 30, 2012, included the following:
•   oil, natural gas and NGL sales of approximately $696 million compared to $543 million for the first half of
2011;
average daily production of 550 MMcfe/d compared to 335 MMcfe/d for the first half of 2011;
average daily production of 550 MMcfe/d compared to 335 MMcfe/d for the first half of 2011;
•
•   realized gains on commodity derivatives of approximately $173 million compared to $98 million for the first
half of 2011;
•   adjusted EBITDA of approximately $621 million compared to $474 million for the first half of 2011;
•   adjusted net income of approximately $110 million compared to $146 million for the first half of 2011;
•   capital expenditures, excluding acquisitions, of approximately $557 million compared to $250 million for the
first half of 2011; and
•   181 wells drilled (178 successful) compared to 101 wells drilled (99 successful) for the first half of 2011.
54
Table of Contents
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income are non-GAAP financial measures used by management to analyze
LINN’s performance. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure used by Company management to evaluate cash flow and
LINN’s ability to sustain or increase distributions. The most significant reconciling items between net income (loss)
and adjusted EBITDA are interest expense and noncash items, including the change in fair value of derivatives, and
depreciation, depletion and amortization. Adjusted net income is used by LINN’s management to evaluate its
operational performance from oil and natural gas properties, prior to unrealized (gains) losses on derivatives, realized
(gains) losses on canceled derivatives, realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim, impairment of long-lived
assets, loss on extinguishment of debt and (gains) losses on sale of assets, net. See “Non-GAAP Financial
Measures” for a reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable financial measure
calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Joint Venture
On April 3, 2012, LINN entered into a joint venture agreement with an affiliate of Anadarko whereby LINN will
participate as a partner in the CO2-enhanced oil recovery development of the Salt Creek field, located in the Powder
River Basin of Wyoming. Anadarko assigned LINN 23% of its interest in the field in exchange for future funding by
LINN of $400 million of Anadarko’s development costs. As of June 30, 2012, LINN had paid approximately $54 million
towards the future funding commitment. The acquisition included approximately 16 MMBoe (96 Bcfe) of proved
reserves as of the agreement date.
Acquisitions
On July 31, 2012, LINN completed the Jonah Acquisition, which included certain oil and natural gas properties located
in the Green River Basin area of southwest Wyoming, for total consideration of approximately $990 million. In
connection with the Jonah Acquisition, LINN paid a deposit of approximately $308 million in June 2012, which is
reported in “other noncurrent assets” on the condensed consolidated balance sheet at June 30, 2012. The Jonah
Acquisition includes approximately 703 Bcfe of estimated proved reserves. The estimated proved reserves for the
Jonah Acquisition were based on LINN’s preliminary internal evaluation of information provided by the seller.
On May 1, 2012, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in east Texas for
total consideration of approximately $168 million. The acquisition included approximately 110 Bcfe of proved reserves
as of the acquisition date.
On March 30, 2012, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the Hugoton
Basin area of southwestern Kansas for total consideration of approximately $1.17 billion. The acquisition included
approximately 701 Bcfe of proved reserves as of the acquisition date.
During the first half of 2012, LINN completed other smaller acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties located in its
various operating regions. LINN, in the aggregate, paid approximately $67 million in total consideration for these
properties.
On December 15, 2011, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located primarily in
the Granite Wash of Texas and Oklahoma from Plains Exploration & Production Company (“Plains”) for total
consideration of approximately $544 million. The acquisition included approximately 51 MMBoe (306 Bcfe) of proved
reserves as of the acquisition date.
On November 1, 2011, and November 18, 2011, LINN completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas
properties located in the Permian Basin for total consideration of approximately $110 million. The acquisitions
included approximately 7 MMBoe (42 Bcfe) of proved reserves as of the acquisition dates.
On June 1, 2011, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties in the Cleveland play,
located in the Texas Panhandle, from Panther Energy Company, LLC and Red Willow Mid-Continent, LLC
Table of Contents
55
(collectively referred to as “Panther”) for total consideration of approximately $223 million. The acquisition included
approximately 9 MMBoe (54 Bcfe) of proved reserves as of the acquisition date.
On May 2, 2011, and May 11, 2011, LINN completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties located
in the Williston Basin for total consideration of approximately $153 million. The acquisitions included approximately 6
MMBoe (35 Bcfe) of proved reserves as of the acquisition dates.
On April 1, 2011, and April 5, 2011, LINN completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties located
in the Permian Basin for total consideration of approximately $239 million. The acquisitions included approximately 13
MMBoe (79 Bcfe) of proved reserves as of the acquisition dates.
On March 31, 2011, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the Williston
Basin from an affiliate of Concho Resources Inc. (“Concho”) for total consideration of approximately $194 million. The
acquisition included approximately 8 MMBoe (50 Bcfe) of proved reserves as of the acquisition date.
During 2011, LINN completed other smaller acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties located in its various
operating regions. LINN, in the aggregate, paid approximately $38 million in total consideration for these properties.
Proved reserves as of the acquisition date for all of the above referenced acquisitions were estimated using the
average oil and natural gas prices during the preceding 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average of the
first-day-of-the-month prices for each month.
Commodity Derivatives
LINN hedges a significant portion of its forecasted production to reduce exposure to fluctuations in the prices of oil
and natural gas and provide long-term cash flow predictability to pay distributions, service debt and manage its
business. By removing a significant portion of the price volatility associated with future production, LINN expects to
mitigate, but not eliminate, the potential effects of variability in cash flow from operations due to fluctuations in
commodity prices.
During the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN entered into commodity derivative contracts consisting of oil and
natural gas swaps for certain years through 2016 and oil trade month roll swaps for October 2011 through December
2015. In September 2011, LINN canceled its oil and natural gas swaps for the year 2016 and used the realized gains
of approximately $27 million to increase prices on its existing oil and natural gas swaps for the year 2012. In
September 2011, LINN also paid premiums of approximately $33 million to increase prices on its existing oil puts for
the years 2012 and 2013. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2011, LINN paid premiums of approximately $52
million for put options and approximately $22 million to increase prices on its existing oil puts for 2012 and 2013.
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, LINN entered into commodity derivative contracts consisting of oil and
natural gas swaps and puts for 2012 through 2017, and paid premiums for put options of approximately $583 million.
Also during the six months ended June 30, 2012, LINN entered into natural gas basis swaps for 2012 through 2016
and trade month roll swaps for 2012 through 2017.
Table of Contents
56
The following table summarizes derivative positions for the periods indicated as of June 30, 2012.
Natural gas positions:
Fixed price swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Puts:(1)
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Total:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Oil positions:
Fixed price swaps:(2)
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Puts:
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Total:
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Natural gas basis differential
positions:(3)
Panhandle basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
NWPL - Rockies basis swaps:
Hedge volume (MMMBtu)
Hedge differential ($/MMBtu)
MichCon basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
Houston Ship Channel basis
July 1 –
December 31,
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
2012
43,910
2013
87,290
2014
97,401
2015
118,041
2016
121,841
5.16    $
5.22    $
5.25    $
5.19    $
4.20    $
38,894
86,198
79,628
71,854
76,269
5.41    $
5.37    $
5.00    $
5.00    $
5.00    $
2017
120,122  
4.26
66,886  
4.88
82,804
173,488
177,029
189,895
198,110
5.28    $
5.29    $
5.14    $
5.12    $
4.51    $
187,008  
4.48
4,730   
4,755  
96.72    $ 94.97    $ 92.92    $ 96.23    $ 90.56    $ 89.02
11,464
11,871
11,903
11,599
1,251   
384  
99.32    $ 97.86    $ 91.30    $ 90.00    $ 90.00    $ 90.00
3,271
3,105
3,960
3,426
5,139  
5,981   
97.26    $ 95.57    $ 92.52    $ 94.81    $ 90.44    $ 89.10
14,735
14,976
15,863
15,025
37,535
77,800
79,388
87,162
19,764
(0.55)   $
(0.56)   $
(0.33)   $
(0.33)   $
—    
(0.31)   $ —
14,122
34,785
36,026
38,362
39,199
(0.20)   $
(0.20)   $
(0.20)   $
(0.20)   $
—    
(0.20)   $ —
4,894   
0.12    $
9,600   
0.10    $
9,490   
0.08    $
—    
9,344   
0.06    $ —      $ —
—
Houston Ship Channel basis
swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
Permian basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
$
 
 
 
  $
Oil timing differential positions:  
Trade month roll swaps:(4)
 
Hedged volume (MBbls)
 
 
  $
Hedged differential ($/Bbl)
3,146   
 
(0.10)   $
2,282   
 
(0.19)   $
3,284   
 
0.21    $
5,731   
 
(0.10)   $
4,636   
 
(0.20)   $
6,944   
 
0.22    $
5,256   
 
(0.10)   $
4,891   
 
(0.21)   $
7,254   
 
0.22    $
4,891   
 
(0.10)   $
4,575   
—    
(0.10)   $ —
5,074   
—    
(0.21)   $ —      $ —
—
7,251   
 
0.24    $
7,446   
 
0.25    $
6,486  
0.25
(1)
Includes certain outstanding natural gas puts of approximately 5,329 MMMBtu for the period July 1, 2012,
through December 31, 2012, 10,570 MMMBtu for each of the years ending December 31, 2013,
57
Table of Contents
(2)
December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2015, and 10,599 MMMBtu for the year ending December 31, 2016, used
to hedge revenues associated with NGL production.
Includes certain outstanding fixed price oil swaps of approximately 5,384 MBbls which may be extended annually
at a price of $100.00 per Bbl for each of the years ending December 31, 2017, and December 31, 2018, and
$90.00 per Bbl for the year ending December 31, 2019, if the counterparties determine that the strike prices are
in-the-money on a designated date in each respective preceding year. The extension for each year is exercisable
without respect to the other years.
(3) Settle on the respective pricing index to hedge basis differential associated with natural gas production.
(4) LINN hedges the timing risk associated with the sales price of oil in the Mid-Continent, Hugoton Basin and
Permian Basin regions. In these regions, the Company generally sells oil for the delivery month at a sales price
based on the average NYMEX price of light crude oil during that month, plus an adjustment calculated as a
spread between the weighted average prices of the delivery month, the next month and the following month
during the period when the delivery month is prompt (the “trade month roll”).
Operating Regions
Following is a discussion of LINN’s six operating regions used during the years ending December 31, 2009, 2010 and
2011. Prior to January 1, 2012, LINN’s properties were divided into these six operating regions in the U.S.:
Mid-Continent Deep
The Mid-Continent Deep region includes properties in the Deep Granite Wash formation in the Texas Panhandle,
which produces at depths ranging from 10,000 feet to 16,000 feet, as well as properties in Oklahoma and Kansas,
which produce at depths of more than 8,000 feet. Mid-Continent Deep proved reserves represented approximately
47% of total proved reserves at December 31, 2011, of which 49% were classified as proved developed reserves.
This region produced 172 MMcfe/d or 47% of LINN’s 2011 average daily production. During 2011, LINN invested
approximately $268 million to drill in this region.
To more efficiently transport its natural gas in the Mid-Continent Deep region to market, LINN owns and operates a
network of natural gas gathering systems comprised of approximately 285 miles of pipeline and associated
compression and metering facilities that connect to numerous sales outlets in the Texas Panhandle.
Mid-Continent Shallow
The Mid-Continent Shallow region includes properties producing from the Brown Dolomite formation in the Texas
Panhandle, which produces at depths of approximately 3,200 feet, as well as properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and
Illinois, which produce at depths of less than 8,000 feet. Mid-Continent Shallow proved reserves represented
approximately 20% of total proved reserves at December 31, 2011, of which 70% were classified as proved developed
reserves. This region produced 63 MMcfe/d or 17% of LINN’s 2011 average daily production. During 2011, LINN
invested approximately $9 million to drill in this region.
To more efficiently transport its natural gas in the Mid-Continent Shallow region to market, LINN owns and operates a
network of natural gas gathering systems comprised of approximately 665 miles of pipeline and associated
compression and metering facilities that connect to numerous sales outlets in the Texas Panhandle.
Permian Basin
The Permian Basin is one of the largest and most prolific oil and natural gas basins in the U.S. LINN’s properties are
located in West Texas and Southeast New Mexico and produce at depths ranging from 2,000 feet to
Table of Contents
58
12,000 feet. Permian Basin proved reserves represented approximately 16% of total proved reserves at December 31,
2011, of which 56% were classified as proved developed reserves. This region produced 73 MMcfe/d or 20% of
LINN’s 2011 average daily production. During 2011, LINN invested approximately $255 million to drill in this region.
Michigan
The Michigan region includes properties producing from the Antrim Shale formation in the northern part of the state,
which produces at depths ranging from 600 feet to 2,200 feet. Michigan proved reserves represented approximately
9% of total proved reserves at December 31, 2011, of which 90% were classified as proved developed reserves. This
region produced 35 MMcfe/d or 9% of LINN’s 2011 average daily production. During 2011, LINN invested
approximately $3 million to drill in this region.
California
The California region consists of the Brea Olinda Field of the Los Angeles Basin. The Brea Olinda Field was
discovered in 1880 and produces from the shallow Pliocene formation to the deeper Miocene formation at depths
ranging from 1,000 feet to 7,500 feet. California proved reserves represented approximately 6% of total proved
reserves at December 31, 2011, of which 93% were classified as proved developed reserves. This region produced 14
MMcfe/d or 4% of LINN’s 2011 average daily production. During 2011, LINN invested approximately $6 million to drill
in this region.
Williston Basin
The Williston Basin is one of the premier oil basins in the U.S. LINN’s properties are located in North Dakota and
produce at depths ranging from 9,000 feet to 12,000 feet. Williston Basin proved reserves represented approximately
2% of total proved reserves at December 31, 2011, of which 48% were classified as proved developed reserves. This
region produced 12 MMcfe/d or 3% of LINN’s 2011 average daily production. During 2011, LINN invested
approximately $39 million to drill in this region.
During 2012, LINN realigned its operating regions and now allocates its properties among eight operating regions in the
U.S.:
•   Mid-Continent, which includes properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and the eastern portion of the Texas
Panhandle (including the Granite Wash and Cleveland horizontal plays);
•   Hugoton Basin, which includes properties located primarily in Kansas and the Shallow Texas Panhandle;
•   Green River Basin, which was added in July 2012 and includes properties located in southwest Wyoming;
•   Permian Basin, which includes areas in west Texas and southeast New Mexico;
•   Michigan/Illinois, which includes the Antrim Shale formation in the northern part of Michigan and oil properties
in southern Illinois;
•   California, which includes the Brea Olinda Field of the Los Angeles Basin;
•   Williston/Powder River Basin, which includes the Bakken formation in North Dakota; and
•   East Texas, which was added in May 2012 and includes properties located in east Texas.
59
Table of Contents
Results of Operations
Six Months Ended June 30, 2012, Compared to Six Months Ended June 30, 2011
Revenues and other:
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
NGL sales
Total oil, natural gas and NGL sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas
derivatives
Marketing and other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Six Months Ended
2011
June 30,
2012
(in thousands)
Variance
$ 137,598   
  330,092   
75,407   
 
   
   
  543,097
(163,961)  
 
4,962   
   
   
  384,098   
   
   
 
  102,264
$ 125,043   
455,509   
 
115,570   
 
   
   
696,122
441,678   
 
16,887   
 
   
   
  1,154,687   
   
   
 
141,765
$ (12,555) 
  125,417  
  40,163  
   
 
  153,025
605,639  
  11,925  
   
 
  770,589
39,501
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses(1)
Exploration costs
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Taxes, other than income taxes
Losses on sale of assets and other, net
Other income and (expenses)
Income (loss) before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income (loss)
Adjusted EBITDA(2)
Adjusted net income(2)
12,331   
 
1,853   
 
62,103   
 
 
995   
  145,711   
—     
 
36,045   
 
 
1,586   
   
   
  362,888   
   
   
  (224,915)  
   
   
  (203,705)  
 
(5,868)  
   
   
$(209,573)
$ 473,602   
   
   
$ 145,664
32,377   
 
 
7,150   
 
84,506   
 
817   
 
260,782   
 
146,499   
 
55,851   
 
1,492   
   
   
 
731,239   
   
   
 
(183,134)  
   
   
 
240,314   
 
(9,430)  
   
   
$ 230,884
$ 621,274   
   
   
$ 109,621
20,046  
 
5,297  
  22,403  
 
(178) 
  115,071  
  146,499  
  19,806  
 
(94) 
   
 
  368,351  
   
 
  41,781  
   
 
  444,019  
 
(3,562) 
   
 
$440,457
$147,672  
   
 
$ (36,043)
(1) General and administrative expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2011, and June 30, 2012, include
approximately $11 million and $14 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation expenses.
(2) This is a non-GAAP measure used by management to analyze LINN’s performance. See “—Non-GAAP Financial
Measures” for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable financial
measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Table of Contents
Average daily production:
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Oil (MBbls/d)
NGL (MBbls/d)
Total (MMcfe/d)
Weighted average prices (hedged):(1)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Oil (Bbl)
NGL (Bbl)
Weighted average prices (unhedged):(2)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Oil (Bbl)
NGL (Bbl)
Average NYMEX prices:
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
60
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2011     
  
 
163    
  19.3    
 
9.3    
335
2012     
  
 
273    
  27.2    
  19.1    
550
$ 8.68     $ 5.93    
   $88.35     $92.86    
   $44.70     $33.21
$ 4.66     $ 2.52    
   $94.34     $92.12    
   $44.70     $33.21
$ 4.22     $ 2.48
Variance
67% 
41% 
105% 
64%
(32)% 
5% 
(26)%
(46)% 
(2)% 
(26)%
(41)%
Oil (Bbl)
Costs per Mcfe of production:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
General and administrative expenses(3)
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes, other than income taxes
$98.33     $98.21    
  
  
   $ 1.69     $ 1.42    
   $ 0.20     $ 0.32    
   $ 1.02     $ 0.84    
   $ 2.40     $ 2.60    
   $ 0.59     $ 0.56
—
(16)% 
60% 
(18)% 
8% 
(5)%
(1)
Includes the effect of realized gains on derivatives of approximately $98 million and $173 million (excluding
approximately $18 million realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim) for the six months ended June 30, 2011,
and June 30, 2012, respectively.
(2) Does not include the effect of realized gains (losses) on derivatives.
(3) General and administrative expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2011, and June 30, 2012, include
approximately $11 million and $14 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation expenses.
Excluding these amounts, general and administrative expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2011, and
June 30, 2012, were $0.85 per Mcfe and $0.70 per Mcfe, respectively. This is a non-GAAP measure used by
LINN’s management to analyze LINN’s performance.
Revenues and Other
Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Sales
Oil, natural gas and NGL sales increased approximately $153 million or 28% to approximately $696 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $543 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011, due to higher
production volumes partially offset by lower natural gas, NGL and oil prices. Lower natural gas, NGL and oil prices
resulted in a decrease in revenues of approximately $106 million, $40 million and $11 million, respectively.
Average daily production volumes increased to 550 MMcfe/d during the six months ended June 30, 2012, from 335
MMcfe/d during the six months ended June 30, 2011. Higher oil, natural gas and NGL production volumes resulted in
an increase in revenues of approximately $136 million, $94 million and $80 million, respectively.
Table of Contents
61
The following sets forth average daily production by region:
Six Months Ended
Average daily production (MMcfe/d):
Mid-Continent
Hugoton Basin
Permian Basin
Michigan/Illinois
Williston/Powder River Basin
California
East Texas
2011
175     
38     
 
 
67     
35     
 
6     
 
 
14     
  —       
  
    
  335
June 30,
2012     
  
  290    
95    
 
 
84    
35    
 
25    
 
13    
 
 
8    
  
    
  550
Variance
115   
  57   
  17   
 —     
  19   
(1)  
 
 
8   
  
   
 215
66% 
 149% 
  27% 
 —    
 297% 
 
(5)% 
 —
64%
The 66% increase in average daily production volumes in the Mid-Continent region primarily reflects LINN’s 2011 and
2012 capital drilling programs in the Granite Wash formation, as well as the impact of the acquisition in the Cleveland
horizontal play in June 2011 and the acquisition from Plains in December 2011. The increase in average daily
production volumes in the Hugoton Basin region primarily reflects the impact of the acquisition from BP in March
2012. Average daily production volumes in the Permian Basin region reflect the impact of acquisitions in 2011 and
subsequent development capital spending. The Michigan/Illinois and California regions consist of low-decline asset
bases and continue to produce at consistent levels. The increase in average daily production volumes in the
Williston/Powder River Basin region reflects the impact of acquisitions in 2011 and the Anadarko Joint Venture in April
2012. Average daily production volumes in the East Texas region reflect the impact of the acquisition in May 2012.
Gains (Losses) on Oil and Natural Gas Derivatives
LINN determines the fair value of its oil and natural gas derivatives utilizing pricing models that use a variety of
techniques, including market quotes and pricing analysis. During the six months ended June 30, 2012, LINN had
commodity derivative contracts for approximately 117% of its natural gas production and 107% of its oil production,
which resulted in realized gains of approximately $173 million. The results for 2012 also include a realized gain related
to the recovery of a bankruptcy claim of approximately $18 million. During the six months ended June 30, 2011, LINN
had commodity derivative contracts for approximately 109% of its natural gas production and 105% of its oil
production and recognized realized gains of approximately $98 million. Unrealized gains and losses result from
changes in market valuations of derivatives as future commodity price expectations change compared to the contract
prices on the derivatives. If the expected future commodity prices increase compared to the contract prices on the
derivatives, unrealized losses are recognized; and if the expected future commodity prices decrease compared to the
contract prices on the derivatives, unrealized gains are recognized. During the first two quarters of 2012, expected
future oil prices decreased resulting in unrealized gains of approximately $296 million, and natural gas prices
increased resulting in unrealized losses of approximately $46 million, for net unrealized gains on derivatives of
approximately $250 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012. During the first two quarters of 2011, expected
future oil and natural gas prices increased, which resulted in net unrealized losses on derivatives of approximately
$262 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011.
Marketing and Other Revenues
Marketing and other revenues increased by approximately $12 million or 240% to approximately $17 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $5 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011, primarily due to
the acquisition of the Jayhawk natural gas processing plant from BP in March 2012.
Table of Contents
Expenses
Lease Operating Expenses
62
Lease operating expenses include expenses such as labor, field office, vehicle, supervision, maintenance, tools and
supplies and workover expenses. Lease operating expenses increased by approximately $40 million or 39% to
approximately $142 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $102 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2011. Lease operating expenses increased primarily due to costs associated with properties
acquired during 2011 and 2012. Lease operating expenses per Mcfe decreased to $1.42 per Mcfe for the six months
ended June 30, 2012, from $1.69 per Mcfe for the six months ended June 30, 2011, primarily due to lower rates on
newly acquired properties.
Transportation Expenses
Transportation expenses increased by approximately $20 million or 163% to approximately $32 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $12 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011, primarily due to
acquisitions in late 2011 and early 2012.
Marketing Expenses
Marketing expenses increased by approximately $5 million or 286% to approximately $7 million for the six months
ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $2 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011, primarily due to the
acquisition of the Jayhawk natural gas processing plant from BP in March 2012.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are costs not directly associated with field operations and reflect the costs of
employees including executive officers, related benefits, office leases and professional fees. General and
administrative expenses increased by approximately $23 million or 36% to approximately $85 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $62 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The increase
was primarily due to an increase in acquisition related expenses of approximately $11 million and an increase in
salaries and benefits related expenses of approximately $9 million, driven primarily by increased employee headcount.
General and administrative expenses per Mcfe decreased to $0.84 per Mcfe for the six months ended June 30, 2012,
from $1.02 per Mcfe for the six months ended June 30, 2011, due to higher production volumes.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization increased by approximately $115 million or 79% to approximately $261
million for the six months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $146 million for the six months ended June 30,
2011. Higher total production volumes were the primary reason for the increased expense. Depreciation, depletion and
amortization per Mcfe also increased to $2.60 per Mcfe for the six months ended June 30, 2012, from $2.40 per Mcfe
for the six months ended June 30, 2011, primarily due to higher production volumes in operating areas with higher
depletion rates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, LINN recorded a noncash impairment charge, before and after tax, of
approximately $146 million associated with proved oil and natural gas properties related to a decline in commodity
prices. LINN recorded no impairment charge for the six months ended June 30, 2011.
Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes
Taxes, other than income taxes, which consist primarily of severance and ad valorem taxes, increased by
approximately $20 million or 55% to approximately $56 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012, from
Table of Contents
63
approximately $36 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011. Severance taxes, which are a function of revenues
generated from production, increased approximately $7 million compared to the six months ended June 30, 2011,
primarily due to higher production volumes partially offset by lower commodity prices. Ad valorem taxes, which are
based on the value of reserves and production equipment and vary by location, increased by approximately $12
million compared to the six months ended June 30, 2011, primarily due to property acquisitions in 2011 and 2012 and
higher rates on LINN’s base properties.
Other Income and (Expenses)
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
Other, net
Six Months Ended June 30,
2011
$ (94,372)   $
(125,825)  
 
(4,718)
(in thousands)
2012
Variance  
 
—      $ 94,372  
  (46,084) 
 
(6,507)
(171,909)  
 
(11,225)
$(224,915)   $(183,134)   $ 41,781
Other income and (expenses) decreased by approximately $42 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012,
compared to the six months ended June 30, 2011. Interest expense increased primarily due to higher outstanding debt
during the period and higher amortization of financing fees and expenses associated with the May 2019 Senior Notes
and the November 2019 Senior Notes, as defined in Note 6 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the
year ended December 31, 2011, included elsewhere in this prospectus. For the six months ended June 30, 2011,
LINN recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $94 million as a result of the redemptions of and
cash tender offers for a portion of the Original Senior Notes, as defined in Note 6. See “Debt” in “Liquidity and Capital
Resources” below for additional details.
Income Tax Expense
LINN is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, with the
exception of the state of Texas, with income tax liabilities and/or benefits of LINN passed through to unitholders.
Limited liability companies are subject to Texas margin tax. Limited liability companies were also subject to state
income taxes in Michigan during the six months ended June 30, 2011. In addition, certain of LINN’s subsidiaries are
Subchapter C-corporations subject to federal and state income taxes. LINN recognized income tax expense of
approximately $9 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012, compared to approximately $6 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2011. Income tax expense increased primarily due to higher income from LINN’s taxable
subsidiaries during the six months ended June 30, 2012, compared to the same period in 2011.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income increased by approximately $441 million or 210% to approximately $231 million for the six months ended
June 30, 2012, from a net loss of approximately $210 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The increase
was primarily due to higher production revenues and higher gains on oil and natural gas derivatives, partially offset by
higher expenses, including interest. See discussions above for explanations of variances.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP financial measure) increased by approximately $147 million or 31% to approximately
$621 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $474 million for the
Table of Contents
64
six months ended June 30, 2011. The increase was primarily due to higher production revenues, partially offset by
higher expenses. See discussions above for explanations of variances. See “—Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a
reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to its most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in
accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) decreased by approximately $36 million or 25% to
approximately $110 million for the six months ended June 30, 2012, from approximately $146 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2011. The decrease was primarily due to higher expenses, including interest, partially offset
by higher production revenues. See discussions above for explanations of variances.
65
Table of Contents
Year Ended December 31, 2011, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2010
Revenues and other:
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
NGL sales
Total oil, natural gas and NGL sales
Gains on oil and natural gas derivatives(1)
Marketing and other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses(2)
Exploration costs
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Taxes, other than income taxes
Losses on sale of assets and other, net
Other income and (expenses)
Income (loss) before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net Income (loss)
Adjusted EBITDA(3)
Adjusted net income(3)
Year Ended December 31,
2010
2011
(in thousands)
Variance
$ 211,596   
  359,996   
  118,462   
   
   
  690,054   
 
75,211   
7,015   
 
   
   
  772,280   
   
   
 
  158,382   
 
19,594   
2,716   
 
99,078   
 
 
5,168   
  238,532   
38,600   
 
45,182   
 
 
6,490   
   
   
  613,742   
   
   
  (268,585)  
   
   
  (110,047)  
 
(4,241)  
   
   
$(114,288)
$ 732,131   
   
   
$ 219,489
$ 278,714   
 
714,385   
168,938   
 
   
   
  1,162,037   
 
449,940   
10,477   
 
   
   
  1,622,454   
   
   
 
232,619   
 
28,358   
 
3,681   
 
133,272   
 
2,390   
 
334,084   
 
—     
 
78,522   
 
3,494   
 
   
   
816,420   
 
   
   
(362,129)  
 
   
   
443,905   
 
(5,466)  
 
   
   
$ 438,439
$ 997,621   
   
   
$ 313,331
$ 67,118  
  354,389  
  50,476  
   
 
  471,983  
  374,729  
3,462  
 
   
 
  850,174
74,237  
 
8,764  
 
965  
  34,194  
 
(2,778) 
  95,552  
  (38,600) 
  33,340  
 
(2,996) 
   
 
  202,678  
   
 
  (93,544) 
   
 
  553,952  
 
(1,225) 
   
 
$552,727
$265,490  
   
 
$ 93,842
(1) During the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN canceled (before the contract settlement date) derivative
contracts on estimated future oil and natural gas production resulting in realized gains of approximately $27
million.
(2) General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011, include
approximately $13 million and $21 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation expenses.
(3) This is a non-GAAP measure used by management to analyze LINN’s performance. See “Non-GAAP Financial
Measures” for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable financial
measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
66
Table of Contents
Year Ended December 31,
2010
137     
13.1     
8.3     
265
2011         
  
175    
21.5    
10.8    
369
Average daily production:
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Oil (MBbls/d)
NGL (MBbls/d)
Total (MMcfe/d)
Weighted average prices (hedged):(1)   
Natural gas (Mcf)
  
Oil (Bbl)
  
NGL (Bbl)
Weighted average prices
(unhedged):(2)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Oil (Bbl)
NGL (Bbl)
Average NYMEX prices:
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
Costs per Mcfe of production:
  
Lease operating expenses
  
Transportation expenses
  
General and administrative expenses(3)   
Depreciation, depletion and amortization   
Taxes, other than income taxes
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
8.52     
94.71     
39.14
4.24     
75.16     
39.14
4.40     
79.53
1.64     
0.20     
1.02     
2.46     
0.47
8.20    
89.21    
42.88
4.35    
91.24    
42.88
4.05    
95.12
1.73    
0.21    
0.99    
2.48    
0.58
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Variance
28% 
64% 
30% 
39%
(4)% 
(6)% 
10%
3% 
21% 
10%
(8)% 
20%
5% 
5% 
(3)% 
1% 
23%
(1)
Includes the effect of realized gains on derivatives of approximately $308 million and $230 million (excluding $27
million realized gains on canceled contracts) for the years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011,
respectively.
(2) Does not include the effect of realized gains (losses) on derivatives.
(3) General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011, include
approximately $13 million and $21 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation expenses.
Excluding these amounts, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2010, and
December 31, 2011, were $0.88 per Mcfe and $0.83 per Mcfe, respectively. This is a non-GAAP measure used
by management to analyze LINN’s performance.
Revenues and Other
Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Sales
Oil, natural gas and NGL sales increased by approximately $472 million or 68% to approximately $1.2 billion for the
year ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $690 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, due to higher
commodity prices and higher production volumes. Higher oil, NGL and natural gas prices resulted in an increase in
revenues of approximately $126 million, $15 million and $7 million, respectively.
Average daily production volumes increased to 369 MMcfe/d during the year ended December 31, 2011, from 265
MMcfe/d during the year ended December 31, 2010. Higher oil, natural gas and NGL production volumes resulted in
an increase in revenues of approximately $228 million, $60 million and $36 million, respectively.
67
Table of Contents
The following sets forth average daily production by region, as established by LINN during 2011 and 2010:
Average daily production (MMcfe/d):
Mid-Continent Deep
Mid-Continent Shallow
Permian Basin
Michigan
California
Williston Basin
2010
2011
Year Ended December 31,     
    
  
172    
63    
73    
35    
14    
12    
    
369
133  
 
66  
 
31  
 
21  
 
 
14  
  —    
   
 
265
Variance
39   
 
(3)  
  42   
  14   
 —     
  12   
  
   
 104
30% 
 
(5)% 
 134% 
  67% 
 —    
 —
39%
The 30% increase in average daily production volumes in the Mid-Continent Deep region is primarily due to LINN’s
2010 and 2011 capital drilling programs in the Deep Granite Wash formation, as well as the impact of the acquisition
in the Cleveland Play in June 2011. The 5% decrease in average daily production volumes in the Mid-Continent
Shallow region reflects downtime related to weather and third-party plant maintenance, and the effects of natural
declines, partially offset by the results of LINN’s drilling and optimization programs. The 134% increase in average
daily production volumes in the Permian Basin region reflects the impact of acquisitions in 2010 and 2011 and
subsequent development capital spending. The 67% increase in average daily production volumes in the Michigan
region reflects the full year impact of acquisitions in the second and fourth quarters of 2010. The California region
consists of a low-decline asset base and continues to produce at a consistent level. Average daily production
volumes in the Williston Basin region reflect the impact of LINN’s acquisitions in this region in 2011.
Gains (Losses) on Oil and Natural Gas Derivatives
LINN determines the fair value of its oil and natural gas derivatives utilizing pricing models that use a variety of
techniques, including market quotes and pricing analysis. During the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN had
commodity derivative contracts for approximately 101% of its natural gas production and 101% of its oil production,
which resulted in realized gains of approximately $257 million (including realized gains on canceled contracts of
approximately $27 million). During the year ended December 31, 2010, LINN had commodity derivative contracts for
approximately 114% of its natural gas production and 97% of its oil production, which resulted in realized gains of
approximately $308 million. Unrealized gains and losses result from changes in market valuations of derivatives as
future commodity price expectations change compared to the contract prices on the derivatives. If the expected future
commodity prices increase compared to the contract prices on the derivatives, unrealized losses are recognized; and
if the expected future commodity prices decrease compared to the contract prices on the derivatives, unrealized gains
are recognized. During 2011, expected future oil and natural gas prices decreased, which resulted in net unrealized
gains on derivatives of approximately $193 million for the year ended December 31, 2011. During 2010, expected
future oil prices increased and expected future natural gas prices decreased, which resulted in net unrealized losses
on derivatives of approximately $232 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. For information about LINN’s
credit risk related to derivative contracts, see “Counterparty Credit Risk” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Expenses
Lease Operating Expenses
Lease operating expenses include expenses such as labor, field office, vehicle, supervision, maintenance, tools and
supplies and workover expenses. Lease operating expenses increased by approximately $75 million or 47% to
approximately $233 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $158 million for the year ended
December 31, 2010. Lease operating expenses per Mcfe also increased to $1.73 per Mcfe for the
Table of Contents
68
year ended December 31, 2011, from $1.64 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2010. Lease operating
expenses increased primarily due to costs associated with properties acquired during 2010 and 2011. Temporary oil
handling costs in the Granite Wash formation and higher post-acquisition maintenance costs in the Permian Basin
also contributed to the increase.
Transportation Expenses
Transportation expenses increased by approximately $9 million or 45% to approximately $28 million for the year
ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $19 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, primarily due to
higher production volumes.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are costs not directly associated with field operations and include costs of
employees including executive officers, related benefits, office leases and professional fees. General and
administrative expenses increased by approximately $34 million or 35% to approximately $133 million for the year
ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $99 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. The increase was
primarily due to an increase in salaries and benefits expense of approximately $18 million, driven primarily by
increased employee headcount, an increase in unit-based compensation expense of approximately $8 million, an
increase in professional services expense of approximately $3 million and an increase in acquisition integration
expenses of approximately $3 million. General and administrative expenses per Mcfe decreased to $0.99 per Mcfe for
the year ended December 31, 2011, from $1.02 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2010, due to higher
production volumes.
Exploration Costs
Exploration costs decreased by approximately $3 million or 54% to approximately $2 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011, from approximately $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. The decrease was primarily
due to lower leasehold impairment expenses on unproved properties.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization increased by approximately $95 million or 40% to approximately $334 million
for the year ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $239 million for the year ended December 31, 2010.
Higher total production volumes were the primary reason for the increased expense. Depreciation, depletion and
amortization per Mcfe increased to $2.48 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2011, from $2.46 per Mcfe for the
year ended December 31, 2010.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
LINN recorded no impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2011. During the year ended December 31,
2010, LINN recorded a noncash impairment charge of approximately $39 million primarily associated with the
impairment of proved oil and natural gas properties related to an unfavorable marketing contract. See “Critical
Accounting Policies and Estimates” below for additional information.
Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes
Taxes, other than income taxes, which consist primarily of severance and ad valorem taxes, increased by
approximately $34 million or 74% to approximately $79 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, from
approximately $45 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. Severance taxes, which are a function of revenues
generated from production, increased by approximately $31 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2010,
primarily due to higher commodity prices and higher production volumes. Ad valorem
Table of Contents
69
taxes, which are based on the value of reserves and production equipment and vary by location, increased by
approximately $3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2010, primarily due to property acquisitions in
2011.
Other Income and (Expenses)
Year Ended December 31,
2010
2011
(in thousands)
Variance  
 
—      $ (94,612)   $ (94,612) 
  (66,215) 
8,021
(259,725)  
—
(193,510)  
(8,021)
$
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized   
Realized losses on interest rate swaps
  
Realized losses on canceled interest rate
swaps
Unrealized gains on interest rate swaps
Other, net
123,865  
  (123,865)  
  
  (63,978) 
 
63,978   
  
(625) 
 
(7,167)  
 
  
      
   
 
   
   $(268,585)   $(362,129)   $ (93,544)
—     
—     
(7,792)
Other income and (expenses) increased by approximately $94 million during the year ended December 31, 2011,
compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. Interest expense increased primarily due to higher outstanding debt
during the period and higher amortization of financing fees associated with the 2019 Senior Notes and the 2010 Issued
Senior Notes, as defined in Note 6 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year ended December 31,
2011, included elsewhere in this prospectus. In addition, in May 2011 LINN entered into a Fifth Amended and
Restated Credit Facility, which also resulted in higher amortization of financing fees. For the year ended
December 31, 2011, LINN also recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $95 million as a result of
the redemptions, cash tender offers and additional repurchases of a portion of the Original Senior Notes, as defined in
Note 6 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011, included elsewhere in
this prospectus. See “Debt” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional details.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
LINN is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, with the
exception of the states of Texas and Michigan, with income tax liabilities and/or benefits of LINN passed through to
unitholders. Limited liability companies are subject to Texas margin tax. Limited liability companies were also subject
to state income taxes in Michigan during 2010 and 2011. In addition, certain of LINN’s subsidiaries are Subchapter C-
corporations subject to federal and state income taxes. LINN recognized income tax expense of approximately $5
million for the year ended December 31, 2011, compared to approximately $4 million for the same period in 2010.
Income tax expense increased primarily due to higher income in 2011 from LINN’s taxable subsidiaries.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income increased by approximately $552 million or 484% to approximately $438 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011, from a net loss of approximately $114 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. The
increase was primarily due higher production revenues and higher gains on oil and natural gas derivatives, partially
offset by higher expenses, including interest. The year ended December 31, 2010 also included an impairment of long-
lived assets and realized and unrealized losses on interest rate swaps; there were no comparable amounts reported
for the year ended December 31, 2011. See discussions above for explanations of variances.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP financial measure) increased by approximately $266 million or 36% to approximately
$998 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $732 million for the year
Table of Contents
70
ended December 31, 2010. The increase was primarily due to higher production revenues resulting from higher
production volumes and higher commodity prices, partially offset by higher expenses. See discussions above for
explanations of variances. See “—Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to its most
directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) increased by approximately $94 million or 43% to approximately
$313 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, from approximately $219 million for the year ended December 31,
2010. The increase was primarily due to higher production revenues partially offset by lower realized gains on oil and
natural gas derivatives and higher expenses, including interest. The year ended December 31, 2010 also included
realized losses on interest rate swaps; there was no comparable amount reported for the year ended December 31,
2011. See discussions above for explanations of variances.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2010, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2009
Revenues and other:
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
NGL sales
Total oil, natural gas and NGL sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives(1)
Marketing and other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses(2)
Exploration costs
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Taxes, other than income taxes
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net
Year Ended December 31,    
   
(in thousands)
2009
2010
Variance
$ 160,470    $ 211,596    $ 51,126  
  181,619   
  178,377  
  
 
66,130   
 
52,332  
  
   
 
   
      
  281,835  
  408,219   
  
  216,585  
  (141,374)  
  
 
6,304   
 
711  
  
   
 
   
      
  499,131  
  273,149   
  
   
   
 
      
  
 
  132,647   
  
18,202   
 
  
 
2,154   
  
86,134   
 
  
 
7,169   
  
  201,782   
  
 
—     
  
27,605   
 
  
(24,197)  
 
  
      
   
  451,496
359,996   
  118,462   
   
   
  690,054   
75,211   
 
 
7,015   
   
   
  772,280   
   
   
 
  158,382   
19,594   
 
 
2,716   
99,078   
 
 
5,168   
  238,532   
 
38,600   
45,182   
 
6,490   
 
   
   
  613,742
25,735  
 
1,392  
 
562  
 
12,944  
 
(2,001) 
 
36,750  
 
38,600  
 
17,577  
 
30,687  
 
 
   
  162,246
Other income and (expenses)
(146,870) 
  (121,715)  
   
 
   
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes   
  190,015  
  (300,062)  
Income tax benefit (expense)
 
(8,462) 
 
4,221   
  
Discontinued Operations
2,351  
 
(2,351)  
 
  
      
   
 
   
   $(298,192)   $(114,288)   $ 183,904  
 
      
   $ 566,235    $ 732,131    $ 165,896  
      
 
   $ 206,922    $ 219,489    $ 12,567
(268,585)  
   
   
  (110,047)  
 
(4,241)  
—
Adjusted net income(3)
Adjusted EBITDA(3)
Net loss
(1) During the year ended December 31, 2009, LINN canceled (before the contract settlement date) derivative
contracts on estimated future oil and natural gas production resulting in realized net gains of approximately $49
million, primarily associated with LINN’s commodity derivative repositioning in July 2009.
Table of Contents
71
(2) General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, and December 31, 2010, include
approximately $15 million and $13 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation expenses.
(3) This is a non-GAAP measure used by management to analyze LINN’s performance. See “—Non-GAAP Financial
Measures” for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable financial
measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Average daily production:
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Oil (MBbls/d)
NGL (MBbls/d)
Total (MMcfe/d)
Weighted average prices (hedged):(1)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Oil (Bbl)
NGL (Bbl)
Weighted average prices (unhedged):(2)  
Natural gas (Mcf)
  
Oil (Bbl)
  
NGL (Bbl)
Average NYMEX prices:
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
Costs per Mcfe of production:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Year Ended December 31,
    2009
125     
9.0     
6.5     
218
2010         
  
137    
13.1    
8.3    
265
$
8.27     
$ 110.94     
28.04     
$
3.51     
55.25     
28.04
3.99     
61.94
1.67
$
$
$
$
$
$
8.52    
94.71    
39.14
4.24    
75.16    
39.14
4.40    
79.53
1.64
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Variance
10% 
46% 
28% 
22%
3% 
(15)% 
40%
21% 
36% 
40%
10% 
28%
(2)%
Transportation expenses
General and administrative expenses(3)
Depreciation, depletion and amortization   
Taxes, other than income taxes
$
$
$
$
0.23     
1.08
2.53     
0.35
$
$
$
$
0.20    
1.02
2.46    
0.47
(13)% 
(6)%
(3)% 
34%
(1)
Includes the effect of realized gains on derivatives of approximately $401 million (excluding $49 million realized
net gains on canceled contracts) and $308 million for the years ended December 31, 2009, and December 31,
2010, respectively.
(2) Does not include the effect of realized gains (losses) on derivatives.
(3) General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, and December 31, 2010, include
approximately $15 million and $13 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation expenses.
Excluding these amounts, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, and
December 31, 2010, were $0.90 per Mcfe and $0.88 per Mcfe, respectively. This is a non-GAAP measure used
by management to analyze LINN’s performance.
Revenues and Other
Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Sales
Oil, natural gas and NGL sales increased by approximately $282 million or 69% to approximately $690 million for the
year ended December 31, 2010, from approximately $408 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, due to higher
commodity prices and higher production volumes. Higher oil, natural gas and NGL prices resulted in an increase in
revenues of approximately $95 million, $36 million and $34 million, respectively.
Table of Contents
72
Average daily production volumes increased to 265 MMcfe/d during the year ended December 31, 2010, from 218
MMcfe/d during the year ended December 31, 2009. Higher oil, natural gas and NGL production volumes resulted in
an increase in revenues of approximately $83 million, $15 million and $19 million, respectively.
The following sets forth average daily production by region, as established for LINN during 2010 and 2009:
Average daily production (MMcfe/d):
Mid-Continent Deep
Mid-Continent Shallow
Permian Basin
Michigan
California
2009
2010
Year Ended December 31,     
    
  
133    
66    
31    
21    
14    
    
265
135  
 
67  
 
2  
  —    
14  
 
   
 
218
Variance
(2)  
 
 
(1)  
  29   
  21   
 —     
  
   
  47
(1)% 
 
 
(1)% 
 1,450% 
  —    
  —
22%
The 1% decrease in average daily production volumes in the Mid-Continent Deep region primarily reflects natural
declines, in addition to minimal capital development during the second half of 2009 due to low commodity prices,
partially offset by the impact of LINN’s 2010 capital drilling program in the Deep Granite Wash formation. Average
daily production volumes in the Mid-Continent Shallow region reflect the impact of drilling and optimization programs
which offset the effects of natural declines. Average daily production volumes in the Permian Basin region reflect the
impact of the acquisitions in 2010 and the third quarter of 2009 and subsequent development capital spending.
Average daily production volumes in the Michigan region reflect the impact of LINN’s acquisitions in this area in 2010.
The California region consists of a low-decline asset base and continues to produce at levels consistent with prior
year.
Gains (Losses) on Oil and Natural Gas Derivatives
LINN determines the fair value of its oil and natural gas derivatives utilizing pricing models that use a variety of
techniques, including market quotes and pricing analysis. During the year ended December 31, 2010, LINN had
commodity derivative contracts for approximately 114% of its natural gas production and 97% of its oil production,
which resulted in realized gains of approximately $308 million. During the year ended December 31, 2009, LINN
recorded realized gains of approximately $450 million (including realized net gains on canceled contracts of
approximately $49 million). Unrealized gains and losses result from changes in market valuations of derivatives as
future commodity price expectations change compared to the contract prices on the derivatives. If the expected future
commodity prices increase compared to the contract prices on the derivatives, unrealized losses are recognized; and
if the expected future commodity prices decrease compared to the contract prices on the derivatives, unrealized gains
are recognized. During 2010, expected future oil prices increased and expected future natural gas prices decreased,
which resulted in net unrealized losses on derivatives of approximately $232 million for the year ended December 31,
2010. During 2009, expected future oil prices increased and expected future natural gas prices decreased, which
resulted in net unrealized losses on derivatives of approximately $591 million for the year ended December 31, 2009.
For information about LINN’s credit risk related to derivative contracts, see “Counterparty Credit Risk” in “Liquidity and
Capital Resources” below.
Expenses
Lease Operating Expenses
Lease operating expenses include expenses such as labor, field office, vehicle, supervision, maintenance, tools and
supplies and workover expenses. Lease operating expenses increased by approximately $25 million or 19% to
approximately $158 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, from approximately $133 million for
Table of Contents
73
the year ended December 31, 2009. Lease operating expenses increased primarily due to costs associated with
properties acquired in the Permian Basin and Michigan regions in 2010 and the second half of 2009. Lease operating
expenses per Mcfe decreased to $1.64 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2010, from $1.67 per Mcfe for the
year ended December 31, 2009.
Transportation Expenses
Transportation expenses increased by approximately $1 million or 8% to approximately $19 million for the year ended
December 31, 2010, from approximately $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, primarily due to higher
total production volume levels from LINN’s acquisitions in the Permian Basin and Michigan regions in 2010 and the
second half of 2009, partially offset by lower rates associated with owned facilities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are costs not directly associated with field operations and include costs of
employees including executive officers, related benefits, office leases and professional fees. General and
administrative expenses increased by approximately $13 million or 15% to approximately $99 million for the year
ended December 31, 2010, from approximately $86 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The increase was
primarily due to an increase in salaries and benefits expense of approximately $10 million, driven primarily by
increased employee headcount, and acquisition integration expenses of approximately $4 million. General and
administrative expenses per Mcfe decreased to $1.02 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2010, from $1.08 per
Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2009.
Exploration Costs
Exploration costs decreased by approximately $2 million or 28% to approximately $5 million for the year ended
December 31, 2010, from approximately $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The decrease was primarily
due to fewer lease-term expirations related to unproved leasehold costs.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization increased by approximately $37 million or 18% to approximately $239 million
for the year ended December 31, 2010, from approximately $202 million for the year ended December 31, 2009.
Higher total production volume levels, primarily due to LINN’s acquisitions in the Permian Basin and Michigan regions
in 2010 and in the Permian Basin region in the second half of 2009, were the main reason for the increase.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization per Mcfe decreased to $2.46 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31,
2010, from $2.53 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2009.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
During the year ended December 31, 2010, LINN recorded a noncash impairment charge of approximately $39 million
primarily associated with the impairment of proved oil and natural gas properties related to an unfavorable marketing
contract. LINN recorded no impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2009. See “Critical Accounting
Policies and Estimates” below for additional information.
Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes
Taxes, other than income taxes, which consist primarily of severance and ad valorem taxes, increased by
approximately $17 million or 64% to approximately $45 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, from
approximately $28 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. Severance taxes, which are a function of revenues
generated from production, increased by approximately $14 million compared to the year ended
Table of Contents
74
December 31, 2009, primarily due to higher commodity prices and higher total production volume levels. Ad valorem
taxes, which are based on the value of reserves and production equipment and vary by location, increased by
approximately $2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2009, primarily due to property acquisitions in the
Permian Basin region.
Other Income and (Expenses)
2009
Year Ended December 31,
Variance  
 
 
 
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized    $ (92,701)   $(193,510)   $(100,809) 
Realized losses on interest rate swaps
34,860  
Realized losses on canceled interest rate
swaps
Unrealized gains on interest rate swaps
Other, net
(in thousands)
(42,881)
(8,021)
2010
(60)  
16,588   
(2,661)
(123,865)  
63,978   
 
 
(7,167)
(123,805) 
  
47,390  
 
  
 
(4,506) 
  
  
 
   
   $(121,715)   $(268,585)   $(146,870)
Other income and (expenses) increased by approximately $147 million during the year ended December 31, 2010,
compared to the year ended December 30, 2009. During the year ended December 31, 2010, LINN canceled (before
the contract settlement date) all of its interest rate swap agreements, resulting in higher realized losses of
approximately $124 million. These losses were partially offset by an increase in unrealized gains on interest rate
swaps and a decrease in realized losses on interest rate swaps during the year ended December 31, 2010, compared
to the year ended December 31, 2009. Additionally, in the second and third quarters of 2010, LINN entered into an
amendment to its Credit Facility and issued the 2010 Issued Senior Notes, as defined in Note 6 to LINN’s historical
audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011, included elsewhere in this prospectus, which
resulted in increased interest expense due to higher interest rates and higher amortization of financing fees. See
“Debt” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional details.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
LINN is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, with the
exception of the states of Texas and Michigan, with income tax liabilities and/or benefits of LINN passed through to
unitholders. Limited liability companies are subject to Texas margin tax. Limited liability companies were also subject
to state income taxes in Michigan during 2009 and 2010. In addition, certain of LINN’s subsidiaries are Subchapter C-
corporations subject to federal and state income taxes. LINN recognized an income tax expense of approximately $4
million for the year ended December 31, 2010, compared to an income tax benefit of approximately $4 million for the
same period in 2009. Income tax expense increased primarily due to an increase in income in 2010 from LINN’s
taxable subsidiaries. In 2009, LINN released a valuation allowance on a significant portion of the deferred tax assets
at LINN’s taxable subsidiaries.
Net Loss
Net loss decreased by approximately $184 million or 62% to approximately $114 million for the year ended
December 31, 2010, from approximately $298 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The decrease was
primarily due to higher production revenues and higher gains on oil and natural gas derivatives, partially offset by
higher expenses, including interest. See discussions above for explanations of variances.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP financial measure) increased by approximately $166 million or 29% to approximately
$732 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, from approximately $566 million for the year ended December 31,
2009. The increase was primarily due to higher production revenues resulting from higher
Table of Contents
75
commodity prices and higher total production volume levels, partially offset by lower realized gains on commodity
derivatives. See discussions above for explanations of variances. See “—Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a
reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to its most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in
accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) increased by approximately $12 million or 6% to approximately
$219 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, from approximately $207 million for the year ended December 31,
2009. The increase was primarily due to higher production revenues, partially offset by higher expenses, including
interest and income taxes, and higher realized losses on interest rate swaps. See discussions above for explanations
of variances.
Reserve Replacement Metrics
LINN calculates two primary reserve metrics: (i) reserve replacement cost and (ii) reserve replacement ratio, to
measure its ability to establish a long-term trend of adding reserves at a reasonable cost. The reserve replacement
cost calculation provides an assessment of the cost of adding reserves that is ultimately included in depreciation,
depletion and amortization expense. The reserve replacement ratio is an indicator of LINN’s ability to replenish annual
production volumes and grow reserves. The metrics are calculated as follow:
Reserve replacement cost per
Mcfe
Reserve replacement ratio
=
=
Oil and natural gas capital costs expended(1)
Sum of reserve additions(2)
Sum of reserve additions(2)
Annual production
(1) Oil and natural gas capital costs expended include the costs of property acquisition, exploration and development
activities conducted to add reserves and exclude asset retirement costs. LINN expects to incur development
costs in the future for proved undeveloped reserves; such future costs are excluded from costs expended and
are not considered in the reserve replacement metrics presented herein.
(2) Reserve additions include proved reserves (developed and undeveloped) and reflect reserve revisions for prices
and performance, extensions, discoveries and other additions and acquisitions and do not include unproved
reserve quantities.
The reserve replacement metrics are presented separately, both: (i) including and excluding the impact of price
revisions on reserves, to demonstrate the effectiveness of LINN’s drilling program exclusive of economic factors
(such as price) outside of its control and (ii) including and excluding acquisitions, to demonstrate LINN’s ability to add
reserves through its drilling program and through acquisitions. Reserve replacement cost and reserve replacement
ratio are non-GAAP financial measures. The methods used by LINN to calculate these measures may differ from
methods used by other companies to compute similar measures. As a result, LINN’s measures may not be
comparable to similar measures provided by other companies. LINN believes that providing such measures is useful
in evaluating the cost to add proved reserves; however, these measures should not be considered in isolation or as a
substitute for GAAP measures. The reserve replacement cost per Mcfe and reserve replacement ratio are statistical
indicators that have limitations, including their predictive and comparative value. The reserve replacement ratio is
limited because it may vary widely based on the extent and timing of new discoveries, project sanctioning and
property acquisitions. In addition, since the reserve replacement ratio does not consider the development cost or
timing of future production of new reserves, it should not be used as a measure of value creation.
Table of Contents
76
The following presents reserve replacement cost and reserve replacement ratio including and excluding the effect of
price revisions on reserves:
Costs per Mcfe of production:
Reserve replacement cost, including acquisitions
Reserve replacement cost, excluding acquisitions
(finding and development cost)
Percentage of production:
Reserve replacement ratio, including acquisitions
Reserve replacement ratio, excluding acquisitions
Including Price Revisions
Year Ended December 31,
Excluding Price Revisions
Year Ended December 31,
2009
$1.96
2010
$ 1.63
2011
$2.37
2009
$1.71
2011
$2.46
2010
$1.94
$2.03
$ 0.79
$1.94
$1.59
$1.57
$2.15
165%  
 
88%
1,014%  
 
321%
674%  
  244%
189%  
  112%
854%  
  161%
651% 
  221%
Amounts used in these calculations and are derived directly from the table presented in “Supplemental Oil and Natural
Gas Data (Unaudited)” in LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011,
included elsewhere in this prospectus. The following provides a reconciliation of oil and natural gas capital costs used
in these calculations to its most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with
GAAP:
Costs incurred in oil and natural gas property acquisition,
exploration and development
Less:
Asset retirement costs
Property acquisition costs
Oil and natural gas capital costs expended, excluding acquisitions
Year Ended December 31,
2009
2010
(in thousands)
2011
$ 258,105   
 
 
(371)  
  (115,929)  
   
   
$ 141,805
$ 1,602,086   
 
 
(748)  
  (1,356,430)  
   
   
244,908   
$
$ 2,158,639
(2,427) 
  (1,516,737) 
   
 
639,475  
$
Liquidity and Capital Resources
LINN utilizes funds from equity and debt offerings, bank borrowings and cash flow from operations for capital
resources and liquidity. To date, the primary use of capital has been for acquisitions and the development of oil and
natural gas properties. For the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN’s total capital expenditures, excluding
acquisitions, were approximately $697 million. For the six months ended June 30, 2012, LINN’s capital expenditures,
excluding acquisitions, were approximately $557 million. For 2012, LINN estimates its total capital expenditures,
excluding acquisitions, will be approximately $1.1 billion, including $1.05 billion related to its oil and natural gas capital
program. This estimate reflects amounts for the development of properties associated with acquisitions, is under
continuous review and subject to ongoing adjustments. LINN expects to fund these capital expenditures primarily with
cash flow from operations and bank borrowings.
As LINN pursues growth, it continually monitors the capital resources available to meet future financial obligations and
planned capital expenditures. LINN’s future success in growing reserves and production volumes will be highly
dependent on the capital resources available and its success in drilling for or acquiring additional reserves. LINN
actively reviews acquisition opportunities on an ongoing basis. If LINN were to make significant additional acquisitions
for cash, it would need to borrow additional amounts under its Credit Facility, if available, or obtain additional debt or
equity financing. LINN’s Credit Facility and indentures governing its Senior Notes impose certain restrictions on
LINN’s ability to obtain additional debt financing. Based upon current expectations, LINN believes liquidity and capital
resources will be sufficient to conduct its business and operations.
77
Table of Contents
Statements of Cash Flows
The following is a comparative cash flow summary:
Net cash:
Provided by (used in) operating
activities(1)
Used in investing activities
2009
Year Ended December 31,
2010
(in thousands)
2011
Six Months Ended
2011
June 30,
2012
$ 426,804
$
270,918
$
518,706
$
303,762
$ (122,429)
Used in investing activities
Provided by (used in) financing
activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash
and cash equivalents
(282,273)
(1,581,408)
(2,130,360)
(1,081,736)
(2,265,931)
(150,968)
1,524,260
1,376,767
611,741
2,389,129
$ (6,437)
$
213,770
$ (234,887)
$ (166,233)
$
769
(1) The years ended December 31, 2009, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011, and the six months ended
June 30, 2012, include premiums paid for derivatives of approximately $94 million, $120 million, $134 million and
$583 million, respectively.
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the six months ended June 30, 2012, was approximately $122 million, compared
to approximately $304 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The decrease was primarily due to
approximately $583 million in premiums paid for commodity derivatives during the six months ended June 30, 2012,
compared to no premiums paid during the same period in 2011. Higher premiums and higher expenses were partially
offset by increased revenues primarily due to higher production volumes.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2011, was approximately $519 million,
compared to approximately $271 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. The increase was primarily due to
higher production volumes and higher commodity prices partially offset by higher expenses.
Cash provided by operating activities was approximately $271 million for the year ended December 31, 2010,
compared to approximately $427 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The decrease was primarily due to
approximately $124 million in realized losses on canceled interest rate derivatives during the year ended
December 31, 2010, compared to approximately $49 million in realized net gains on canceled commodity derivatives
during the year ended December 31, 2009.
Premiums paid during the six months ended June 30, 2012 and during 2011, 2010 and 2009 were for commodity
derivative contracts that hedge future production. These derivative contracts provide LINN long-term cash flow
predictability to manage its business, service debt and pay distributions and are primarily funded through LINN’s
Credit Facility. The amount of derivative contracts LINN enters into in the future will be directly related to expected
future production.
Table of Contents
Investing Activities
78
The following provides a comparative summary of cash flow from investing activities:
Cash flow from investing activities:
Acquisition of oil and natural gas
properties, net of cash acquired
Capital expenditures
Proceeds from sale of properties and
2009
Year Ended December 31,
2010
(in thousands)
2011
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2011
2012
$(130,735)   $(1,351,033)   $(1,500,193)   $ (847,780)   $(1,762,933) 
(503,573)
(178,242)
(223,013)
(629,864)
(244,546)
Proceeds from sale of properties and
equipment and other
26,704
575  
 
  
      
 
   $(282,273)   $(1,581,408)   $(2,130,360)   $(1,081,736)   $(2,265,931)
10,590
(7,362)
(303)
The primary use of cash in investing activities is for capital spending, including acquisitions and the development of
LINN’s oil and natural gas properties. Cash used in investing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2012,
primarily relates to the acquisitions of properties in the Hugoton Basin, Williston/Powder River Basin and East Texas
regions. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2011, primarily relates to acquisitions of
properties in the Williston Basin, Permian Basin and Mid-Continent Deep regions. The year ended December 31, 2011,
also includes the deposit of approximately $9 million returned to LINN by the other party to the purchase and sale
agreement (“PSA”) terminated by LINN in 2010.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2010, primarily relates to acquisitions and the
development of properties in the Permian Basin, Mid-Continent Deep and Michigan regions. Proceeds from the sale of
properties were lower for the year ended December 31, 2010, compared to the year ended December 31, 2009,
primarily due to the proceeds received in 2009 related to the sale of acreage in central Oklahoma. The year ended
December 31, 2010, also includes the deposit made by LINN of approximately $9 million held by the other party to the
PSA terminated by LINN. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2009, includes
approximately $114 million for the acquisition of properties in the Permian Basin region.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2012, was approximately $2.4 billion,
compared to approximately $612 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The increase in financing cash flow
needs was primarily attributable to increased acquisitions and development activity during the six months ended June
30, 2012.
Table of Contents
79
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2011, was approximately $1.4 billion compared
to approximately $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2010. The decrease in financing cash flow needs was
primarily attributable to the increase in cash provided by operating activities and the utilization of cash on hand. In
comparison, cash used in financing activities was approximately $151 million for the year ended December 31, 2009.
The following provides a comparative summary of proceeds from borrowings and repayments of debt:
Proceeds from borrowings:
Credit facility
Senior notes
Repayments of debt:
Credit facility
Senior notes
Six Months Ended
2011
2011
2012
2009
2010
June,
237,703
(in thousands)
Year Ended December 31,
2,250,816
615,000    $ 2,155,000  
   $ 401,500    $ 1,050,000    $ 1,790,000    $
744,240   
  1,799,802  
 
  
      
 
   
   
   
   $ 639,203    $ 3,300,816    $ 2,534,240    $ 1,359,240    $ 3,954,802  
      
 
  
   $(704,893)   $(2,150,000)   $ (850,000)   $ (615,000)   $(1,945,000) 
—    
 
  
 
      
   $(704,893)   $(2,150,000)   $(1,301,029)   $(1,064,679)   $(1,945,000)
(451,029)
(449,679)
744,240
—
—
Debt
LINN’s Credit Facility provides for a revolving credit facility up to the lesser of: (i) the then-effective borrowing base
and (ii) the maximum commitment amount. In October 2011, as part of the semi-annual redetermination, a borrowing
base of $3.0 billion was approved by the lenders with a maximum commitment amount of $1.5 billion. In February
2012, lenders approved an increase in the maximum commitment amount to $2.0 billion. In May 2012, LINN entered
into an amendment to its Credit Facility to increase the borrowing base to $3.5 billion and extend the maturity date
from April 2016 to April 2017. At June 30, 2012, available borrowing capacity was approximately $646 million, which
includes a $4 million reduction in availability for outstanding letters of credit and a $200 million reduction in availability
related to a restriction on swap agreements outstanding associated with the Jonah Acquisition. The $200 million
reduction in availability under the Credit Facility no longer applies since the acquisition has closed.
In July 2012, LINN entered into an amendment to its Credit Facility to increase the maximum commitment amount
from $2.0 billion to $3.0 billion.
On February 28, 2011, LINN commenced cash tender offers and related consent solicitations to purchase any and all
of its outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes.
In March 2011, in accordance with the provisions of the indentures governing its 2017 Senior Notes and the 2018
Senior Notes, LINN redeemed 35%, or $87 million and $90 million, respectively, of each of the original aggregate
principal amount of the Original Senior Notes, as defined in Note 6 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for
the year ended December 31, 2011, included elsewhere in this prospectus.
In March 2011, in connection with its cash tender offers and related consent solicitations, LINN also accepted and
purchased: (i) $105 million of the aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 2017 Senior Notes (or 65% of the
remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2017 Senior Notes), and (ii) $126 million aggregate principal amount of
its outstanding 2018 Senior Notes (or 76% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2018 Senior Notes).
In May 2011, LINN issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.50% senior notes due 2019 and used net
proceeds of approximately $729 million to repay all of the outstanding indebtedness under its Credit
Table of Contents
80
Facility, to fund or partially fund acquisitions and for general corporate purposes. On May 8, 2012, LINN filed a
registration statement on Form S-4 to register exchange notes that are also substantially similar to the November
2019 Senior Notes. As of July 26, 2012, the registration statement has not been declared effective. The deadline for
registration has passed and LINN will be required to pay additional interest which is expected to be less than
$500,000.
In June 2011, LINN repurchased an additional portion of its remaining outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior
Notes for approximately $17 million (or 29% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2017 Senior Notes)
and approximately $24 million (or 61% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2018 Senior Notes),
respectively. In December 2011, LINN also repurchased an additional portion of its remaining outstanding 2018 Senior
Notes for approximately $2 million (or 9% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of the 2018 Senior Notes).
After giving effect to the tender offers and subsequent repurchases of the 2017 Senior Notes and the 2018 Senior
Notes, aggregate principal amounts of $41 million and $14 million, respectively, remained outstanding at
December 31, 2011.
In March 2012, LINN issued $1.8 billion in aggregate principal amount of 6.25% senior notes due 2019 and used the
net proceeds of the offering to fund the Hugoton Acquisition, to repay indebtedness outstanding under its revolving
credit facility and for general corporate purposes.
LINN depends, in part, on its Credit Facility for future capital needs. In addition, LINN has drawn on the Credit Facility
to fund or partially fund quarterly cash distribution payments, since it uses operating cash flow primarily for drilling and
development of oil and natural gas properties and acquisitions and borrows as cash is needed. Absent such
borrowings, LINN would have at times experienced a shortfall in cash available to pay the declared quarterly cash
distribution amount. If an event of default occurs and is continuing under the Credit Facility, LINN would be unable to
make borrowings to fund distributions. For additional information about this matter and other risk factors that could
affect LINN, please read “Risk Factors.”
Counterparty Credit Risk
LINN accounts for its commodity derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate derivatives at fair value. LINN’s
counterparties are current participants or affiliates of participants in its Credit Facility or were participants or affiliates
of participants in its Credit Facility at the time it originally entered into the derivatives. The Credit Facility is secured
by LINN’s oil, natural gas and NGL reserves; therefore, LINN is not required to post any collateral. LINN does not
receive collateral from its counterparties. LINN minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by: (i) limiting its
exposure to any single counterparty; (ii) entering into derivative instruments only with counterparties that meet LINN’s
minimum credit quality standard, or have a guarantee from an affiliate that meets LINN’s minimum credit quality
standard; and (iii) monitoring the creditworthiness of LINN’s counterparties on an ongoing basis. In accordance with
LINN’s standard practice, its commodity derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate derivatives are subject to
counterparty netting under agreements governing such derivatives and therefore the risk of loss due to counterparty
nonperformance is somewhat mitigated.
Equity Distribution Agreement
In August 2011, LINN entered into an equity distribution agreement, pursuant to which it may from time to time issue
and sell units representing limited liability company interests having an aggregate offering price of up to $500 million.
In connection with entering into the agreement, LINN incurred expenses of approximately $423,000. Sales of units, if
any, will be made through a sales agent by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions, in block transactions, or as
otherwise agreed with the agent. LINN expects to use the net proceeds from any sale of the units for general
corporate purposes, which may include, among other things, capital expenditures, acquisitions and the repayment of
debt.
Table of Contents
81
In September 2011, LINN issued and sold 16,060 units representing limited liability company interests at an average
unit price of $38.25 for proceeds of approximately $602,000 (net of approximately $12,000 in commissions). In
December 2011, LINN issued and sold 772,104 units representing limited liability company interests at an average
unit price of $38.03 for proceeds of approximately $29 million (net of approximately $587,000 in commissions). In
connection with the issue and sale of these units, LINN incurred professional service expenses of approximately
$139,000. LINN used the net proceeds for general corporate purposes including the repayment of a portion of the
indebtedness outstanding under its Credit Facility.
In January 2012, LINN issued and sold 1,539,651 units representing limited liability company interests at an average
unit price of $38.02 for proceeds of approximately $57 million (net of approximately $2 million in commissions and
professional service expenses). The net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes including the repayment
of a portion of the indebtedness outstanding under LINN’s Credit Facility. At June 30, 2012, units equaling
approximately $411 million in aggregate offering price remained available to be issued and sold under the agreement.
Public Offering of Units
In March 2011, LINN sold 16,726,067 units representing limited liability company interests at $38.80 per unit ($37.248
per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $623 million (after underwriting discount and
offering expenses of approximately $26 million). LINN used a portion of the net proceeds from the sale of these units
to fund the March 2011 redemptions of a portion of the outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes and to
fund the cash tender offers and related expenses for a portion of the remaining 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior
Notes. LINN used the remaining net proceeds from the sale of units to finance a portion of the March 31, 2011,
acquisition in the Williston Basin.
In January 2012, LINN sold 19,550,000 units representing limited liability company interests at $35.95 per unit
($34.512 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $674 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $28 million). LINN used the net proceeds from the sale of these units
to repay a portion of the indebtedness outstanding under its Credit Facility.
Unit Repurchase Plan
In October 2008, the Board of Directors of LINN authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of LINN’s outstanding
units from time to time on the open market or in negotiated purchases. In August 2011, LINN repurchased 400,000
units at an average unit price of $32.98 for a total cost of approximately $13 million. In addition, in October 2011,
LINN repurchased 129,734 units at an average unit price of $32.08 for a total cost of approximately $4 million.
Distributions
Under LINN’s limited liability company agreement, unitholders are entitled to receive a quarterly distribution of
available cash to the extent there is sufficient cash from operations after establishment of cash reserves and
payment of fees and expenses. The following provides a summary of distributions paid by LINN during the year ended
December 31, 2011 and the six months ended June 30, 2012:
Date Paid
 
May 2012
February 2012
November 2011
August 2011
May 2011
February 2011
Period Covered by Distribution
January 1 – March 31, 2012
October 1 – December 31, 2011
  
  
  
   October 1 – December 31, 2010
July 1 – September 30, 2011
April 1 – June 30, 2011
January 1 – March 31, 2011
Distribution
Per Unit
0.725    
0.69    
0.69    
0.69    
0.66    
0.66
$
$
$
$
$
$
Total
Distribution 
(in millions)  
144  
$
138  
$
122  
$
$
123  
116  
$
$
106
82
Table of Contents
On July 24, 2012, LINN’s Board of Directors declared a cash distribution of $0.725 per unit with respect to the second
quarter of 2012. The distribution, totaling approximately $145 million, will be paid on August 14, 2012, to unitholders of
record as of the close of business on August 7, 2012.
Contingencies
LINN has been named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits and is involved in various other disputes arising in the
ordinary course of business, including claims from royalty owners related to disputed royalty payments and royalty
valuations. LINN has established reserves that management currently believes are adequate to provide for potential
liabilities based upon its evaluation of these matters. For a certain statewide class action royalty payment dispute
where a reserve has not yet been established, LINN has denied that it has any liability on the claims and has raised
arguments and defenses that, if accepted by the court, will result in no loss to LINN. Discovery related to class
certification has concluded. Briefing and the hearing on class certification have been deferred by court order pending
the resolution of interlocutory appeals of two unrelated class certification orders. As a result, LINN is unable to
estimate a possible loss, or range of possible loss, if any. LINN is not currently a party to any litigation or pending
claims that it believes would have a material adverse effect on its overall business, financial position, results of
operations or liquidity; however, cash flow could be significantly impacted in the reporting periods in which such
matters are resolved.
During the years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, and the six months ended
June 30, 2012, LINN made no significant payments to settle any legal, environmental or tax proceedings. LINN
regularly analyzes current information and accrues for probable liabilities on the disposition of certain matters as
necessary. Liabilities for loss contingencies arising from claims, assessments, litigation or other sources are recorded
when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated.
In 2008, Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. and Lehman Brothers Commodity Services Inc. (together “Lehman”), filed
voluntary petitions for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court
for the Southern District of New York. In March 2011, LINN and Lehman entered into Termination Agreements under
which LINN was granted general unsecured claims against Lehman in the amount of $51 million (the “Company
Claim”). In December 2011, a Chapter 11 Plan (“Plan”) was approved by the Bankruptcy Court. Based on the recovery
estimates described in the approved disclosure statement relating to the Plan, LINN expects to ultimately receive a
substantial portion of the Company Claim. On April 19, 2012, an initial distribution under the Plan of approximately $25
million was received by LINN resulting in a gain of approximately $18 million, which is included in gains (losses) on oil
and natural gas derivatives on the condensed consolidated statement of operations.
83
Table of Contents
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes, as of December 31, 2011, certain long-term contractual obligations that are reflected in the
consolidated balance sheets and/or disclosed in the accompanying notes thereto:
Contractual Obligations
 
Long-term debt obligations:
Credit facility
Senior notes
Interest (1)
Operating lease obligations:
Office, property and equipment leases
Other noncurrent liabilities:
Asset retirement obligations
Other:
Commodity derivatives
Charitable contributions
Payments Due
2017 and
Beyond
—    
  3,104,898  
 
805,210
2012
Total
—       $ 940,000     $
   $ 940,000     $ —       $
 
—      
  
  537,436
2013 – 2014    
(in thousands)
3,104,898    
  2,130,681
—      
  268,718
—      
519,317
2015 – 2016
31,477
71,142
5,652
2,847
9,367
3,353
7,405
3,438
9,053
61,504
17,563    
222
14,060    
 
111
—    
 
  
—    
 
  
      
 
   $6,295,983     $291,388     $ 552,039     $1,471,891     $3,980,665
1,772    
111
1,731    
—
(1) Represents interest on the Credit Facility computed at the weighted average LIBOR of 2.57% through maturity in
April 2016 and interest on the 2019 Senior Notes, 2010 Issued Senior Notes, and the Original Senior Notes, as
defined in Note 6 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011,
included elsewhere in this prospectus, computed at fixed rates of 11.75%, 9.875%, 6.50%, 8.625% and 7.75%
through maturities in May 2017, July 2018, May 2019, April 2020 and February 2021, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The non-GAAP financial measures of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income, as defined by LINN, may not be
comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Therefore, these non-GAAP measures should be
considered in conjunction with income from continuing operations and other performance measures prepared in
accordance with GAAP, such as operating income or cash flow from operating activities. Adjusted EBITDA and
adjusted net income should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for GAAP measures, such as net income,
operating income or any other GAAP measure of liquidity or financial performance.
Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP Measure)
Adjusted EBITDA is a measure used by LINN’s management to indicate (prior to the establishment of any reserves
by its board of directors) the cash distributions LINN expects to make to its unitholders. Adjusted EBITDA is also a
quantitative measure used throughout the investment community with respect to publicly-traded partnerships and
limited liability companies.
LINN defines adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus the following adjustments:
•   Net operating cash flow from acquisitions and divestitures, effective date through closing date;
•   Interest expense;
•   Depreciation, depletion and amortization;
•   Impairment of long-lived assets;
84
Table of Contents
•   Write-off of deferred financing fees;
•   (Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net;
•   Provision for legal matters;
•   Loss on extinguishment of debt;
•   Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity derivatives;
•
Unrealized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
Unrealized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
•   Realized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
•   Realized (gains) losses on canceled derivatives;
•   Realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim;
•   Unit-based compensation expenses;
•   Exploration costs;
•   Income tax (benefit) expense; and
•   Discontinued operations.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA (unaudited):
Six Months Ended
Net income (loss)
Plus:
Net operating cash flow from acquisitions and
divestitures, effective date through closing date   
Interest expense, cash
  
Interest expense, noncash
  
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
  
Impairment of long-lived assets
  
Write-off of deferred financing fees
  
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net   
Provision for legal matters
  
Loss on extinguishment of debt
  
Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity
derivatives
  
Unrealized gains on interest rate derivatives
  
Realized losses on interest rate derivatives
  
Realized (gains) losses on canceled derivatives   
Realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim   
Unit-based compensation expenses
  
Exploration costs
  
Income tax (benefit) expense
  
Discontinued operations
2009
Year Ended December 31,
$(298,192)   $(114,288)   $ 438,439    $(209,573)   $ 230,884
(in thousands)
2010
June 30,
2011
2011
2012
3,708   
 
74,185   
 
18,516   
  201,782   
—     
 
 
204   
(23,051)  
 
—     
 
 
—
591,379   
(16,588)  
 
42,881   
 
 
(48,977)  
—     
 
15,089   
 
7,169   
 
 
(4,221)  
2,351
42,846   
  129,691   
 
63,819   
  238,532   
38,600   
 
 
2,076   
3,008   
 
4,362   
 
 
—
232,376   
(63,978)  
 
 
8,021   
  123,865   
 
—     
13,792   
 
5,168   
 
 
4,241   
—
57,966   
  249,085   
 
10,640   
  334,084   
—     
 
 
1,189   
124   
 
 
1,086   
94,612
(192,951)  
—     
 
 
—     
(26,752)  
 
 
—     
22,243   
 
2,390   
 
 
5,466   
—
36,359   
  125,181   
 
644   
  145,711   
—     
 
 
1,189   
(916)  
 
740   
 
 
94,372
261,851   
—     
 
—     
 
 
—     
—     
 
11,181   
 
995   
 
 
5,868   
—
45,127  
  129,652  
 
42,257  
  260,782  
  146,499  
 
7,889  
991  
 
795  
 
 
—
(250,406) 
—    
 
—    
 
 
—    
(18,277) 
 
14,834  
 
817  
 
 
9,430  
—
Adjusted EBITDA
$ 566,235    $ 732,131    $ 997,621    $ 473,602    $ 621,274
85
Table of Contents
Adjusted Net Income (Non-GAAP Measure)
Adjusted net income is a performance measure used by Company management to evaluate its operational
performance from oil and natural gas properties, prior to unrealized (gains) losses on derivatives, realized (gains)
losses on canceled derivatives, realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim, impairment of long-lived assets, loss
on extinguishment of debt and (gains) losses on sale of assets, net.
The following presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted net income (unaudited):
Six Months Ended
2012
2011
2009
June 30,
Year Ended December 31,
2010
2011
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
$(298,192)   $(114,288)   $ 438,439    $(209,573)   $ 230,884
Net income (loss)
Plus:
Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity
  (250,406) 
derivatives
  591,379   
  
 
—    
Unrealized gains on interest rate derivatives
 
(16,588)  
  
  146,499  
Realized (gains) losses on canceled derivatives   
(48,977)  
 
(18,277) 
 
Realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim   
—     
 
—    
 
Impairment of long-lived assets
—     
 
  
 
—    
Loss on extinguishment of debt
 
—     
  
921  
 
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net   
(23,051)  
 
—    
 
2,351   
Discontinued operations
 
  
      
   
 
   
   $ 206,922    $ 219,489    $ 313,331    $ 145,664    $ 109,621
232,376   
 
(63,978)  
  123,865   
 
—     
38,600   
 
 
—     
2,914   
 
—
(192,951)  
 
—     
(26,752)  
 
—     
 
 
—     
94,612   
 
(17)  
 
—
261,851   
 
—     
—     
 
—     
 
—     
 
 
94,372   
(986)  
 
—
Adjusted net income
$
Income (loss) from continuing operations per
unit—basic
Plus, per unit:
Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity
derivatives
 
  
Unrealized gains on interest rate derivatives
 
  
Realized (gains) losses on canceled derivatives   
 
Realized gain on recovery of bankruptcy claim   
 
Impairment of long-lived assets
 
  
Loss on extinguishment of debt
 
  
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net   
 
Discontinued operations
 
  
      
   $
Adjusted net income per unit—basic
(2.50)   $
(0.80)   $
2.52    $
(1.25)   $
1.17
4.95   
(0.14)  
(0.41)  
—     
—     
—     
(0.19)  
0.02
1.73    $
1.63   
(0.45)  
0.87   
—     
0.27   
—     
0.02   
—
1.54    $
(1.11)  
—     
(0.15)  
—     
—     
0.54   
—     
—
1.80    $
1.56   
—     
—     
—     
—     
0.56   
(0.01)  
—
0.86    $
(1.26) 
—    
—    
(0.09) 
0.74  
—    
—    
—    
 
0.56
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of LINN’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon the consolidated
financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these
Table of Contents
86
financial statements requires LINN to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Certain accounting
policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is reasonable likelihood that materially
different amounts could have been reported under different conditions, or if different assumptions had been used.
LINN evaluates its estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. LINN bases estimates on historical experience and
various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the
basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other
sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of financial
statements.
Below are expanded discussions of LINN’s more significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments, i.e., those
that reflect more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of its financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In December 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an Accounting Standards Update
(“ASU”) that requires an entity to disclose information about offsetting and related arrangements to enable users of its
financial statements to understand the effect of those arrangements on its financial position. The ASU requires
disclosure of both gross information and net information about both instruments and transactions eligible for offset in
the statement of financial position and instruments and transactions subject to an agreement similar to a master
netting arrangement. The ASU will be applied retrospectively and is effective for periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2013. LINN is currently evaluating the impact, if any, of the adoption of this ASU on its consolidated
financial statements and related disclosures.
In May 2011, the FASB issued an ASU that further addresses fair value measurement accounting and related
disclosure requirements. The ASU clarifies the FASB’s intent regarding the application of existing fair value
measurement and disclosure requirements, changes the fair value measurement requirements for certain financial
instruments, and sets forth additional disclosure requirements for other fair value measurements. The ASU is to be
applied prospectively and is effective for periods beginning after December 15, 2011. The adoption of the
requirements of the ASU, which expanded disclosures, had no effect on LINN’s results of operations or financial
position.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
Proved reserves are based on the quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL that by analysis of geoscience and
engineering data can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible from a given date forward,
from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods and government regulations prior
to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is
reasonably certain. The independent engineering firm DeGolyer and MacNaughton prepared a reserve and economic
evaluation of all of LINN properties on a well-by-well basis as of December 31, 2011, and the reserve estimates
reported herein were prepared by DeGolyer and MacNaughton. The reserve estimates were reviewed and approved by
LINN’s senior engineering staff and management, with final approval by its Executive Vice President and Chief
Operating Officer.
Reserves and their relation to estimated future net cash flows impact LINN’s depletion and impairment calculations.
As a result, adjustments to depletion and impairment are made concurrently with changes to reserve estimates. The
process performed by the independent engineers to prepare reserve amounts included their estimation of reserve
quantities, future producing rates, future net revenue and the present value of such future net revenue, based in part
on data provided by LINN. The estimates of reserves conform to the guidelines of the SEC, including the criteria of
“reasonable certainty,” as it pertains to expectations about the recoverability of reserves in future years.
Table of Contents
87
The accuracy of reserve estimates is a function of many factors including the following: the quality and quantity of
available data, the interpretation of that data, the accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions and the
judgments of the individuals preparing the estimates. In addition, reserve estimates are a function of many
assumptions, all of which could deviate significantly from actual results. As such, reserve estimates may materially
vary from the ultimate quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL eventually recovered. For additional information regarding
estimates of reserves, including the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows, see “Supplemental Oil
and Natural Gas Data (Unaudited)” in LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year ended December 31,
2011, included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Proved Properties
LINN accounts for oil and natural gas properties in accordance with the successful efforts method. In accordance with
this method, all leasehold and development costs of proved properties are capitalized and amortized on a unit-of-
production basis over the remaining life of the proved reserves and proved developed reserves, respectively.
LINN evaluates the impairment of its proved oil and natural gas properties on a field-by-field basis whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The carrying values of proved
properties are reduced to fair value when the expected undiscounted future cash flows are less than net book value.
The fair values of proved properties are measured using valuation techniques consistent with the income approach,
converting future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair values of
proved properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity
prices; and (iv) a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. The underlying commodity prices embedded in
LINN’s estimated cash flows are the product of a process that begins with New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”)
forward curve pricing, adjusted for estimated location and quality differentials, as well as other factors that Company
management believes will impact realizable prices. Costs of retired, sold or abandoned properties that constitute a
part of an amortization base are charged or credited, net of proceeds, to accumulated depreciation, depletion and
amortization unless doing so significantly affects the unit-of-production amortization rate, in which case a gain or loss
is recognized currently. Gains or losses from the disposal of other properties are recognized currently. Expenditures
for maintenance and repairs necessary to maintain properties in operating condition are expensed as incurred.
Estimated dismantlement and abandonment costs are capitalized, net of salvage, at their estimated net present value
and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the related proved developed reserves. LINN
capitalizes interest on borrowed funds related to its share of costs associated with the drilling and completion of new
oil and natural gas wells. Interest is capitalized only during the periods in which these assets are brought to their
intended use. LINN capitalized interest costs of approximately $2 million, $1 million and $300,000 for the years ended
December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively.
Impairment of Proved Properties
Based on the analysis described above, LINN recorded no impairment charge of proved oil and natural gas properties
for the years ended December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2009. During the six months ended June 30, 2012, LINN
recorded a noncash impairment charge, before and after tax, of approximately $146 million associated with proved oil
and natural gas properties related to a decline in commodity prices. For the year ended December 31, 2010, LINN
recorded a noncash impairment charge, before and after tax, of approximately $39 million primarily associated with
proved oil and natural gas properties related to an unfavorable marketing contract. The carrying values of the impaired
proved properties were reduced to fair value, estimated using inputs characteristic of a Level 3 fair-value
measurement. The charges are included in “impairment of long-lived assets” on the consolidated statements of
operations.
Unproved Properties
Costs related to unproved properties include costs incurred to acquire unproved reserves. Because these reserves do
not meet the definition of proved reserves, the related costs are not classified as proved properties.
Table of Contents
88
The fair values of unproved properties are measured using valuation techniques consistent with the income approach,
converting future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair values of
unproved properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future
commodity prices; and (iv) a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. The market-based weighted average
cost of capital rate is subjected to additional project-specific risking factors. Unproved leasehold costs are capitalized
and amortized on a composite basis if individually insignificant, based on past success, experience and average
lease-term lives. Individually significant leases are reclassified to proved properties if successful and expensed on a
lease by lease basis if unsuccessful or the lease term expires. Unamortized leasehold costs related to successful
exploratory drilling are reclassified to proved properties and depleted on a unit-of-production basis. LINN assesses
unproved properties for impairment quarterly on the basis of its experience in similar situations and other factors such
as the primary lease terms of the properties, the average holding period of unproved properties, and the relative
proportion of such properties on which proved reserves have been found in the past.
Exploration Costs
Geological and geophysical costs, delay rentals, amortization and impairment of unproved leasehold costs and costs
to drill exploratory wells that do not find proved reserves are expensed as exploration costs. The costs of any
exploratory wells are carried as an asset if the well finds a sufficient quantity of reserves to justify its capitalization as
a producing well and as long as LINN is making sufficient progress towards assessing the reserves and the economic
and operating viability of the project. LINN recorded noncash leasehold impairment expenses related to unproved
properties of approximately $2 million, $5 million and $7 million for the years ended December 31, 2011,
December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, which are included in “exploration costs” on the consolidated
statements of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Sales of oil, natural gas and NGL are recognized when the product has been delivered to a custody transfer point,
persuasive evidence of a sales arrangement exists, the rights and responsibility of ownership pass to the purchaser
upon delivery, collection of revenue from the sale is reasonably assured, and the sales price is fixed or determinable.
LINN has elected the entitlements method to account for natural gas production imbalances. Imbalances occur when
LINN sells more or less than its entitled ownership percentage of total natural gas production. In accordance with the
entitlements method, any amount received in excess of LINN’s share is treated as a liability. If LINN receives less
than its entitled share, the underproduction is recorded as a receivable. At December 31, 2011, and December 31,
2010, LINN had natural gas production imbalance receivables of approximately $19 million and $18 million,
respectively, which are included in “accounts receivable—trade, net” on the consolidated balance sheets and natural
gas production imbalance payables of approximately $9 million and $8 million, respectively, which are included in
“accounts payable and accrued expenses” on the consolidated balance sheets.
LINN engages in the purchase, gathering and transportation of third-party natural gas and subsequently markets such
natural gas to independent purchasers under separate arrangements. As such, LINN separately reports third-party
marketing sales and natural gas marketing expenses.
Asset Retirement Obligations
LINN has the obligation to plug and abandon oil and natural gas wells and related equipment at the end of production
operations. Estimated asset retirement costs are recognized when the obligation is incurred, and are amortized over
proved developed reserves using the unit-of-production method. Accretion expense is included in
89
Table of Contents
“depreciation, depletion and amortization” on the consolidated statements of operations. The fair values of additions to
the asset retirement obligations are estimated using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single
discounted amount. Significant inputs to the valuation include estimates of: (i) plug and abandon costs per well based
on existing regulatory requirements; (ii) remaining life per well; (iii) future inflation factors; and (iv) a credit-adjusted
risk-free interest rate. These inputs require significant judgments and estimates by LINN’s management at the time of
the valuation and are the most sensitive and subject to change. Revisions in estimated liabilities can result from
revisions of estimated inflation rates, escalating retirement costs and changes in the estimated timing of settling
asset retirement obligations.
Derivative Instruments
LINN uses derivative financial instruments to reduce exposure to fluctuations in the prices of oil and natural gas. By
removing a significant portion of the price volatility associated with future production, LINN expects to mitigate, but
not eliminate, the potential effects of variability in cash flow from operations due to fluctuations in commodity prices.
These transactions are primarily in the form of swap contracts and put options. A swap contract specifies a fixed
price that LINN will receive from the counterparty as compared to floating market prices, and on the settlement date
LINN will receive or pay the difference between the swap price and the market price. A put option requires LINN to pay
the counterparty a premium equal to the fair value of the option at the purchase date and receive from the
counterparty the excess, if any, of the fixed price floor over the market price at the settlement date. In addition, LINN
may from time to time enter into derivative contracts in the form of interest rate swaps to minimize the effects of
fluctuations in interest rates. Currently, LINN has no outstanding derivative contracts in the form of interest rate
swaps.
Derivative instruments (including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts that require bifurcation)
are recorded at fair value and included on the consolidated balance sheets as assets or liabilities. LINN did not
designate these contracts as cash flow hedges; therefore, the changes in fair value of these instruments are recorded
in current earnings. LINN uses certain pricing models to determine the fair value of its derivative financial instruments.
Inputs to the pricing models include publicly available prices and forward price curves generated from a compilation of
data gathered from third parties. Company management validates the data provided by third parties by understanding
the pricing models used, obtaining market values from other pricing sources, analyzing pricing data in certain
situations and confirming that those securities trade in active markets.
Acquisition Accounting
LINN accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. Accordingly, LINN recognizes
amounts for identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed equal to their estimated acquisition date fair values.
Transaction and integration costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred.
LINN makes various assumptions in estimating the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. As fair
value is a market-based measurement, it is determined based on the assumptions that market participants would use.
The most significant assumptions relate to the estimated fair values of proved and unproved oil and natural gas
properties. The fair values of these properties are measured using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows
to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs to the valuation include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future
operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity prices; and (iv) a market-based weighted average cost of
capital rate. The market-based weighted average cost of capital rate is subjected to additional project-specific risking
factors. To compensate for the inherent risk of estimating and valuing unproved properties, the discounted future net
revenues of probable and possible reserves are reduced by additional risk-weighting factors. In addition, when
appropriate, LINN reviews comparable purchases and sales of oil and natural gas properties within the same regions,
and uses that data as a proxy for fair market value; i.e., the amount a willing buyer and seller would enter into in
exchange for such properties.
90
Table of Contents
Any excess of the acquisition price over the estimated fair value of net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill while
any excess of the estimated fair value of net assets acquired over the acquisition price is recorded in current earnings
as a gain. Deferred taxes are recorded for any differences between the assigned values and the tax basis of assets
and liabilities. Estimated deferred taxes are based on available information concerning the tax basis of assets
acquired and liabilities assumed and loss carryforwards at the acquisition date, although such estimates may change
in the future as additional information becomes known.
While the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed have no effect on cash flow, they can
have an effect on future results of operations. Generally, higher fair values assigned to oil and natural gas properties
result in higher future depreciation, depletion and amortization expense, which results in decreased future net
earnings. Also, a higher fair value assigned to oil and natural gas properties, based on higher future estimates of
commodity prices, could increase the likelihood of impairment in the event of lower commodity prices or higher
operating costs than those originally used to determine fair value. The recording of impairment expense has no effect
on cash flow but results in a decrease in net income for the period in which the impairment is recorded.
Legal, Environmental and Other Contingencies
A provision for legal, environmental and other contingencies is charged to expense when the loss is probable and the
cost can be reasonably estimated. Determining when expenses should be recorded for these contingencies and the
appropriate amounts of the accrual is subject to an estimation process that requires subjective judgment of
management. In many cases, management’s judgment is based on the advice and opinions of legal counsel and other
advisers, the interpretation of laws and regulations which can be interpreted differently by regulators and/or courts of
law, the experience of LINN and other companies dealing with similar matters, and management’s decision on how it
intends to respond to a particular matter; for example, a decision to contest it vigorously or a decision to seek a
negotiated settlement. LINN’s management closely monitors known and potential legal, environmental and other
contingencies and periodically determines when it should record losses for these items based on information available
to LINN.
Unit-Based Compensation
LINN recognizes expense for unit-based compensation over the requisite service period in an amount equal to the fair
value of unit-based payments granted to employees and nonemployee directors.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
The primary objective of the following information is to provide forward-looking quantitative and qualitative information
about potential exposure to market risks. The term “market risk” refers to the risk of loss arising from adverse
changes in commodity prices and interest rates. The disclosures are not meant to be precise indicators of expected
future losses, but rather indicators of reasonably possible losses. This forward-looking information provides indicators
of how LINN views and manages its ongoing market risk exposures. All of LINN’s market risk sensitive instruments
were entered into for purposes other than trading.
The following should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related discussion included elsewhere in
this registration statement.
Commodity Price Risk
LINN enters into derivative contracts with respect to a portion of its projected production through various transactions
that provide an economic hedge of the risk related to the future commodity prices received. LINN does not enter into
derivative contracts for trading purposes (see Note 7 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year
ended December 31, 2011, included elsewhere in this prospectus).
91
Table of Contents
At June 30, 2012, the fair value of fixed price swaps and put contracts that settle during the next 12 months was a net
asset of approximately $469 million. A 10% increase in the index oil and natural gas prices above the June 30, 2012,
prices for the next 12 months would result in a net asset of approximately $310 million which represents a decrease in
the fair value of approximately $159 million; conversely, a 10% decrease in the index oil and natural gas prices would
result in a net asset of approximately $634 million, which represents an increase in the fair value of approximately
$165 million.
Interest Rate Risk
At June 30, 2012, LINN had long-term debt outstanding under its Credit Facility of approximately $1.2 billion, which
incurred interest at floating rates. A 1% increase in the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) would result in an
estimated $12 million increase in annual interest expense.
Counterparty Credit Risk
LINN accounts for its commodity derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate derivatives at fair value on a
recurring basis (see Note 8 to LINN’s historical audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011,
included elsewhere in this prospectus). The fair value of these derivative financial instruments includes the impact of
assumed credit risk adjustments, which are based on LINN’s and its counterparties’ published credit ratings, public
bond yield spreads and credit default swap spreads, as applicable.
At June 30, 2012, the average public bond yield spread utilized to estimate the impact of LINN’s credit risk on
derivative liabilities was approximately 2.96%. A 1% increase in the average public bond yield spread would result in
an estimated $10,000 increase in net income for the six months ended June 30, 2012. At June 30, 2012, the credit
default swap spreads utilized to estimate the impact of its counterparties’ credit risk on derivative assets ranged
between 0.00% and 4.72%. A 1% increase in each of the counterparties’ credit default swap spreads would result in
an estimated $21 million decrease in net income for the six months ended June 30, 2012.
Table of Contents
92
BUSINESS
LinnCo
We are a limited liability company formed in Delaware in April 2012. Upon completion of this offering, our only
business will consist of owning LINN units. We will have no operations prior to the closing of this offering. As a result,
our financial condition and results of operations following this offering will depend entirely upon the performance of
LINN. We do not expect to have any income or cash flow other than distributions we receive in respect of our LINN
units. When LINN makes distributions on the units, we will pay a dividend on our shares of the cash we receive in
respect of our LINN units, net of reserves for income taxes payable by us. For the periods ending December 31, 2012,
2013, 2014 and 2015, we estimate that our income tax liability will not exceed     % of the cash distributed to us. On
July 24, 2012, LINN declared a regular quarterly cash distribution of $0.725 per unit, or $2.90 per unit on an annualized
basis. Accordingly, if LINN were to maintain its current annualized distribution of $2.90 per unit through 2015, the
amount reserved to pay income taxes of LinnCo is estimated to be no more than $         per share for the periods
ending December 31, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
We have elected to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes. As a result, an owner of our
shares will not report on its U.S. federal income tax return any of our items of income, gain, loss and deduction, nor
will they receive a Schedule K-1. Our shareholders also will not be subject to state income tax filings in the various
states in which LINN conducts operations as a result of owning our shares. Like shareholders of a corporation, our
shareholders will be subject to U.S. federal income tax, as well as any applicable state or local income tax, on taxable
dividends received by them. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences” for additional details.
Overview
LINN
LINN’s mission is to acquire, develop and maximize cash flow from a growing portfolio of long-life oil and natural gas
assets. LINN is an independent oil and natural gas company that began operations in March 2003 and completed its
initial public offering (“IPO”) in January 2006. LINN’s properties are located in the United States, primarily in the Mid-
Continent, Hugoton Basin, Green River Basin, Permian Basin, Michigan/Illinois, California, Williston/Powder River
Basin, and East Texas.
Proved reserves at December 31, 2011, were 3,370 Bcfe, of which approximately 34% were oil, 50% were natural gas
and 16% were natural gas liquids (“NGL”). Approximately 60% were classified as proved developed, with a total
standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows of $6.6 billion. At December 31, 2011, LINN operated 7,759
or 69% of its 11,230 gross productive wells and had an average proved reserve-life index of approximately 22 years,
based on the December 31, 2011, reserve report and fourth quarter 2011 annualized production.
Recent Developments
Anadarko Joint Venture
On April 3, 2012, LINN entered into a joint venture agreement with an affiliate of Anadarko whereby LINN will
participate as a partner in the CO2-enhanced oil recovery development of the Salt Creek field, located in the Powder
River Basin of Wyoming. Anadarko assigned LINN 23% of its interest in the field in exchange for future funding by
LINN of $400 million of Anadarko’s development costs. The acquisition included approximately 16 MMBoe (96 Bcfe)
of proved reserves as of the agreement date based on LINN’s preliminary internal evaluation.
Acquisitions
On July 31, 2012, LINN completed the Jonah Acquisition, which included certain oil and natural gas properties located
in the Green River Basin area of southwest Wyoming, for total consideration of approximately
Table of Contents
93
$990 million. The Jonah Acquisition includes approximately 703 Bcfe of estimated proved reserves. The estimated
proved reserves for the Jonah Acquisition were based on LINN’s preliminary internal evaluation of information provided
by the seller.
On May 1, 2012, LINN completed the acquisition of properties located in east Texas for total consideration of
approximately $168 million. The acquisition included approximately 110 Bcfe of proved reserves as of the acquisition
date.
On March 30, 2012, LINN completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the Hugoton
Basin area of southwestern Kansas for total consideration of $1.17 billion. The acquisition included approximately 701
Bcfe of proved reserves as of the acquisition date.
Proved reserves as of the acquisition date for all of the above referenced acquisitions were estimated using the
average oil and natural gas prices during the preceding 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average of the
first-day-of-the-month prices for each month.
LINN regularly engages in discussions with potential sellers regarding acquisition opportunities. Such acquisition
efforts may involve its participation in auction processes, as well as situations in which LINN believes it is the only
party or one of a very limited number of potential buyers in negotiations with the potential seller. These acquisition
efforts can involve assets that, if acquired, would have a material effect on its financial condition and results of
operations.
Distributions
On July 24, 2012, LINN’s Board of Directors declared a cash distribution of $0.725 per unit with respect to the second
quarter of 2012. The distribution, totaling approximately $145 million, will be paid on August 14, 2012, to unitholders of
record as of the close of business on August 7, 2012.
On April 24, 2012, LINN’s Board of Directors declared a cash distribution of $0.725 per unit, or $2.90 per unit on an
annualized basis, with respect to the first quarter of 2012, which was paid on May 15, 2012 to unitholders of record at
the close of business May 8, 2012.
On January 27, 2012, LINN’s Board of Directors declared a cash distribution of $0.69 per unit, or $2.76 per unit on an
annualized basis, with respect to the fourth quarter of 2011. The distribution, totaling approximately $138 million, was
paid on February 14, 2012, to unitholders of record as of the close of business on February 7, 2012.
Operating Regions
LINN’s properties are currently located in eight operating regions in the U.S.:
•   Mid-Continent, which includes properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and the eastern portion of the Texas
Panhandle (including the Granite Wash and Cleveland horizontal plays);
•   Hugoton Basin, which includes properties located primarily in Kansas and the Shallow Texas Panhandle;
•   Green River Basin, which includes properties located in southwest Wyoming;
•   Permian Basin, which includes areas in west Texas and southeast New Mexico;
•   Michigan/Illinois, which includes the Antrim Shale formation in the northern part of Michigan and oil properties
in southern Illinois;
94
Table of Contents
•   California, which includes the Brea Olinda Field of the Los Angeles Basin;
•   Williston/Powder River Basin, which includes the Bakken formation in North Dakota and the Powder River
Basin in Wyoming; and
•   East Texas, which includes properties located in east Texas.
Mid-Continent
The Mid-Continent region includes properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and the eastern portion of the Texas Panhandle
(including the Granite Wash and Cleveland horizontal plays). Wells in this diverse region produce from both oil and
natural gas reservoirs at depths ranging from 1,500 feet to over 18,000 feet. The Granite Wash formation is currently
being developed using horizontal drilling and multi-stage stimulations. In the northern Texas Panhandle and extending
into western Oklahoma, the Cleveland formation is being developed as a horizontal oil play. Elsewhere in Oklahoma,
several producing formations are being targeted using similar horizontal drilling and completion technologies. The
majority of wells in this region are mature, low-decline oil and natural gas wells. Mid-Continent proved reserves
represented approximately 38% of Pro Forma Proved Reserves at December 31, 2011. Of these reserves, 53% were
classified as proved developed.
To more efficiently transport its natural gas in the Mid-Continent region to market, LINN owns and operates a network
of natural gas gathering systems comprised of approximately 300 miles of pipeline and associated compression and
metering facilities. In connection with the horizontal development activities in the Granite Wash, LINN continues to
expand this gathering system which connects to numerous natural gas processing facilities in the region.
Hugoton Basin
The Hugoton Basin is a large oil and natural gas producing area located in the central portion of the Texas Panhandle
extending into southwestern Kansas. LINN’s Texas properties in the basin primarily produce from the Brown Dolomite
formation at depths of approximately 3,200 feet. LINN’s Kansas properties in the basin, acquired in March 2012,
primarily produce from the Council Grove and Chase formations at depths ranging from 2,500 feet to 3,000 feet.
Hugoton Basin proved reserves represented approximately 22% of Pro Forma Proved Reserves at December 31,
2011. Of these reserves, 87% were classified as proved developed.
To more efficiently transport its natural gas in the Texas Panhandle to market, LINN owns and operates a network of
natural gas gathering systems comprised of approximately 665 miles of pipeline and associated compression and
metering facilities that connect to numerous sales outlets in the area. LINN also owns and operates the Jayhawk
natural gas processing plant in southwestern Kansas with a capacity of approximately 450 MMcfe/d, allowing LINN to
extract maximum value from the liquids-rich natural gas produced in the area. LINN’s production in the area is
delivered to the plant via a system of approximately 2,100 miles of pipeline and related facilities operated by LINN, of
which approximately 250 miles is owned by LINN.
Green River Basin
The Green River Basin region consists of properties acquired in July 2012 located in southwest Wyoming that
primarily produce natural gas at depths ranging from 8,000 feet to 12,000 feet. Green River Basin proved reserves
represented approximately 14% of LINN’s Pro Forma Proved Reserves at December 31, 2011. Of these reserves,
54% were classified as proved developed.
Permian Basin
The Permian Basin is one of the largest and most prolific oil and natural gas basins in the U.S. LINN’s properties are
located in west Texas and southeast New Mexico and produce at depths ranging from 2,000 feet to
Table of Contents
95
12,000 feet. The Wolfberry trend is located in the north central portion of the basin where LINN has been active drilling
vertical oil wells since 2010. LINN also produces oil and natural gas from mature, low-decline wells including several
waterflood properties located across the basin. Permian Basin proved reserves represented approximately 11% of Pro
Forma Proved Reserves at December 31, 2011. Of these reserves, 56% were classified as proved developed.
Michigan/Illinois
The Michigan/Illinois region includes properties producing from the Antrim Shale formation in the northern part of
Michigan and oil properties in southern Illinois. These wells produce at depths ranging from 600 feet to 4,000 feet.
Michigan/Illinois proved reserves represented approximately 6% of Pro Forma Proved Reserves at December 31,
2011. Of these reserves, 91% were classified as proved developed.
California
The California region consists of the Brea Olinda Field of the Los Angeles Basin. The Brea Olinda Field was
discovered in 1880 and produces from the shallow Pliocene formation to the deeper Miocene formation at depths
ranging from 1,000 feet to 7,500 feet. California proved reserves represented approximately 4% of Pro Forma Proved
Reserves at December 31, 2011. Of these reserves, 93% were classified as proved developed.
Williston/Powder River Basin
The Williston/Powder River Basin region includes the Bakken formation in North Dakota and the Powder River Basin
in Wyoming. LINN’s non-operated properties in the Williston Basin, one of the premier oil basins in the U.S., produce
at depths ranging from 9,000 feet to 12,000 feet. LINN’s properties in the Powder River Basin, acquired in April 2012,
consist of a CO2 flood operated by Anadarko in the Salt Creek Field. Williston/Powder River Basin proved reserves
represented approximately 4% of Pro Forma Proved Reserves at December 31, 2011. Of these reserves, 63% were
classified as proved developed.
East Texas
The East Texas region consists of properties acquired in May 2012 located in east Texas that primarily produce
natural gas from the Cotton Valley formation at depths of approximately 11,000 feet. Proved reserves for these
mature, low-decline producing properties, all of which are proved developed, represented approximately 2% of LINN’s
Pro Forma Proved Reserves at December 31, 2011.
Table of Contents
Drilling and Acreage
96
The following sets forth the wells drilled during the periods indicated (“gross” refers to the total wells in which LINN had
a working interest and “net” refers to gross wells multiplied by LINN’s working interest):
Gross wells:
Productive
Dry
Net development wells:
Productive
Dry
Net exploratory wells:
Productive
Dry
2009
72     
1     
 
  
    
  73     
  
    
  
  35     
1     
 
  
    
  36     
    
  
  
  —       
  —       
  
    
  —
2010
138     
1     
 
  
    
  139     
  
    
  
  116     
1     
 
  
    
  117     
    
  
  
  —       
  —       
  
    
  —
Year Ended December 31,
2011
292  
2  
 
  
 
  294
186  
2  
 
  
 
  188
—    
  —    
  
 
  —
The totals above do not include 8 and 25 lateral segments added to existing vertical wellbores during the years ended
December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively. There were no lateral segments added to existing vertical
wellbores during the year ended December 31, 2011. At December 31, 2011, LINN had 85 gross (51 net) wells in
process (no wells were temporarily suspended).
This information should not be considered indicative of future performance, nor should it be assumed that there is
necessarily any correlation between the number of productive wells drilled and the quantities or economic value of
reserves found. Productive wells are those that produce commercial quantities of oil, natural gas or NGL, regardless
of whether they generate a reasonable rate of return.
The following sets forth information about LINN’s drilling locations and net acres of leasehold interests as of
December 31, 2011:
Proved undeveloped
Other locations
Total drilling locations
Leasehold interests—net acres (in thousands)
Total(1) 
 2,302  
 4,154  
  
 
 6,456  
  
 
 1,116
(1) Does not include optimization projects.
97
Table of Contents
As shown in the table above, as of December 31, 2011, LINN had 2,302 proved undeveloped drilling locations
(specific drilling locations as to which the independent engineering firm DeGolyer and MacNaughton assigned proved
undeveloped reserves as of such date) and LINN had identified 4,154 additional unproved drilling locations (specific
drilling locations as to which DeGolyer and MacNaughton has not assigned any proved reserves) on acreage that
LINN has under existing leases. As successful development wells frequently result in the reclassification of adjacent
lease acreage from unproved to proved, LINN expects that a significant number of its unproved drilling locations will
be reclassified as proved drilling locations prior to the actual drilling of these locations.
Productive Wells
The following sets forth information relating to the productive wells in which LINN owned a working interest as of
December 31, 2011. Productive wells consist of producing wells and wells capable of production, including wells
awaiting pipeline or other connections to commence deliveries. “Gross” wells refers to the total number of producing
wells in which LINN has an interest, and “net” wells refers to the sum of its fractional working interests owned in gross
wells. The number of wells below does not include approximately 2,500 productive wells in which LINN owns a royalty
interest only.
Operated(1)
Natural Gas Wells
Oil Wells
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
Total Wells
Gross      Net
Operated(1)
Nonoperated(2)
3,889     
     1,843     
     
     5,732
2,925      3,870      3,578       7,759      6,503  
369      1,628       207       3,471       576  
 
       
 
  3,294      5,498      3,785      11,230      7,079
(1) LINN had 12 operated wells with multiple completions at December 31, 2011.
(2) LINN had no nonoperated wells with multiple completions at December 31, 2011.
Developed and Undeveloped Acreage
The following sets forth information relating to leasehold acreage as of December 31, 2011:
Leasehold acreage
Production, Price and Cost History
Developed
Acreage
Undeveloped
Total
Gross     
 
  
 
    2,352      1,060       133       56     2,485      1,116
Gross     Net      Gross
(in thousands)
Net
Net
Acreage
Acreage
LINN’s natural gas production is primarily sold under market sensitive price contracts, which typically sell at a
differential to the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”), Panhandle Eastern Pipeline (“PEPL”), El Paso Permian
Basin, or MichCon city-gate natural gas prices due to the Btu content and the proximity to major consuming markets.
LINN’s natural gas production is sold to purchasers under percentage-of-proceeds contracts, percentage-of-index
contracts or spot price contracts. By the terms of the percentage-of-proceeds contracts, LINN receives a percentage
of the resale price received by the purchaser for sales of residual natural gas and NGL recovered after transportation
and processing of natural gas. These purchasers sell the residual natural gas and NGL based primarily on spot market
prices. Under percentage-of-index contracts, the price per MMBtu LINN receives for natural gas is tied to indexes
published in Gas Daily or Inside FERC Gas Market Report. Although exact percentages vary daily, as of
December 31, 2011, approximately 90% of LINN’s natural gas and NGL production was sold under short-term
contracts at market-sensitive or spot prices. At December 31, 2011, LINN had natural gas throughput delivery
commitments under long-term contracts of approximately 784 MMcf for the year ended December 31, 2012, and
approximately 31 Bcf to be delivered by August 2015.
Table of Contents
98
LINN’s oil production is primarily sold under market sensitive contracts, which typically sell at a differential to
NYMEX, and as of December 31, 2011, approximately 90% of its oil production was sold under short-term contracts.
At December 31, 2011, LINN had no delivery commitments for oil production.
As discussed in the “Strategy” section above, LINN enters into derivative contracts primarily in the form of swap
contracts and put options to reduce the impact of commodity price volatility on its cash flow from operations. By
removing a significant portion of the price volatility associated with future production, LINN expects to mitigate, but
not eliminate, the potential effects of variability in cash flow due to fluctuations in commodity prices.
The following sets forth information regarding average daily production, average prices and average costs for each of
the periods indicated:
Average daily production:
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Oil (MBbls/d)
NGL (MBbls/d)
Total (MMcfe/d)
Weighted average prices (hedged):(1)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Oil (Bbl)
NGL (Bbl)
Weighted average prices (unhedged):(2)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Oil (Bbl)
NGL (Bbl)
Average NYMEX prices:
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
Costs per Mcfe of production:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
General and administrative expenses(3)
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes, other than income taxes
Year Ended December 31,
2011     
  
 
175    
  21.5    
  10.8    
 
369
Six Months Ended
June  30,
2011      2012
163
273  
  19.3      27.2  
9.3      19.1  
 
 
335     
550
2009
125    
9.0    
6.5    
218
2010     
  
 
137    
  13.1    
8.3    
 
 
265
$ 8.27     $ 8.52     $ 8.20     $ 8.68    $ 5.93  
   $110.94     $94.71     $89.21     $88.35    $92.86  
   $ 28.04     $39.14     $42.88     $44.70    $33.21
$ 3.51     $ 4.24     $ 4.35     $ 4.66    $ 2.52  
   $ 55.25     $75.16     $91.24     $94.34    $92.12  
   $ 28.04     $39.14     $42.88     $44.70    $33.21
$ 3.99     $ 4.40     $ 4.05     $ 4.22    $ 2.48  
   $ 61.94     $79.53     $95.12     $98.33    $98.21
$ 1.67     $ 1.64     $ 1.73     $ 1.69    $ 1.42  
   $ 0.23     $ 0.20     $ 0.21     $ 0.20    $ 0.32  
   $ 1.08     $ 1.02     $ 0.99     $ 1.02    $ 0.84  
   $ 2.53     $ 2.46     $ 2.48     $ 2.40    $ 2.60  
   $ 0.35     $ 0.47     $ 0.58     $ 0.59    $ 0.56
(1)
Includes the effect of realized gains on derivatives of approximately $401 million (excluding $49 million realized
net gains on canceled contracts), $308 million, $230 million (excluding $27 million realized gains on canceled
contracts), $98 million and $173 million (excluding approximately $18 million realized gain on recovery of
bankruptcy claim) for the years ended December 31, 2009, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011, and the
six months ended June 30, 2011 and June 30, 2012, respectively.
(2) Does not include the effect of realized gains (losses) on derivatives.
(3) General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, December 31, 2010, and
December 31, 2011, and the six months ended June 30, 2011 and June 30, 2012, include approximately $15
million, $13 million, $21 million, $11 million and $14 million, respectively, of noncash unit-based compensation
expenses. Excluding these amounts, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31,
2009, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011, and the six months ended June 30, 2011 and June 30, 2012,
were $0.90 per Mcfe, $0.88 per Mcfe, $0.83 per Mcfe, $0.85 per Mcfe and $0.70 per Mcfe, respectively. This
measure is not in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) and thus is a non-
GAAP measure, used by management to analyze LINN’s performance.
Table of Contents
Reserve Data
Proved Reserves
99
The following sets forth estimated proved oil, natural gas and NGL reserves and the standardized measure of
discounted future net cash flows at December 31, 2011, based on reserve reports prepared by independent engineers,
DeGolyer and MacNaughton:
Estimated proved developed reserves:
Natural gas (Bcf)
Oil (MMBbls)
NGL (MMBbls)
Total (Bcfe)
Estimated proved undeveloped reserves:
Natural gas (Bcf)
Oil (MMBbls)
NGL (MMBbls)
Total (Bcfe)
Estimated total proved reserves (Bcfe)
Proved developed reserves as a percentage of total proved reserves
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows (in millions)(1)
Representative NYMEX prices:(2)
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
998  
 
125  
 
 
48  
  2,034
677  
 
64  
 
46  
 
  1,336  
  3,370  
 
60% 
$6,615
$ 4.12  
$95.84
(1) This measure is not intended to represent the market value of estimated reserves.
(2)
In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves were estimated using the average price during the 12-month
period, determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month, unless prices are
defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions. The average price
used to estimate reserves is held constant over the life of the reserves.
During the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN’s proved undeveloped reserves (“PUDs”) increased to 1,336 Bcfe
from 935 Bcfe at December 31, 2010, representing an increase of 401 Bcfe. The increase was primarily due to 364
Bcfe added as a result of LINN’s acquisitions in the Mid-Continent Deep, Permian Basin and Williston Basin regions
and 346 Bcfe added as a result of its drilling activities in the Texas Panhandle Granite Wash, partially offset by PUDs
developed during 2011.
During the year ended December 31, 2011, LINN incurred approximately $307 million in capital expenditures to
convert 178 Bcfe of reserves classified as PUDs at December 31, 2010. Based on the December 31, 2011 reserve
report, the amounts of capital expenditures estimated to be incurred in 2012, 2013 and 2014 to develop LINN’s PUDs
are approximately $765 million, $836 million and $556 million, respectively. The amount and timing of these
expenditures will depend on a number of factors, including actual drilling results, service costs and product prices. Of
the 1,336 Bcfe of PUDs at December 31, 2011, seven Bcfe remained undeveloped for five years or more; however,
the property is included in LINN’s 2012 development plan. All PUD properties are included in LINN’s current five-year
development plan.
Reserve engineering is inherently a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of oil, natural gas
and NGL that cannot be measured exactly. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of
available data and engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Accordingly, reserve estimates may vary
from the quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL that are ultimately recovered. Future prices received for production
may vary, perhaps significantly, from the prices assumed for the purposes of estimating the standardized measure of
discounted future net cash flows. The standardized measure of discounted future net
Table of Contents
100
cash flows should not be construed as the market value of the reserves at the dates shown. The 10% discount factor
required to be used under the provisions of applicable accounting standards may not be the most appropriate discount
factor based on interest rates in effect from time to time and risks associated with LINN or the oil and natural gas
industry. The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is materially affected by assumptions about
the timing of future production, which may prove to be inaccurate.
The reserve estimates reported herein were prepared by independent engineers, DeGolyer and MacNaughton. The
process performed by the independent engineers to prepare reserve amounts included their estimation of reserve
quantities, future producing rates, future net revenue and the present value of such future net revenue, is based in
part on data provided by LINN. When preparing the reserve estimates, the independent engineering firm did not
independently verify the accuracy and completeness of the information and data furnished by LINN with respect to
ownership interests, production, well test data, historical costs of operation and development, product prices, or any
agreements relating to current and future operations of the properties and sales of production. However, if in the
course of their work, something came to their attention that brought into question the validity or sufficiency of any
such information or data, they did not rely on such information or data until they had satisfactorily resolved their
questions relating thereto. The estimates of reserves conform to the guidelines of the SEC, including the criteria of
“reasonable certainty,” as it pertains to expectations about the recoverability of reserves in future years. The
independent engineering firm also prepared estimates with respect to reserve categorization, using the definitions for
proved reserves set forth in Regulation S-X Rule 4-10(a) and subsequent SEC staff interpretations and guidance.
LINN’s internal control over the preparation of reserve estimates is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of LINN’s reserve estimates in accordance with SEC regulations. The preparation of
reserve estimates was overseen by LINN’s Reservoir Engineering Advisor, who has Master of Petroleum Engineering
and Master of Business Administration degrees and more than 25 years of oil and natural gas industry experience.
The reserve estimates were reviewed and approved by LINN’s senior engineering staff and management, with final
approval by its Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer. LINN has not filed reserve estimates with any
federal authority or agency, with the exception of the SEC.
Operational Overview
General
LINN generally seeks to be the operator of its properties so that it can develop drilling programs and optimization
projects that not only replace production, but add value through reserve and production growth and future operational
synergies. Many of LINN’s wells are completed in multiple producing zones with commingled production and long
economic lives.
Principal Customers
For the year ended December 31, 2011, sales of oil, natural gas and NGL to Enbridge Energy Partners, L.P. and DCP
Midstream Partners, LP accounted for approximately 21% and 19%, respectively, of LINN’s total production volumes,
or 40% in the aggregate. If LINN were to lose any one of its major oil and natural gas purchasers, the loss could
temporarily cease or delay production and sale of its oil and natural gas in that particular purchaser’s service area. If
LINN were to lose a purchaser, it believes it could identify a substitute purchaser. However, if one or more of these
large purchasers ceased purchasing oil and natural gas altogether, it could have a detrimental effect on the oil and
natural gas market in general and on the volume of oil and natural gas that LINN is able to sell.
Competition
The oil and natural gas industry is highly competitive. LINN encounters strong competition from other independent
operators and master limited partnerships in acquiring properties, contracting for drilling and other
Table of Contents
101
related services and securing trained personnel. LINN is also affected by competition for drilling rigs and the
availability of related equipment. In the past, the oil and natural gas industry has experienced shortages of drilling rigs,
equipment, pipe and personnel, which has delayed development drilling and has caused significant price increases.
LINN is unable to predict when, or if, such shortages may occur or how they would affect its drilling program.
Operating Hazards and Insurance
The oil and natural gas industry involves a variety of operating hazards and risks that could result in substantial
losses from, among other things, injury or loss of life, severe damage to or destruction of property, natural resources
and equipment, pollution or other environmental damage, cleanup responsibilities, regulatory investigation and
penalties and suspension of operations. LINN may be liable for environmental damages caused by previous owners of
property it purchases and leases. As a result, LINN may incur substantial liabilities to third parties or governmental
entities, the payment of which could reduce or eliminate funds available for acquisitions, development or distributions,
or result in the loss of properties. In addition, LINN participates in wells on a nonoperated basis and therefore may be
limited in its ability to control the risks associated with the operation of such wells.
In accordance with customary industry practices, LINN maintains insurance against some, but not all, potential
losses. LINN cannot provide assurance that any insurance it obtains will be adequate to cover any losses or liabilities.
LINN has elected to self-insure for certain items for which it has determined that the cost of available insurance is
excessive relative to the risks presented. In addition, pollution and environmental risks generally are not fully
insurable. The occurrence of an event not fully covered by insurance could have a material adverse effect on LINN’s
financial position and results of operations. For more information about potential risks that could affect LINN, please
read “Risk Factors.”
Title to Properties
Prior to the commencement of drilling operations, LINN conducts a title examination and performs curative work with
respect to significant defects. To the extent title opinions or other investigations reflect title defects on those
properties, LINN is typically responsible for curing any title defects at its expense prior to commencing drilling
operations. Prior to completing an acquisition of producing leases, LINN performs title reviews on the most significant
leases and, depending on the materiality of properties, LINN may obtain a title opinion or review previously obtained
title opinions. As a result, LINN has obtained title opinions on a significant portion of its properties and believes that it
has satisfactory title to its producing properties in accordance with standards generally accepted in the industry. Oil
and natural gas properties are subject to customary royalty and other interests, liens for current taxes and other
burdens that do not materially interfere with the use of or affect the carrying value of the properties.
Seasonal Nature of Business
Seasonal weather conditions and lease stipulations can limit the drilling and producing activities and other operations
in regions of the U.S. in which LINN operates. These seasonal conditions can pose challenges for meeting the well
drilling objectives and increase competition for equipment, supplies and personnel, which could lead to shortages and
increase costs or delay operations. For example, LINN’s operations may be impacted by ice and snow in the winter
and by electrical storms and high temperatures in the spring and summer, as well as by wild fires in the fall.
The demand for natural gas typically decreases during the summer months and increases during the winter months.
Seasonal anomalies sometimes lessen this fluctuation. In addition, certain natural gas users utilize natural gas
storage facilities and purchase some of their anticipated winter requirements during the summer, which can also
lessen seasonal demand fluctuations.
102
Table of Contents
Environmental Matters and Regulation
LINN’s operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations governing the discharge of
materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. LINN’s operations are subject to the
same environmental laws and regulations as other companies in the oil and natural gas industry. These laws and
regulations may:
•   require the acquisition of various permits before drilling commences;
•   require the installation of expensive pollution control equipment;
•   restrict the types, quantities and concentration of various substances that can be released into the
environment in connection with drilling and production activities;
•   limit or prohibit drilling activities on lands lying within wilderness, wetlands, areas inhabited by endangered
species and other protected areas;
•   require remedial measures to prevent pollution from former operations, such as pit closure and plugging of
abandoned wells;
•   impose substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from operations; and
•   with respect to operations affecting federal lands or leases, require preparation of a Resource Management
Plan, an Environmental Assessment, and/or an Environmental Impact Statement.
These laws, rules and regulations may also restrict the production rate of oil, natural gas and NGL below the rate that
would otherwise be possible. The regulatory burden on the industry increases the cost of doing business and
consequently affects profitability. Additionally, Congress and federal and state agencies frequently revise
environmental laws and regulations, and any changes that result in more stringent and costly waste handling, disposal
and cleanup requirements for the oil and natural gas industry could have a significant impact on operating costs.
The environmental laws and regulations applicable to LINN and its operations include, among others, the following
U.S. federal laws and regulations:
•   Clean Air Act, and its amendments, which governs air emissions;
•   Clean Water Act, which governs discharges to and excavations within the waters of the U.S.;
•   Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (“CERCLA”), which imposes liability
where hazardous releases have occurred or are threatened to occur (commonly known as “Superfund”);
•   Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, which prescribes new fuel economy standards and other
energy saving measures;
•   National Environmental Policy Act, which governs oil and natural gas production activities on federal lands;
•   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), which governs the management of solid waste;
•   Safe Drinking Water Act, which governs the underground injection and disposal of wastewater; and
•   U.S. Department of Interior regulations, which impose liability for pollution cleanup and damages.
Various states regulate the drilling for, and the production, gathering and sale of, oil, natural gas and NGL, including
imposing production taxes and requirements for obtaining drilling permits. States also regulate the method of
developing new fields, the spacing and operation of wells and the prevention of waste of resources. States may
regulate rates of production and may establish maximum daily production allowables from natural gas wells based on
market demand or resource conservation, or both. States do not regulate wellhead prices or
Table of Contents
103
engage in other similar direct economic regulations, but there can be no assurance that they will not do so in the
future. The effect of these regulations may be to limit the amounts of oil, natural gas and NGL that may be produced
from LINN’s wells and to limit the number of wells or locations it can drill. The oil and natural gas industry is also
subject to compliance with various other federal, state and local regulations and laws. Some of those laws relate to
occupational safety, resource conservation and equal opportunity employment.
LINN believes that it substantially complies with all current applicable environmental laws and regulations and that
continued compliance with existing requirements will not have a material adverse impact on its financial condition or
results of operations. Future regulatory issues that could impact LINN include new rules or legislation regulating
greenhouse gas emissions, hydraulic fracturing and air emissions.
Climate Change
In response to recent studies suggesting that emissions of carbon dioxide and certain other gases may be
contributing to warming of the Earth’s atmosphere, the EPA has adopted regulations under existing provisions of the
federal Clean Air Act that require a reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases (“GHG”) from motor vehicles and
trigger construction and operating permit review for GHG emissions from certain stationary sources. Thus, on June 3,
2010, the EPA issued a final rule to address permitting of GHG emissions from stationary sources under the Clean Air
Act’s Prevention of Significant Deterioration (“PSD”) and Title V programs. This final rule “tailors” the PSD and Title V
programs to apply to certain stationary sources of GHG emissions in a multi-step process, with the largest sources
first subject to permitting. In addition, on November 8, 2010, the EPA finalized new GHG reporting requirements for
upstream petroleum and natural gas systems, which were added to the EPA’s existing GHG reporting rule published
in 2009. Facilities containing petroleum and natural gas systems that emit 25,000 metric tons or more of CO2
equivalent per year will now be required to report annual GHG emissions to the EPA, with the first report due on
September 28, 2012. In addition, both houses of Congress have considered legislation to reduce emissions of GHGs,
and almost one-half of the states have already taken legal measures to reduce emissions of GHGs, primarily through
the planned development of GHG emission inventories and/or regional GHG cap and trade programs. Any laws or
regulations that may be adopted to restrict or reduce emissions of U.S. greenhouse gases could require LINN to incur
increased operating costs, and could have an adverse effect on demand for oil and natural gas.
Hydraulic Fracturing
Hydraulic fracturing is an important and common practice that is used to stimulate production of hydrocarbons from
tight formations. The process involves the injection of water, sand and chemicals under pressure into formations to
fracture the surrounding rock and stimulate production. Hydraulic fracturing operations have historically been overseen
by state regulators as part of their oil and natural gas regulatory programs. However, the EPA has asserted federal
regulatory authority over hydraulic fracturing involving diesel additives under the Safe Drinking Water Act’s
Underground Injection Control Program and has recently released draft permitting guidance documents related to this
newly asserted regulatory authority. Moreover, on November 23, 2011, the EPA announced that it was granting, in
part, a petition to initiate rulemaking under the Toxic Substances Control Act (“TSCA”), relating to chemical
substances and mixtures used in oil and natural gas exploration or production. Further, on May 11, 2012, the
Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Land Management (“BLM”) issued a proposed rule that, if adopted, would
require public disclosure of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing operations after fracturing operations have been
completed and would strengthen standards for well-bore integrity and management of fluids that return to the surface
during and after fracturing operations on federal and Indian lands. In addition, legislation has been introduced before
Congress to provide for federal regulation of hydraulic fracturing and to require disclosure of the chemicals used in the
fracturing process. If adopted, these bills could result in additional permitting requirements for hydraulic fracturing
operations as well as various restrictions on those operations. These permitting requirements and restrictions could
result in delays in operations at well sites and also increased costs to make wells productive.
There are also certain governmental reviews either underway or being proposed that focus on environmental aspects
of hydraulic-fracturing practices. The White House Council on Environmental Quality is coordinating an
Table of Contents
104
administration-wide review of hydraulic-fracturing practices, and a committee of the United States House of
Representatives has conducted an investigation of hydraulic-fracturing practices. Furthermore, a number of federal
agencies are analyzing, or have been requested to review, a variety of environmental issues associated with hydraulic
fracturing. The EPA has commenced a study of the potential environmental effects of hydraulic fracturing on drinking
water and groundwater, with initial results expected to be available by late 2012 and final results by 2014. In addition,
the U.S. Department of Energy is conducting an investigation into practices the agency could recommend to better
protect the environment from drilling using hydraulic-fracturing completion methods. Also, the U.S. Department of the
Interior is considering disclosure requirements or other mandates for hydraulic fracturing on federal lands. These on-
going or proposed studies, depending on their course and any meaningful results obtained, could spur initiatives to
further regulate hydraulic fracturing under the Safe Drinking Water Act or other regulatory mechanisms. Moreover,
some states have adopted, and other states are considering adopting, regulations that could restrict hydraulic
fracturing in certain circumstances. For example, both Texas and Louisiana have adopted disclosure regulations
requiring varying degrees of disclosure of the constituents in hydraulic fracturing fluids. Any such added regulation in
states where LINN operates could lead to operational delays, increased operating costs and additional regulatory
burdens, and reduced production of oil and natural gas, which could adversely affect LINN’s revenues and results of
operations.
Endangered Species Act
The federal Endangered Species Act (“ESA”) restricts activities that may affect endangered and threatened species or
their habitats. Some of LINN’s operations may be located in areas that are designated as habitat for endangered or
threatened species. LINN believes that it is currently in substantial compliance with the ESA. However, the
designation of previously unprotected species as being endangered or threatened could cause LINN to incur additional
costs or become subject to operating restrictions in areas where the species are known to exist.
Air Emissions
On April 17, 2012, the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) issued final rules that subject oil and natural gas
production, processing, transmission and storage operations to regulation under the New Source Performance
Standards (“NSPS”) and National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (“NESHAP”) programs. The EPA
rules include NSPS standards for completions of hydraulically fractured natural gas wells. These standards require
that prior to January 1, 2015 owners/operators reduce VOC emissions from natural gas not sent to the gathering line
during well completion either by flaring or by capturing the gas using green completions with a completion combustion
device. Beginning January 1, 2015, operators must capture the gas and make it available for use or sale, which can
be done through the use of green completions. The standards are applicable to newly fractured wells as well as
existing wells that are refractured. Further, the finalized regulations also establish specific new requirements, effective
in 2012, for emissions from compressors, controllers, dehydrators, storage tanks, gas processing plants and certain
other equipment. These rules may require changes to our operations, including the installation of new equipment to
control emissions. LINN is currently evaluating the effect these rules will have on its business.
LINN cannot predict how future environmental laws and regulations may impact its properties or operations. For the
year ended December 31, 2011, LINN did not incur any material capital expenditures for installation of remediation or
pollution control equipment at any of LINN’s facilities. LINN is not aware of any environmental issues or claims that
will require material capital expenditures during 2012 or that will otherwise have a material impact on its financial
position or results of operations.
Employees
As of December 31, 2011, LINN employed approximately 824 personnel. None of the employees are represented by
labor unions or covered by any collective bargaining agreement. LINN believes that its relationship with its employees
is satisfactory.
Table of Contents
105
MANAGEMENT
Our business and affairs will be managed by a board of directors.
The following table sets forth specific information for our executive officers and directors. All of our directors are
elected annually by, and may be removed by, LINN as the owner of our sole voting share. Executive officers are
appointed for one-year terms.
Name
Mark E. Ellis
Kolja Rockov
Arden L. Walker, Jr.
Charlene A. Ripley
David B. Rottino
George A. Alcorn
David D. Dunlap
Terrence S. Jacobs
Michael C. Linn
Age    
 56
41
52
48
46
Position with LinnCo
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer; Director
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
Executive Vice President and
Chief Operating Officer
Senior Vice President and General
Counsel
Senior Vice President and Chief
Accounting Officer
80
Independent Director
50
Independent Director
69
Independent Director
60   Director
Position with LINN
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer; Director
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
Executive Vice President and
Chief Operating Officer
Senior Vice President and General
Counsel
Senior Vice President of Finance,
Business Development and Chief
Accounting Officer
Independent Director
Independent Director
Independent Director
Founder and Director
Michael C. Linn
Joseph P. McCoy
Jeffrey C. Swoveland
61
Independent Director
57
Independent Director
Independent Director
Independent Director
Mark E. Ellis is our Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer and has served in such capacity since April
2012. Mr. Ellis was appointed to our board of directors in April 2012. He is also the Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer of LINN and has served in such capacity since December 2011. He also serves on the board of
LINN, to which he was appointed in January 2010. He previously served as President, Chief Executive Officer and
Director of LINN from January 2010 to December 2011. From December 2007 to January 2010, Mr. Ellis served as
President and Chief Operating Officer of LINN and from December 2006 to December 2007, Mr. Ellis served as
Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of LINN. Mr. Ellis serves on the boards of America’s Natural
Gas Alliance, Houston Museum of Natural Science, The Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion, Industry Board of
Petroleum Engineering at Texas A&M University and the Visiting Committee of Petroleum Engineering at the Colorado
School of Mines.
Kolja Rockov is an Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of LinnCo and has served in such capacity
since April 2012. Mr. Rockov is also an Executive Vice President and the Chief Financial Officer of Linn Energy, LLC
and has served in such capacity since March 2005. Mr. Rockov has more than 15 years of experience in the oil and
natural gas finance industry. From October 2004 until he joined LINN in March 2005, Mr. Rockov served as a
Managing Director in the Energy Group at RBC Capital Markets, where he was primarily responsible for investment
banking coverage of the U.S. exploration and production sector. Mr. Rockov is a member of the Board of Small Steps
Nurturing Center in Houston.
Arden L. Walker, Jr. is an Executive Vice President of LinnCo and has served in such capacity since April 2012.
Mr. Walker is also an Executive Vice President and the Chief Operating Officer of Linn Energy, LLC and has
Table of Contents
106
served in such capacity since January 2011. From January 2010 to January 2011, Mr. Walker served as Senior Vice
President and Chief Operating Officer of Linn Energy, LLC. Mr. Walker joined of Linn Energy, LLC in February 2007 as
Senior Vice President—Operations and Chief Engineer to oversee its Texas, Oklahoma and California operations. He
is currently responsible for oversight of LINN’s operations in all regions. From April 2006 until he joined LINN in
February 2007, Mr. Walker served as Asset Development Manager, San Juan Business Unit, for ConocoPhillips
Company. From June 2004 to April 2006, Mr. Walker served as General Manager, Asset Development, in the San
Juan Division for Burlington Resources. Mr. Walker is a member of the Society of Petroleum Engineers and
Independent Petroleum Association of America. He currently serves on the Board of Directors for the Sam Houston
Area Council of the Boy Scouts of America and Theatre Under The Stars.
Charlene A. Ripley is a Senior Vice President and the General Counsel and Corporate Secretary of LinnCo and has
served in that position since April 2012. She is also a Senior Vice President and the General Counsel and Corporate
Secretary of Linn Energy, LLC and has served in that position since April 2007. Prior to joining LINN, Ms. Ripley held
the position of Vice President, General Counsel, Corporate Secretary and Chief Compliance Officer at Anadarko
Petroleum Corporation from 2006 until April 2007 and served as Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate
Secretary from 2004 until 2006. Ms. Ripley currently chairs the Oil and Gas Practice Committee of the Institute for
Energy Law and serves on the board of the Texas General Counsel Forum. In addition, Ms. Ripley serves on the
advisory boards of the Women’s Energy Network and Executive Women’s Partnership of the Greater Houston
Partnership and serves on several nonprofit boards including the Impact Youth Development Center, Girls Inc. and the
American Heart Association of Houston. She is also a member of the United Way of Greater Houston Women’s
Initiative.
David B. Rottino is a Senior Vice President and the Chief Accounting Officer of LinnCo and has served in that position
since April 2012. He is also the Senior Vice President of Finance, Business Development and Chief Accounting
Officer of Linn Energy, LLC and has served in that position since July 2010. From June 2008 to July 2010, Mr. Rottino
served as the Senior Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer of Linn Energy, LLC. He served as Vice President
and E&P Controller for El Paso Corporation from June 2006 to May 2008. Prior to joining El Paso Corporation,
Mr. Rottino served as Assistant Controller for ConocoPhillips from April 2006 to June 2006. He was Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer for the Canadian division of Burlington Resources from July 2005 to April 2006. Mr. Rottino
is a Certified Public Accountant and a member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and Texas
Society of Certified Public Accountants. In addition, he currently serves on the Board of Camp for All.
George A. Alcorn was appointed to our Board of Directors in April 2012. Mr. Alcorn is an independent director.
Mr. Alcorn also serves on the board of LINN, to which he was appointed in January 2006, and is Chairman of LINN’s
Nominating and Governance Committee. Mr. Alcorn has served as President of Alcorn Exploration, Inc., a private
exploration and production company, since 1982. Mr. Alcorn is also a member of the board of directors of EOG
Resources, Inc. He is a past chairman of the Independent Petroleum Association of America and a founding member
and past chairman of the Natural Gas Council.
Mr. Dunlap was appointed to our Board of Directors in May 2012. Mr. Dunlap is an independent director. Mr. Dunlap
also serves on the board of LINN, to which he was appointed in May 2012. Mr. Dunlap has served as Chief Executive
Officer, since April 2010, and President, since February 2011, of Superior Energy Services, Inc. From 2007 until April
2010, Mr. Dunlap served as Executive Vice President—Chief Operating Officer of BJ Services Company, a well
services provider. Mr. Dunlap also currently serves on the board of directors of Superior Energy Services, Inc.
Terrence S. Jacobs was appointed to our Board of Directors in April 2012. Mr. Jacobs is an independent director.
Mr. Jacobs also serves on the board of LINN, to which he was appointed in January 2006. Mr. Jacobs has served as
LINN’s Lead Director since January 2012. Since 1995, Mr. Jacobs has served as President and CEO of Penneco Oil
Company, which provides ongoing leasing, marketing, exploration and drilling operations for natural gas and crude oil
in Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Wyoming. Mr. Jacobs currently serves on the boards of directors of Penneco Oil
Company and affiliates, CMS Mid-Atlantic, Inc., the Pennsylvania
Table of Contents
107
Independent Oil and Gas Association and Duquesne University. Mr. Jacobs served as President of the Independent
Oil and Gas Association of Pennsylvania from 1999 to 2001 and from 2003 to 2005 and has served as a director of
the Independent Petroleum Association of America for the states of Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania and New York
—West from 2000-2006. He is a member of the National Petroleum Council, and he is presently serving as Chairman
of the Tax Committee of the Independent Petroleum Association of America. Mr. Jacobs is a Certified Public
Accountant in Pennsylvania.
Michael C. Linn was appointed to our Board of Directors in April 2012. He is also the Founder of LINN and has served
as a Director of LINN since December 2011. Prior to that, he was Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors of
LINN since January 2010. He served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of LINN from December 2007 to
January 2010; Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of LINN from June 2006 to December 2007; and
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director of LINN from March 2003 to June 2006. Following his retirement as an
officer of LINN, Mr. Linn formed MCL Ventures LLC, a private investment vehicle that will focus on purchasing oil and
gas royalty as well as non-operated interests in oil and gas wells, subject to the non-competition provisions in his
retirement agreement with LINN. Mr. Linn serves on the National Petroleum Council and Natural Gas Council. He
serves on the board of the Independent Petroleum Association of America (IPAA) and is Chairman of the IPAA
Political Action Committee and past Chairman of IPAA. He serves as the Texas Representative for the Legal and
Regulatory Affairs Committee of the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission. He previously served as Chairman
of the National Gas Council and Director of the Natural Gas Supply Association. He is former President of the
Independent Oil and Gas Associations of New York, Pennsylvania and West Virginia. His civic affiliations include
serving on the boards of the Texas Heart Institute, Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, Texas Children’s Hospital,
Houston Children’s Charity, Houston Police Foundation and on the Visitors Board of the MD Anderson Cancer Center.
He is the Chairman of the Texas Children’s Hospital Compensation Committee. In February 2012, Mr. Linn joined the
board of directors of Nabors Industries Ltd.
Joseph P. McCoy was appointed to our Board of Directors in April 2012. Mr. McCoy is an independent director and
will serve as Chairman of our Audit Committee. Mr. McCoy also serves on the board of LINN, to which he was
appointed in September 2007, and is Chairman of LINN’s Audit Committee. Mr. McCoy served as Senior Vice
President and Chief Financial Officer of Burlington Resources Inc. from 2005 until 2006 and Vice President and
Controller (Chief Accounting Officer) of Burlington Resources Inc. from 2001 until 2005. Prior to joining Burlington
Resources, Mr. McCoy spent 27 years with Atlantic Richfield and affiliates in a variety of financial positions.
Mr. McCoy joined the Board of Directors of Global Geophysical Services, Inc. and Scientific Drilling International
during 2011 and served as a member of the board of directors of Rancher Energy, Inc. and BPI Energy Corp. from
2007 to 2009. Since 2006, other than his service on our board of directors and the other boards identified above,
Mr. McCoy has been retired.
Jeffrey C. Swoveland was appointed to our Board of Directors in April 2012. Mr. Swoveland is an independent director.
Mr. Swoveland also serves on the board of LINN, to which he was appointed in January 2006, and is Chairman of
LINN’s Compensation Committee. Since June 2009, Mr. Swoveland has served as the Chief Executive Officer of
ReGear Life Sciences (formerly known as Coventina Healthcare Enterprises), a medical device company that
develops and markets products which reduce pain and increase the rate of healing through therapeutic, deep tissue
heating. From May 2006 to June 2009, Mr. Swoveland served as Chief Operating Officer of ReGear Life Sciences.
From 2000 to 2006, he served as Chief Financial Officer of BodyMedia, a life-science and bioinformatics company.
From 1994 to 2000, he served as Director of Finance, VP Finance & Treasurer and Interim Chief Financial Officer of
Equitable Resources, Inc., a diversified natural gas company. Mr. Swoveland is also a member of the board of
directors of PDC Energy.
Our Board of Directors
All of our directors currently serve as directors of LINN. We anticipate that we will have an audit committee composed
of our four independent directors, Messrs. Alcorn, Jacobs, McCoy and Swoveland, upon the closing of the sale of
shares offered by this prospectus.
108
Table of Contents
Our Executive Compensation
Our executive officers and employees are also executive officers of, or employed directly by, LINN. LINN will make
compensation decisions for, and pay compensation directly to, such individuals, and they will not receive additional
compensation from us. As such, we have not paid or accrued any obligations with respect to compensation or
benefits for our executive officers or employees. We do not expect to pay any salaries, bonuses or equity awards to
such executive officers or employees.
LINN’s Executive Compensation
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
LINN uses traditional compensation elements of base salary, annual cash incentives, long-term equity based
incentives, and employee benefits to deliver attractive and competitive compensation. LINN’s executive
compensation programs are administered by an independent compensation committee, with assistance from an
independent consultant. LINN generally targets the median of its peer group for total compensation, while providing
the Named Officers with an opportunity to earn higher levels of incentive pay based on company performance. LINN’s
“Named Officers” for 2011 discussed below are Michael C. Linn, its former Executive Chairman, Mark E. Ellis, its
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Kolja Rockov, its Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer, Arden L. Walker, Jr., its Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer and Charlene A. Ripley, its
Senior Vice President and General Counsel. Effective December 31, 2011, Michael C. Linn retired as an officer of
LINN and Mark E. Ellis succeeded Mr. Linn as Chairman of LINN’s board of directors. Mr. Linn continues to serve as
a director.
This Compensation Discussion and Analysis addresses the following topics:
the role of the compensation committee of LINN’s board of directors (“the Compensation Committee”) in
•   the role of the compensation committee of LINN’s board of directors (“the Compensation Committee”) in
establishing executive compensation;
•   LINN’s process for setting executive compensation;
•   LINN’s compensation philosophy and policies regarding executive compensation; and
•   LINN’s compensation decisions with respect to Named Officers.
The Compensation Committee
The Compensation Committee has overall responsibility for the approval, evaluation and oversight of all LINN’s
compensation plans, policies and programs. The fundamental responsibilities of the Compensation Committee are to:
(i) establish the goals, objectives and policies relevant to the compensation of LINN’s senior management, and
evaluate performance in light of those goals to determine compensation levels, (ii) approve and administer LINN’s
incentive compensation plans, (iii) set compensation levels and make awards under incentive compensation plans
that are consistent with LINN’s compensation principles and its performance, and (iv) review LINN’s disclosure
relating to compensation. The Compensation Committee also has responsibility for evaluating compensation paid to
LINN’s non-employee directors.
The Compensation Setting Process
Compensation Committee Meetings
LINN’s Compensation Committee holds regular quarterly meetings each year, which coincide with LINN’s quarterly
board meetings. It also holds additional meetings as required to carry out its duties. The Compensation Committee
Chairman works with LINN’s Corporate Secretary to establish each meeting agenda.
At the regular first quarter meeting, the Compensation Committee:
•   considers and approves changes in base salary for the upcoming year;
•   reviews actual results compared to the pre-established performance measures for the previous year to
determine annual cash incentive awards for the executive officers under LINN’s Employee Incentive
Compensation Plan, or EICP;
109
Table of Contents
•   grants equity awards under LINN’s Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended, or LTIP;
•   approves the performance measures under LINN’s EICP for the upcoming year, which may include both
quantitative financial measures and qualitative performance measures intended to focus on and reward
activities that create unitholder value;
•   evaluates the compensation paid to independent directors and, to the extent it deems appropriate, approves
any adjustments; and
•   reviews the summary results of LINN’s board of directors’ written evaluations of LINN’s Chief Executive
Officer, as well as LINN’s Chief Executive Officer’s self evaluation.
The Compensation Committee receives updates at each quarterly meeting on LINN’s progress toward the goals set at
the beginning of the year. At a special meeting of the Compensation Committee held in October, the Compensation
Committee reviews and discusses a compensation analysis prepared by its independent compensation consultant
(please see “Role of Compensation Consultant” below) and considers compensation for the succeeding calendar year.
The Compensation Committee meets in executive session to consider appropriate compensation for LINN’s
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer. With respect to compensation for all other Named Officers, the
Compensation Committee generally meets with LINN’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer outside the
presence of all the other executive officers. When individual compensation decisions are not being considered, the
Compensation Committee typically meets in the presence of LINN’s former Executive Chairman, the Chairman,
President and Chief Executive Officer, the General Counsel and the Corporate Secretary. Depending upon the agenda
for a particular meeting, the Compensation Committee may also invite other officers, LINN’s compensation
consultant, and a representative of the Compensation Committee’s compensation consultant to participate in
Compensation Committee meetings. The Compensation Committee also regularly meets in executive session without
management.
Role of Compensation Consultant
The Compensation Committee’s Charter grants the Compensation Committee the sole and direct authority to retain
and terminate compensation advisors and to approve their fees. All such advisors report directly to the Compensation
Committee, and all assignments are directed by the Compensation Committee Chairman. Prior to 2011, the
Compensation Committee had engaged Towers Watson for the past five years as the Compensation Committee’s
independent compensation consultant. In 2011, the Compensation Committee elected to engage Meridian
Compensation Partners, LLC to assist the Compensation Committee in assessing and determining competitive
compensation packages for LINN’s executive officers. Meridian did no other work for LINN in 2011.
In this capacity, Meridian, at the Compensation Committee’s request and under the direction of the Compensation
Committee Chairman, reviewed LINN’s compensation program and structure generally and made recommendations on
the program design. Meridian also assembled information regarding comparable executive positions among
independent oil and natural gas producers. Meridian’s data for 2011 was based primarily on survey sources, and to a
lesser extent on data compiled from the public filings of a peer group of various companies.
Table of Contents
110
In 2011, LINN increased its compensation peer group slightly by adding independent oil and natural gas producers of a
similar size, based on a number of criteria including enterprise value, market capitalization, revenues and assets. The
chart below identifies the members of LINN’s 2010 and 2011 peer groups.
Company Name
Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation
2010 Peer
Group
2011 Peer
Group
Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation
Concho Resources Inc.
Cimarex Energy Co.
Denbury Resources Inc.
Newfield Exploration Company
Noble Energy, Inc.
Petrohawk Energy Corporation
Pioneer Natural Resources Company
Plains Exploration & Production Company
QEP Resources, Inc.
Range Resources Corporation
SM Energy Company
Southwestern Energy Company
Ultra Petroleum Corp.
Whiting Petroleum Corporation
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
Ö
LINN also employs an individual as a consultant to support it in managing its executive compensation process. The
consultant did not provide any other services to LINN in 2011.
Role of Executive Officers
Except with respect to his own compensation, LINN’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, with
assistance from LINN’s consultant, plays an important role in the Compensation Committee’s establishment of
compensation levels for LINN’s executive officers. The most significant aspects of his role in the process are:
•   evaluating performance
•   recommending EICP award targets and quantitative and qualitative performance measures under LINN’s
EICP;
•   recommending base salary levels, actual EICP awards and LTIP awards; and
•   advising the Compensation Committee with respect to achievement of performance measures under the
EICP.
LINN’s Executive Compensation Program
Compensation Objectives
LINN’s executive compensation program is intended to align the interests of its executive officers with the interests of
unitholders by motivating LINN’s executive officers to focus on those actions which achieve strong financial and
operating results and ultimately grow the company. LINN believes that profitable growth, both organically and through
acquisitions, drives its ability to maintain and increase distributions to its unitholders. The alignment of interests
between unitholders and executive officers of LINN is primarily reflected through LINN’s executive officers’
participation in LINN’s EICP and LTIP. In addition, LINN’s program is designed to achieve the following objectives:
•   attract and retain talented executive officers by providing total compensation levels competitive with that of
executives holding comparable positions in similarly-situated organizations;
111
Table of Contents
•   provide total compensation that is supported by individual performance;
•   provide a performance-based compensation component that balances rewards for short-term and long-term
results and is tied to company performance; and
•   encourage the long-term commitment of LINN’s executive officers to LINN and to its unitholders’ long-term
interests.
Compensation Strategy
To accomplish its objectives, LINN seeks to offer a total direct compensation program to its executive officers that,
when valued in its entirety, serves to attract, motivate and retain executives with the character, experience and
professional accomplishments required for LINN to continue to grow and develop. LINN seeks to align executive
compensation with its unitholders’ interests by placing a significant portion of total direct compensation “at risk.” “At
risk” means the executive officer will not realize full value unless 1) for EICP awards, performance goals are
achieved, approximately 65% of which are directly tied to LINN’s financial performance, and 2) for restricted units,
LINN maintains or increases both its unit price and per unit distribution. To appropriately incentivize its executive
officers to take a long-term view, unit based awards under LINN’s LTIP are the largest component of its “at risk”
compensation.
LINN’s executive compensation program consists of three principal elements: (i) base salary, (ii) potential for annual
cash incentive compensation awards under LINN’s EICP based upon the achievement of specific company
performance objectives, and (iii) opportunities to earn unit-based awards under LINN’s LTIP, which provide long-term
incentives that are intended to encourage the achievement of superior results over time and to align the interests of
executive officers with those of LINN’s unitholders.
To ensure that the total compensation package LINN offers its executive officers is competitive, Meridian develops an
assessment of market levels of compensation through both an analysis of survey data and information disclosed in
peer companies’ public filings. While the Compensation Committee considers this data when assessing the
reasonableness of the executive officers’ total compensation, it also considers a number of other factors including:
(i) historical compensation levels, (ii) the specific role the executive plays within the company, (iii) the individual
performance of the executive, and (iv) the relative compensation levels among LINN’s executive officers. There is no
pre-established policy or target for the Compensation Committee’s allocation of total compensation between long-term
compensation in the form of LTIP awards and short-term compensation in the form of base salary and EICP awards.
The allocation is at the discretion of the Compensation Committee and generally is based upon an analysis of how
LINN’s peer companies use long-term and short-term compensation to compensate their executive officers. Each year
the Compensation Committee reviews this peer company data when setting EICP targets and LTIP awards for that
year but also considers other factors when granting LTIP awards, including LINN’s performance and the individual
Named Officer’s performance.
2011 Executive Compensation Components
For 2011, the principal components of compensation for Named Officers were:
•   Short term compensation:
base salary
•
•
base salary
employee incentive compensation plan
•   Long-term equity compensation in the form of restricted units
•   Other benefits
112
Table of Contents
Short Term Compensation
Base Salary. LINN provides Named Officers and other employees with a base salary to provide them with a
reasonable base level of monthly income relative to their role and responsibilities. Each of LINN’s Named Officers has
an employment agreement that provides for a minimum level of base salary and upward adjustments at the discretion
of the Board. For a summary of the material terms of the Named Officers’ employment agreements, please see
“Narrative Disclosure to the 2011 Summary Compensation Table” in LINN’s Proxy Statement for the April 24, 2012
Annual Shareholder Meeting.
Salary levels are typically considered annually as part of LINN’s performance review process as well as upon a
promotion or other change in job responsibilities. During its review of base salaries for executive officers, the
Compensation Committee primarily considers:
•   survey and published peer data provided by the Compensation Committee’s independent compensation
consultant;
•   internal review of the executive’s compensation, both individually and relative to other executive officers; and
•   recommendations by LINN’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer.
For 2011, reviewing peer data and considering the other factors mentioned above under “Compensation Strategy,” the
Compensation Committee increased the base salary of each of the Named Officers to maintain base salary around
the median of LINN’s peers.
Employee Incentive Compensation Program
EICP Award Targets
LINN’s EICP is an annual cash incentive program which provides guidelines for the calculation of annual cash
incentive based compensation. The EICP program is intended to focus on and reward achievement of near term
financial, operating and strategic priorities that LINN believes drive long-term value for unitholders. The Compensation
Committee reviews peer data in setting EICP award targets and for 2011, using peer data as a guide, set EICP award
targets for each Named Officer as a percentage of base salary.
EICP award targets for LINN’s Named Officers in 2011 were set as follows:
Named Officer
Mark E. Ellis
Kolja Rockov
Arden L. Walker, Jr.
Charlene A. Ripley
Michael C. Linn
Performance Measures
% of
Base Salary
100% 
90% 
90% 
80% 
80%
In early 2011, the Compensation Committee established 1) targets for quantitative performance measures based on
LINN’s 2011 budget targets and budget ranges (other than unitholder return) and 2) qualitative strategic pathways
designed to align with LINN’s strategy and future vision for the company. To ensure the right level of focus on the
quantitative financial measures, the Compensation Committee decided to weight the quantitative measures at 65%
and the qualitative measures at 35% in the determination of the total EICP payout.
To provide the Compensation Committee the flexibility it needs to adjust for and react to macroeconomic events,
such as dramatic changes in commodity prices or volatile capital markets, the Compensation Committee
Table of Contents
113
prefers not to rely on a formulaic approach based on pre-established thresholds resulting in automatic payouts. The
Compensation Committee always retains discretion to adjust actual awards as it thinks appropriate given all the
circumstances at the time of award. See “Actual Results” below for the specific 2011 quantitative performance
measures and budget targets and the qualitative strategic pathways. To determine the EICP payout levels for 2011,
the Compensation Committee reviewed 1) LINN’s performance on the quantitative performance measures described
below, and 2) LINN’s progress on and achievement of the qualitative strategic pathways.
Quantitative Performance Measures
For 2011, 65% percent of each Named Officer’s EICP Award opportunity was based on LINN’s performance with
respect to the following measures set at the beginning of 2011:
a) Operations - measured by actual production volumes and cash costs (including lease operating expenses
and general and administrative expenses) compared to LINN’s budget;
b) Ability to Pay Distribution - measured by
1.
LINN’s cash flow (defined as Adjusted EBITDA less interest expense) compared to its budget for
2011; and
2.
LINN’s Distribution Coverage Ratio as compared to its budget. Distribution coverage ratio is defined as
Distributable Cash Flow for 2011 divided by total cash distributions. Distributable Cash Flow is defined
as Adjusted EBITDA (defined below) less cash interest expense and maintenance capital.
c) Relative Unitholder Return - measured by LINN’s total return for fiscal year 2011 compared to that of a peer
group of energy master limited partnerships, selected due to management’s and the Compensation
Committee’s view that these companies most closely align with the peer group considered by analysts and
investors when comparing LINN’s total return. The Compensation Committee selected the following peer
group for comparison of total return: EV Energy Partners, L.P., Inergy, L.P., Buckeye Partners, L.P., El
Paso Pipeline Partners, L.P., Breitburn Energy L.P., Magellan Midstream Partners, L.P. and Nustar Energy
L.P.
LINN defined Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) from continuing operations plus:
•   Net operating cash flow from acquisitions and divestitures, effective date through closing date;
•   Interest expense;
•   Depreciation, depletion and amortization;
•   Impairment of long-lived assets;
•   Write off of deferred financing fees and other;
•   (Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net;
•   Provision for legal matters;
•   Loss on extinguishment of debt;
•   Unrealized (gains) losses on commodity derivatives;
•   Unrealized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
Realized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
Realized (gains) losses on interest rate derivatives;
•
•   Realized (gains) losses on canceled derivatives;
•   Unit-based compensation expenses;
•   Exploration costs; and
•   Income tax (benefit) expense.
114
Table of Contents
In setting the measures in January 2011, the Compensation Committee determined that the measures above should
be weighted equally because the Compensation Committee believed that each was a factor important to LINN’s
overall performance and none should be given more importance or weight than the others. See “Actual Results” below
for how the Compensation Committee actually considered the objectives.
Qualitative Strategic Pathways
The other 35% of the EICP award opportunity was based on LINN’s achievement of or progress made on the following
qualitative strategic pathways, which were recommended by LINN’s management and reviewed by the Compensation
Committee in January 2011:
a) Consistent Operational Results and Execution;
b) Acquisitions Excellence;
c) Culture — People Development and Growth; and
d) Access to Capital/Optimizing Capital Structure.
Actual Results
65% of the total EICP award opportunity is allocated to the quantitative performance measures described above.
Upon completion of the fiscal year, the Compensation Committee reviewed and assessed LINN’s performance for
each quantitative measure relative to its budget, as revised throughout the year (other than unitholder return) and
made a subjective determination with respect to LINN’s achievement as compared to those metrics. In December
2011, after consultation with LINN’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, the Compensation Committee
also made the decision to consider the additional metric of cash flow per unit due to the Compensation Committee’s
view that it is a better metric than absolute cash flow to demonstrate LINN’s ability to pay its distribution.
Results for 2011 were as follows:
*
Operations
Volumes (MMcfe/day)
Cash Costs (Lease Operating
Expenses and General and
Administrative Expenses)
(in millions)
Cash Costs (Lease Operating
Expenses and General and
Administrative Expenses) ($/Mcfe)
Ability to Pay Distributions
Cash Flow (Adjusted EBITDA less
Interest Expense) (in millions)
Cash Flow/Unit (Cash flow divided
by units outstanding)
Distribution Coverage Ratio
Revised
Budget
Target*     
  
393
Revised
Budget
Range*
364-422
$ 317
$
301-333
$ 2.21
$ 2.32-2.10
$ 745
$
690-800
$  4.01    
  1.22x
$  3.71-4.31    
  1.10-1.34x
2011 Estimated
Performance as of
January 20121
$
$
$
$
369
343
2.52
758
4.36  
1.25x
Budget targets and ranges were updated throughout the year to reflect acquisition activity, debt and equity
offerings and distribution increase.
(1) The Compensation Committee based its decisions on estimates of 2011 performance available at the January
2012 Committee Meeting. Actual final results were released in LINN’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2011 and LINN’s Earnings Release, filed on Current Report on Form 8-K, each filed on
February 23, 2012.
115
Table of Contents
Relative Unitholder Return in 2011*:
Relative Unitholder Return Over Three Years*:
*
In each case, this information was compiled by us using publicly available information. The charts above do not
represent the annual performance graph required by Item 201(e) of Regulation S-K, which can be found in Item 5
of LINN’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, filed on February 23, 2012.
Table of Contents
116
The Compensation Committee then reviewed LINN’s performance relative to the qualitative strategic pathways, which
comprise the other 35% of the total EICP award opportunity, and determined that LINN had outstanding success with
respect to all objectives.
Objective
  
Consistent Operational Results and Execution  
Acquisitions Excellence
  
Culture — People Development and Growth
  
Access to Capital/Optimizing Capital
Structure
Outstanding Results 
Ö
   
   
Ö
Ö
Ö
In its consideration of the quantitative measures, the Compensation Committee noted that due to, among other things,
cost pressures and variability in production volumes, LINN’s performance on the Operations portion of the quantitative
measures just met or fell below targets. In reviewing the other quantitative measures, the Compensation Committee
focused on:
1)
LINN’s positive total shareholder return relative to its peer group over the past three years; and
2)
LINN’s exceeding its budget targets in cash flow, cash flow per unit, and distribution coverage ratio, each
demonstrating the accretive nature of the acquisitions made in 2011.
In reviewing the qualitative measures, the Compensation Committee reviewed examples of LINN’s success in each
category and focused on:
1)
LINN’s ability to source, execute, close and integrate accretive acquisition opportunities which resulted in a
total of approximately $1.5 billion in asset acquisitions closed throughout 2011;
2)
LINN’s focus on maintaining a strong corporate culture while growing the company which allows it to
continue to attract and retain key employees;
3)
LINN’s ability to quickly and opportunistically access capital markets and optimize its capital structure
(liquidity position, debt and equity balance, short-term and long-term debt balance, and credit facility
structure);
4)
LINN’s broadening its investor base for both debt and equity;
5)
LINN’s significant increase in its hedging capacity and efforts at counterparty diversification;
6)
LINN’s success in capital program execution and its maintenance of safe and environmentally sound
operations; and
7)
LINN’s significant involvement in its community.
After reviewing the results of the quantitative and qualitative measures with a focus on the above mentioned factors,
and comparing LINN’s overall performance in 2011 with its exceptional performance in 2010, the Compensation
Committee also used subjective discretion and determined that an overall award of 125% of each Named Officer’s
EICP award target was appropriate.
Generally, the Compensation Committee believes that company performance is a reflection of executive officer
performance in total. The Compensation Committee may, however, apply discretion upward or downward to reflect
individual performance. For 2011, the Compensation Committee did not make any differentiation in EICP awards due
to individual performance; thus each Named Officer (other than Mr. Ellis whose award was rounded to slightly higher
than 125%) received approximately 125% of his or her EICP award target. As an example, Mr. Rockov, whose EICP
award target was 90% of his base salary, received an award of approximately 112.5% of his base salary.
117
Table of Contents
Long-Term Incentive Compensation
LINN’s LTIP encourages participants to focus on LINN’s long-term performance and provides an opportunity for
executive officers and other employees to increase their stake in LINN through grants of LINN units based on a three-
year vesting period. Long-term incentive awards benefit LINN by:
•   enhancing the link between the creation of unitholder value and long-term executive incentive compensation;
•   maintaining significant forfeitable equity stakes among executives thereby fostering retention; and
•   maintaining competitive levels of total compensation.
LTIP awards are typically made in January and have been intended primarily as forward looking long-term incentives;
however, the Compensation Committee considers LINN’s performance in the prior year in determining the size of the
award. In determining the size of the awards generally, the Compensation Committee uses peer data as a guide and
targets the total value of each grant such that each Named Officer’s LTIP award, when combined with base salary
and bonus, would place the executives’ total direct compensation between the median and 75th percentile of similarly
situated executives in LINN’s compensation peer group. The Compensation Committee always has discretion to
award above the 75th percentile in years where it determines that exceptional performance is achieved and below the
median of the peer group in years of poor performance or when economic conditions dictate.
In determining the individual awards, the Compensation Committee considered the market data, LINN’s outstanding
performance for the previous year, its subjective evaluation of the individual performances of each Named Officer and
how that Named Officer contributed to LINN’s achievement of quantitative and qualitative performance measures.
The Compensation Committee currently grants all of its awards as restricted units. The Compensation Committee
believes that granting only restricted units results in a simple, straightforward LTIP program and closely aligns LINN
with how other energy master limited partnerships are currently using long term incentive awards. Because LINN’s
Named Officers receive distributions on vested and unvested units at the same rate as all LINN’s unitholders, the
Compensation Committee believes that restricted units closely align management’s interests with those of LINN’s
unitholders, by providing incentive to maintain or increase the level of distributions.
In January 2011, the Compensation Committee considered the following factors in its decision to grant LTIP awards
for 2011 at substantially higher levels than in 2010: 1) LINN’s outstanding performance and profitable growth in 2010
and 2) LINN’s desire to retain its senior management team to focus on achievement of its strategic objectives over
the next several years. The Compensation Committee intends to continue to utilize LTIP awards as a means of
rewarding extraordinary performance and profitable growth. Reflecting LINN’s performance in 2011 (as discussed
above under “Actual Results”), grants made in January 2012 fell more in line with the Compensation Committee’s
usual practice of awarding at levels to place total compensation between the median and 75th percentile.
Restricted Unit Awards
Under the terms of LINN’s LTIP, restricted units are subject to a vesting period of at least three years and contain
such other terms as the Compensation Committee may determine. For LINN’s Named Officers, its Executive
Restricted Unit Grant Agreement provides for vesting in equal installments over three years and provides that upon
termination of employment with LINN (a) by LINN other than for Cause, (b) by the officer with Good Reason, or (c) by
reason of death, Disability or retirement (as those terms are defined herein under the section titled “Payments Made
Upon Termination Without Cause or For Good Reason”), all restrictions lapse and the grant immediately vests in full.
Table of Contents
118
Participants, including Named Officers, who receive restricted unit grants under the LTIP receive quarterly
distributions on all the units awarded (whether vested or unvested), with the units being retained in LINN’s transfer
agent’s custody and subject to restrictions on sale or transfer until vested. The Compensation Committee does not
include amounts received from quarterly cash distributions in its calculations of total direct compensation for
comparison to LINN’s compensation peer group.
Unit Ownership Guidelines
In August 2009, the Compensation Committee adopted minimum unit ownership guidelines for LINN’s executive
officers and independent directors. Each of LINN’s Named Officers is required to own such number of units
representing a value that is the multiple of his or her base salary listed below:
•   Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer: 5 times base salary
•   Executive Vice Presidents: 4 times base salary
•   Senior Vice Presidents: 3 times base salary
LINN’s independent directors are required to own units representing a value that is three times the annual cash
retainer for independent directors. The calculation of the applicable number of units is determined as of the last day of
the fiscal year based on the average high and low closing price of LINN’s units on the NASDAQ Global Select Market
for the prior 12 months and salary or cash retainer in effect as of the last day of the year. The Compensation
Committee has discretion to allow sufficient time to permit the Named Officer or director to regain compliance with
these guidelines should he or she fall out of compliance due to fluctuating unit price. The Compensation Committee
believes that continued unit ownership by LINN’s executives and independent directors helps tighten the alignment
among the interests of board members, executives, and unitholders and demonstrate the Named Officers’ and
directors’ confidence in LINN.
Other Benefits
Termination Arrangements and Change in Control Provisions. LINN maintains employment agreements with its Named
Officers to encourage their continued service during the term of the agreement. Please read “Narrative Disclosure to
the 2011 Summary Compensation Table” in LINN’s Proxy Statement for the April 24, 2012 Annual Shareholder
Meeting. These agreements provide for severance compensation to be paid if the officer’s employment is terminated
under certain conditions as outlined in the applicable agreement, such as following a change in control, termination by
LINN without cause, termination by the Named Officer for Good Reason, termination by LINN for “cause,” death or
Disability.
The employment and other compensatory agreements between LINN and its Named Officers and the related
severance provisions are designed to meet the following objectives:
•   Change of Control. In certain scenarios, a merger or acquisition of LINN by another person may be in the best
interests of LINN’s unitholders. LINN provides severance compensation to the Named Officers if such
officer’s employment terminates following a change of control transaction to promote the ability of the officer
to act in the best interests of LINN’s unitholders even though his or her employment could be terminated as a
result of the transaction.
•   Termination without Cause. If LINN terminates the employment of certain executive officers “without cause”
as defined in the applicable agreement, LINN is obligated to pay the officer certain compensation and other
benefits as described in greater detail in “Potential Payments Upon Termination or Change of Control” below.
LINN believes these payments are appropriate because the terminated officer is generally bound by
confidentiality obligations for five years, and nonsolicitation and non-compete provisions for one year after
termination. Both parties have mutually agreed to severance terms that would be in place prior to any
termination event. This provides LINN with more flexibility to make a change in senior management if such a
change is in the best interests of LINN and its unitholders.
119
Table of Contents
Perquisites. LINN believes in a simple, straight-forward compensation program and as such, Named Officers have not
in the past been provided unique perquisites or other personal benefits. The Compensation Committee periodically
reviews LINN’s charitable contributions, the use of aircraft, vehicles and potential perquisites that could result in
personal benefits to LINN’s Named Officers. Other than as described below, consistent with LINN’s general strategy,
no perquisites or other personal benefits exceeded $10,000 for any of LINN’s Named Officers in 2011.
Other than LINN’s Former Executive Chairman and its Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Named
Officers and employees are discouraged from personal use of company leased aircraft. In July 2011, in an effort to
provide for maximum efficiency and security in travel, the Compensation Committee elected to begin providing 25
hours of flight time (prorated for 2011) on company paid private aircraft per calendar year to each of LINN’s Former
Executive Chairman and its Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, at an approximate value of $200,000
per year. Upon his retirement as Executive Chairman effective December 31, 2011, this benefit ceased for Mr. Linn
(please read “Narrative Disclosure to the 2011 Summary Compensation Table” in LINN’s Proxy Statement for the
April 24, 2012 Annual Shareholder Meeting for a description of Mr. Linn’s Retirement Agreement).
In January 2012, in an effort to provide for consistent personal income tax treatment among LINN’s Named Officers,
the Compensation Committee authorized reimbursement, in an amount up to $10,000 per year, for personal income
tax preparation services for each of LINN’s Named Officers. In addition, in January 2012, the Compensation
Committee authorized the reimbursement of certain tax preparation expenses incurred in 2011 for Mr. Ellis up to
$15,000.
Retirement Savings Plan. All employees, including LINN’s Named Officers, may participate in LINN’s Retirement
Savings Plan, or 401(k) Plan. LINN provides this plan to help its employees save for retirement in a tax-efficient
manner. Employees, including Named Officers, can contribute the maximum amount allowed by law. LINN currently
makes a matching contribution equal to 100% of the first 6% of eligible compensation contributed by the employee on
a before-tax basis. As contributions are made throughout the year, plan participants become fully vested in the
amounts contributed.
Nondiscriminatory Health and Welfare Benefits. All eligible employees, including LINN’s Named Officers, may
participate in LINN’s health and welfare benefit programs, including medical, dental and vision care coverage,
disability insurance and life insurance.
Tax and Accounting Implications
Code Section 162(m). Section 162(m) of the Code generally disallows a tax deduction to public companies for
compensation over $1 million paid to the principal executive officer, the principal financial officer and the three
additional most highly compensated executive officers of a company (other than the principal executive officer or the
principal financial officer), as reported in that company’s most recent proxy statement. Qualifying performance-based
compensation is not subject to the deduction limit if certain requirements are met. As part of its role, the
Compensation Committee reviews and considers the deductibility of executive compensation; however, due to LINN’s
status as a publicly traded partnership for tax purposes rather than a publicly held corporation, LINN believes that the
provisions of Section 162(m) are inapplicable to it.
Code Section 280G and Code Section 4999. LINN considers the impact of Sections 280G and 4999 of the Code in
determining its post-termination compensation, and provides reimbursement for any excise tax, interest and penalties
incurred if payments or benefits received due to a change of control would be subject to an excise tax under
Section 4999 of the Code.
Code Section 409A. Section 409A of the Code provides that deferrals of compensation under a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan or arrangement are to be included in an individual’s current gross income to the
Table of Contents
120
extent that such deferrals are not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture and have not previously been included in
the individual’s gross income, unless certain requirements are met. LINN structures its executive officer employment
agreements, change of control plan and incentive plans, each to the extent they are subject to Section 409A, to be in
compliance with Section 409A.
Accounting for Unit-Based Compensation. LINN recognizes expense for unit-based compensation over the requisite
service period, in an amount equal to the fair value of unit-based payments granted.
Unitholder Advisory Vote on Executive Compensation
At LINN’s 2011 Annual Meeting, its unitholders cast a non-binding, advisory vote on LINN’s executive compensation
policies and decisions as disclosed in the Proxy Statement related to the 2011 Annual Meeting. Approximately 93%
of the units voted on the matter were cast in favor of the compensation decisions and policies as disclosed. The
Compensation Committee considered this result and determined that it was not necessary at this time to make any
changes to LINN’s compensation policies and decisions in response to the advisory vote.
Table of Contents
121
2011 LINN SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
The following table sets forth certain information with respect to the compensation paid for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2011 to LINN’s Chief Executive Officer, its Chief Financial Officer, its three other most highly
compensated executive officers (the Named Officers).
(a)
Name and Principal
Position at LINN
Michael C. Linn
Former Executive
Chairman of the
Board (1)
Mark E. Ellis
Chairman,
President and
Chief Executive
Officer (1)
Kolja Rockov
Executive Vice
President and
Chief Financial
Officer
Arden L. Walker,
Jr.
Executive Vice
President and
Chief Operating
Officer
Charlene A.
Ripley
Senior Vice
President and
General Counsel
(b)
Year     
2011
(c)
Salary
($)
630,000
2010
630,000
2009
    
2011
630,000
    
750,000
2010
600,000
2009
    
  
2011
415,000
    
  
415,000
2010
315,000
(f)
Option
Awards
($) (3)
(d)
(e)
Unit
Bonus
($) (2)
505,000
Awards
($) (3)
3,292,120
—
2,782,911
—  
—
4,436,732
    
7,201,460
—
2,968,446
—
—
—  
—
—
—  
—
1,796,927
    
  
2,469,071
74,671
    
  
—
—
1,113,180
—
(g)
Non-Equity
Incentive
Plan
(h)
All  other
Compensation
Compensation
($) (4)
    
126,000
885,000
1,185,000
    
1,000,000
1,050,000
775,000
    
  
470,000
470,000
($) (5)
6,147,700
14,700
9,800
    
79,700
14,700
9,800
    
  
14,700
14,700
(i)
Total
($) (6)
10,700,820
4,312,611
6,261,532
  
9,031,160
4,633,146
3,071,398
  
3,368,771
1,912,880
2009
300,000
—
1,172,963
48,744
385,000
9,800
1,916,507
2011
415,000
2010
300,000
2009
    
  
2011
260,000
    
  
375,000
2010
300,000
—
2,057,566
—
788,514
—
—
—  
—
763,686
    
  
1,646,060
31,735
    
  
—
—
742,111
—
470,000
345,000
270,000
    
  
375,000
360,000
14,700
14,700
9,800
    
  
14,700
14,700
2,957,266
1,448,214
1,335,221
  
2,410,760
1,416,811
2009
275,000
—
768,710
31,941
255,000
9,800
1,340,451
(1) Mr. Linn retired from his position as Executive Chairman of LINN effective December 31, 2011. He remains a
director of LINN. Mr. Ellis became Chairman of the Board of LINN effective December 31, 2011.
(2) The amount shown for Mr. Linn reflects payment of EICP at target guaranteed to him pursuant to his Retirement
Agreement described below.
(3) The amounts in columns (e) and (f) reflect the aggregate grant date fair value of awards granted under LINN’s
LTIP, computed in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718. Assumptions used in the calculation of these
amounts are included in Note 5 to LINN’s audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2011, included in its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011.
The amounts in column (g) reflect the cash awards approved by the Compensation Committee under LINN’s
The amounts in column (g) reflect the cash awards approved by the Compensation Committee under LINN’s
EICP for performance in 2009, 2010 and 2011. The 2009 amounts were not actually paid until February 2010, the
2010 amounts were not actually paid until February 2011 and the 2011 amounts were
(4)
122
Table of Contents
not actually paid until February 2012. The amount shown for Mr. Linn reflects the payment of the excess EICP
above his target pursuant to his Retirement Agreement described below.
(5) For each officer, the amount shown in column (h) reflects matching contributions allocated by us to each of
LINN’s Named Officers pursuant to the Retirement Savings Plan (which is more fully described beginning on
page 24 of LINN’s Proxy Statement under the heading “Other Benefits”). Mr. Linn’s amount also includes 1) a
payment of $6 million made in December 2011 in connection with his Retirement Agreement described below and
2) $133,000 paid by LINN for personal usage of company leased aircraft. Mr. Ellis’s amount includes 1) an
amount of $15,000 authorized by the Committee to reimburse Mr. Ellis for certain tax preparation expenses and
2) $50,000 paid by the Company for personal usage of company leased aircraft.
(6) Distributions paid during 2011 on issued, but unvested units pursuant to the equity awards are not shown in
column (i) because the fair value shown in column (e) reflects the value of distributions. Distributions are paid to
LINN’s Named Officers at the same rate as all LINN unitholders, currently $2.76 per unit on an annualized basis.
Distributions paid in 2009, 2010 and 2011 are shown below.
Executive
Michael C. Linn
Mark E. Ellis
Kolja Rockov
Arden L. Walker, Jr.
Charlene Ripley
2011
($)
2010
($)
676,928      808,692    
    814,447      531,471    
    317,393      265,106    
    242,614      176,070    
    210,848      181,156
2009
($)
940,880  
 453,333  
 359,874  
 193,992  
 189,995
Narrative Disclosure to the 2011 Summary Compensation Table
Michael C. Linn, Former Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors.
In connection with his retirement, LINN entered into a Retirement Agreement with Mr. Linn, dated November 29, 2011,
which replaces and supersedes Mr. Linn’s existing employment agreement. The terms of the Retirement Agreement
provide for a lump sum cash retirement payment to Mr. Linn of $6 million, as well as payment of his target bonus for
2011 of $505,000, each of which was paid prior to December 31, 2011. Mr. Linn is also entitled to receive, not later
than March 15, 2012, payment of any bonus amount in excess of the target bonus. Following the Committee’s
declaration of bonus awards at 125% of target, Mr. Linn was paid $126,000 on February17, 2012. Mr. Linn continues
to be eligible for coverage under LINN’s benefit plans, subject to his payment of 100% of the applicable premiums that
would otherwise be payable under COBRA.
Mr. Linn’s service as a director will constitute a continuation of service with LINN for purposes of the vesting of his
existing restricted units granted under LINN’s LTIP, provided that his grant agreements were amended to provide for
full vesting in the event he is not re-nominated or reelected as a director. The grant agreements governing Mr. Linn’s
existing unit options were amended to provide for extension of the option term until the earlier of the existing
expiration date or one year following termination of his service as a director.
The Retirement Agreement also contains certain confidentiality provisions, non-compete and non-solicitation
obligations and other customary provisions and provides for a general release.
Mark E. Ellis, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer.
LINN entered into a First Amended and Restated Employment Agreement with Mr. Ellis, effective December 17, 2008,
as amended effective January 1, 2010, that provides for an annual base salary not less than $600,000, subject to
annual review and upward adjustment by the Compensation Committee. Mr. Ellis is entitled to receive incentive
compensation payable at the discretion of the Compensation Committee. The Compensation Committee may set, in
advance, an annual target bonus. Mr. Ellis is eligible for awards under the LTIP at the
Table of Contents
123
discretion of the Compensation Committee. Under the LTIP and the related grant agreements, Mr. Ellis receives
distributions payable on all vested and unvested restricted units at the same rate as that paid to all LINN unitholders,
currently $2.76 per unit on an annualized basis.
Mr. Ellis’s agreement contains certain confidentiality and non-compete obligations that restrict his ability to compete
with LINN’s business for up to one year following his termination, unless the termination occurs within the change of
control period (as defined in the agreement).
Kolja Rockov, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
LINN entered into a Third Amended and Restated Employment Agreement with Mr. Rockov, effective December 17,
2008, that provides for an annual base salary of not less than $285,000, subject to annual review and upward
adjustment by the Compensation Committee. The remaining terms governing Mr. Rockov’s compensation under the
agreement are the same as Mr. Ellis’s employment agreement.
Arden L. Walker, Jr., Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer.
LINN entered into a First Amended and Restated Employment Agreement with Mr. Walker, effective December 17,
2008, and as amended on April 26, 2011, that provides for an annual base salary of $415,000, subject to annual
review and upward adjustment by the Compensation Committee. The remaining terms governing Mr. Walker’s
compensation under the agreement are the same as Mr. Ellis’s employment agreement.
Charlene A. Ripley, Senior Vice President and General Counsel.
LINN entered into a First Amended and Restated Employment Agreement with Ms. Ripley, effective December 17,
2008, that provides for an annual base salary of $255,000, subject to annual review and upward adjustment by the
Compensation Committee. The remaining terms governing Ms. Ripley’s compensation under the agreement are the
same as Mr. Ellis’s employment agreement. Ms. Ripley’s agreement does not contain confidentiality and non-
compete provisions.
Please read “Quantification of Payments on Termination” below for a summary of the compensation upon termination
provisions of each Named Officer’s employment agreement.
Table of Contents
124
2011 GRANTS OF PLAN BASED AWARDS
(c)
Estimated Future
Payouts
Under Non-Equity
(d)
All Other
Unit
Awards;
(g)
Grant Date
Fair Value
of Unit and
(a)
Name
Michael C. Linn
Mark E. Ellis
Kolja Rockov
Arden L. Walker, Jr.
Charlene A. Ripley
(b)
Grant Date (1)    
  1/28/2011    
  1/28/2011    
  1/28/2011    
  1/28/2011    
  1/28/2011
Incentive Plan
Awards ($)
(Target) (2)
504,000    
750,000    
373,500    
373,500    
300,000
Number of
Units
(#)
85,266    
 186,518    
  63,949    
  53,291    
  42,633
Option
Awards
($) (3)
3,292,120  
 7,201,460  
 2,469,071  
 2,057,566  
 1,646,060
In each case, the grant date is the same as the date of committee approval. In addition, the Compensation
Committee approved the following restricted unit grants to LINN’s Named Officers (other than Mr. Linn who retired
as an officer, effective December 31, 2011) on January 26, 2012:
Name
Mark E. Ellis
Kolja Rockov
Arden L. Walker, Jr.
Charlene A. Ripley
Restricted Unit
Award
    
136,277    
54,511    
54,511    
32,707
Value at Grant Date 
$
5,080,407  
2,032,170  
$
2,032,170  
$
$
1,219,317
In January 2011, the Compensation Committee set EICP targets for 2011 as a percentage of base salary. There
is no threshold or maximum payout; the Compensation Committee has discretion to adjust the actual award
above or below the target. The amount shown represents the payout at target; the actual awards for 2011
(awarded on January 26, 2012) are shown in column (g) of the Summary Compensation Table.
(1)
(2)
(3) The amounts shown in column (g) represent the grant date fair value for each award under FASB ASC Topic 718.
Assumptions used in the calculation of these amounts are included in Note 5 to LINN’s audited consolidated
financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2011, included in LINN’s Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the year ended December 31, 2011.
Table of Contents
Name
Mike Linn (3)
Mike Linn (3)
Mike Linn (4)
Mike Linn (5)
Mike Linn (6)
Mark Ellis (3)
Mark Ellis (3)
Mark Ellis (3)
125
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT DECEMBER 31, 2011
Option Awards
Unit Awards
Units
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Options
Option
Exercisable
Unexercisable
Exercise Price
(#)
    
55,625    
75,875    
  
  
  
50,000    
50,000
(#)
—      
—      
  
  
  
—      
—
($)
21.00    
21.70    
  
  
  
32.18    
23.61
Option
Expiration
Date (1)
1/19/2016    
  1/29/2018    
  
  
  
 12/18/2016    
 12/18/2017
Number of
Units That
Have Not
Vested (#)    
  
  
  92,721    
  72,727    
  85,266
Market Value
of Unvested
Units ($)(2)
3,515,053  
  2,757,081  
  3,232,434
Mark Ellis (3)
Mark Ellis (7)
Mark Ellis (4)
Mark Ellis (5)
Mark Ellis (6)
Kolja Rockov (3)
Kolja Rockov (3)
Kolja Rockov (3)
Kolja Rockov (7)
Kolja Rockov (4)
Kolja Rockov (5)
Kolja Rockov (6)
Arden Walker (3)
Arden Walker (3)
Arden Walker (7)
Arden Walker (4)
Arden Walker (5)
Arden Walker (6)
Charlene Ripley (3)
Charlene Ripley (3)
Charlene Ripley (7)
Charlene Ripley (4)
Charlene Ripley (5)
Charlene Ripley (6)
125,000    
90,510    
 
  
  
  
  111,250    
85,000    
 
83,350    
 
 
59,084    
  
  
  
50,000    
45,850    
38,467    
  
  
  
30,000    
54,200    
38,717
—      
45,255    
  
  
  
—      
—      
—      
29,541    
  
  
  
—      
—      
19,233    
  
  
  
—      
—      
19,358
21.70    
15.95    
  
  
  
21.00    
27.94    
21.70    
15.95    
  
  
  
33.00    
21.70    
15.95    
  
  
  
35.00    
21.70    
15.95
1/29/2018    
2/4/2019    
 
  
  
  
  1/19/2016    
  12/6/2016    
  1/29/2018    
 
2/4/2019    
  
  
  
 
2/5/2017    
  1/29/2018    
2/4/2019    
 
  
  
  
  4/11/2017    
  1/29/2018    
2/4/2019
37,553    
  77,576    
 186,518    
  
  
  
  
  24,513    
  29,091    
  63,949    
  
  
  
  15,960    
  20,606    
  53,291    
  
  
  
  16,065    
  19,394    
  42,633
1,423,634  
  2,940,906  
  7,070,897
929,288  
  1,102,840  
  2,424,307
605,044  
 
781,173  
  2,020,262
609,024  
 
 
735,227  
  1,616,217
1 Options expire ten years from date of grant.
2
3
4
5
6
7
Based on the closing sales price of our common units on December 30, 2011 of $37.91.
These unit options are fully vested as of the date of this Registration Statement.
These restricted unit awards vest in three equal installments on January 19, 2010, 2011, 2012.
These restricted unit awards vest in three equal installments on January 27, 2011, 2012 and 2013.
These restricted unit awards vest in three equal installments on January 28, 2012, 2013 and 2014.
These unit options vest in three equal installments on January 19, 2010, 2011 and 2012.
Table of Contents
126
2011 OPTION EXERCISES AND UNITS VESTED
Option Awards
Unit Awards
(a)
Name
  
Michael C. Linn (2)   
Mark E. Ellis(3)
  
Kolja Rockov (4)
  
Arden L. Walker,
Jr.(5)
Charlene A.
Ripley(6)
(b)
Number of Units
(c)
Acquired on
Exercise (#)
106,649    
—      
—
—
—
Value Realized on
Exercise ($)
1,545,500    
—      
—
—
—
(d)
Number of  Units
Acquired on Vesting
(#)
151,686    
93,291    
50,359
(e)
Vesting ($) (1)
Value Realized on
 
5,832,722  
3,599,107  
1,938,216
32,481
33,112
1,250,792
1,274,509
1
The value realized represents the total fair market value of the shares on the vesting date reported as earned
compensation during 2011.
2 Mr. Linn vested and sold 54,075 units to satisfy statutory federal payroll tax withholding requirements.
3 Mr. Ellis vested and sold 32,201 units to satisfy statutory federal payroll tax withholding requirements.
4 Mr. Rockov vested and sold 16,245 units to satisfy statutory federal payroll tax withholding requirements.
5 Mr. Walker vested and sold 9,575 units to satisfy statutory federal payroll tax withholding requirements.
6 Ms. Ripley vested and sold 9,811 units to satisfy statutory federal payroll tax withholding requirements.
PENSION BENEFITS
LINN does not provide pension benefits for its Named Officers or other employees. Retirement benefits are provided
through the Retirement Savings Plan, as discussed previously.
NON-QUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION
LINN does not have a non-qualified deferred compensation plan. The Retirement Savings Plan is a 401(k) deferred
compensation arrangement and a qualified plan under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (Code).
POTENTIAL PAYMENTS UPON TERMINATION OR CHANGE OF CONTROL
Payments Made Upon Termination For Any Reason
Under each of LINN’s Named Officer’s employment agreement, regardless of the manner in which his or her
employment terminates, the executive will be entitled to receive amounts earned (but unpaid) during his term of
employment. Such amounts include:
•   earned, but unpaid base salary;
•   unused vacation pay;
•   amounts contributed and vested through our Retirement Savings Plan; and
•   any other amounts that may be reimbursable by us to the Named Officer under his or her employment
agreement.
127
Table of Contents
Payments Made Upon Termination Without Cause or for Good Reason
In addition to the payments described above, in the event of termination by us other than for “Cause” or termination by
the executive for “Good Reason” except in the event of a change of control, each Named Officer’s employment
agreement provides for severance payments equal to two times the Named Officer’s highest base salary in effect at
any time during the 36 months prior to the date of the termination. Each Named Officer will also receive his earned,
but unpaid EICP awards determined as follows:
(i) If the Named Officer was employed for the entire previous year but was terminated prior to the Compensation
Committee finally determining his or her EICP award for the preceding year, then the Named Officer will be deemed to
have been awarded 100% of his target EICP award for that year; or
(ii) If the Named Officer was employed for the entire previous year and the Compensation Committee had already
finally determined the EICP award for the preceding year by the date of termination, but it had not yet been paid, then
the Named Officer will receive the actual amount of the EICP award; plus in either case
an amount representing a pro-rata, deemed (assuming an award at 100% of his or her target) EICP award for the fiscal
year in which the termination date occurs. LINN will also pay its portion of COBRA continuation coverage, as well as
pay certain costs of continuing medical coverage after the expiration of the maximum required period under COBRA.
The footnotes to the table below describes each Named Officer’s specific severance payments.
In addition, in the event of termination by LINN other than for “Cause” or termination by the Named Officer for “Good
Reason,” all outstanding restricted unit and unit option awards will vest in full.
LINN will have “Cause” to terminate the Named Officer’s employment by reason of any of the following: a) his or her
conviction of, or plea of nolo contendere to, any felony or to any crime or offense causing substantial harm to LINN
(whether or not for personal gain) or involving acts of theft, fraud, embezzlement, moral turpitude or similar conduct; b)
his or her repeated intoxication by alcohol or drugs during the performance of his or her duties; c) his or her willful and
intentional misuse of any of LINN’s funds; d) embezzlement by him or her; e) his or her willful and material
misrepresentations or concealments on any written reports submitted to LINN; f) his or her willful and intentional
material breach of his or her employment agreement; g) his or her willful and material failure to follow or comply with
the reasonable and lawful written directives of the Board of Directors of LINN; or h) conduct constituting a material
breach of our then current (A) Code of Business Conduct and Ethics of LINN, and any other written policy referenced
therein, or (B) the Code of Ethics for Chief Executive Officer and Senior Financial Officers of LINN, if applicable,
provided that in each case the Named Officer knew or should have known such conduct to be a breach.
“Good Reason” will mean any of the following to which the Named Officer will not consent in writing: (i) a reduction in
his or her then current base salary; (ii) failure by LINN to pay in full on a current basis (A) any of the compensation or
benefits described in the Named Officer’s employment agreement that are due and owing, or (B) any amounts that are
due and owing to the Named Officer under any long-term or short-term or other incentive compensation plans,
agreements or awards; (iii) material breach of any provision of the Named Officer’s employment agreement by us;
(iv) any material reduction in the Named Officer’s title, authority or responsibilities; or (v) a relocation of the Named
Officer’s primary place of employment to a location more than fifty (50) miles from LINN’s then current location in
Houston, Texas.
If the Named Officer is terminated for “Cause” or voluntarily terminates his or her employment without “Good Reason,”
the Named Officer will receive only the amounts identified under “Payments Made Upon Termination For Any
Reason.”
128
Table of Contents
Payments Made Upon Death or Disability
In the event of the death or “Disability” of a Named Officer, he or she will receive amounts earned (but unpaid) during
his term of employment as described above. In addition, upon the death or “Disability” of a Named Officer, all
outstanding restricted units and unit option awards will vest in full.
“Disability” means the earlier of (a) written determination by a physician selected by LINN and reasonably agreed to by
the Named Officer that the Named Officer has been unable to perform substantially his or her usual and customary
duties for a period of at least one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days or a non-consecutive period of one hundred
eighty (180) days during any twelve-month period as a result of incapacity due to mental or physical illness or
disease; and (b) “Disability” as such term is defined in LINN’s applicable long-term disability insurance plan.
Payments Made Upon a Termination Following a Change of Control
LINN’s LTIP and the employment agreements with each Named Officer provide certain benefits if his or her
employment is terminated by LINN without Cause (as defined above) or by the Named Officer for Good Reason (as
defined above) during the period beginning six (6) months prior to a Change of Control and ending two (2) years
following the Change of Control.
In addition to the earned benefits and amounts listed under the heading “Payments Made Upon Termination For Any
Reason,” the Named Officer will receive:
•   a lump sum severance payment that ranges from two to three times the sum of the Named Officer’s base
salary at the highest rate in effect at any time during the thirty-six (36) month period immediately preceding
the termination date, plus the highest EICP award that the Employee was paid in the thirty-six (36) months
immediately preceding the Change of Control;
•   COBRA continuation coverage as described above upon a termination without “Cause” or for “Good Reason;”
•   his or her earned, but unpaid EICP award determined as described above upon a termination without “Cause”
or for “Good Reason;”
•   an amount equal to the excise tax charged to the Named Officer as a result of the receipt of any change of
control payments; and
•   all restricted unit and unit options awards held by the Named Officer will automatically vest and become
exercisable.
With respect to the definition of “Change of Control,” each of the Named Officers’ employment agreements are the
same. “Change of Control” means the first to occur of:
1.
The acquisition by any individual, entity or group (within the meaning of Section 13(d) (3) or 14(d) (2) of the
Exchange Act) (a “Person”) of beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 promulgated under the
Exchange Act) of thirty-five percent (35%) or more of either (A) the then-outstanding equity interests of LINN
(the “Outstanding Linn Energy Equity”) or (B) the combined voting power of the then-outstanding voting
securities of LINN entitled to vote generally in the election of directors of LINN (the “Outstanding Linn Energy
Voting Securities”); provided, however, that, for purposes of this Section 1, the following acquisitions will not
constitute a Change of Control: (1) any acquisition directly from LINN, (2) any acquisition by LINN, (3) any
acquisition by any employee benefit plan (or related trust) sponsored or maintained by LINN or any affiliated
company, or (4) any acquisition by any corporation or other entity pursuant to a transaction that complies
with Section (3)(A), Section (3)(B) or Section (3)(C) below;
129
Table of Contents
2. Any time at which individuals who, as of the date hereof, constitute the Board (the “Incumbent Board”) cease
for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board; provided, however, that any individual becoming
a director subsequent to the date hereof whose election, or nomination for election by LINN’s unitholders,
was approved by a vote of at least a majority of the directors then comprising the Incumbent Board will be
considered as though such individual were a member of the Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this
purpose, any such individual whose initial assumption of office occurs as a result of an actual or threatened
election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other actual or threatened solicitation
of proxies or consents by or on behalf of a Person other than the Incumbent Board;
3. Consummation of a reorganization, merger, statutory share exchange or consolidation or similar corporate
transaction involving LINN or any of its subsidiaries, a sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of
the assets of LINN, or the acquisition of assets or equity interests of another entity by LINN or any of its
subsidiaries (each, a “Business Combination”), in each case unless, following such Business Combination,
(A) all or substantially all of the individuals and entities that were the beneficial owners of the Outstanding
Linn Energy Equity and the Outstanding Linn Energy Voting Securities immediately prior to such Business
Combination beneficially own, directly or indirectly, more than fifty percent (50%) of the then-outstanding
equity interests and the combined voting power of the then-outstanding voting securities entitled to vote
generally in the election of directors, as the case may be, of the corporation resulting from such Business
Combination (including, without limitation, a corporation or other entity that, as a result of such transaction,
owns LINN or all or substantially all of LINN’s assets either directly or through one or more subsidiaries) in
substantially the same proportions as their ownership immediately prior to such Business Combination of the
Outstanding Linn Energy Equity and the Outstanding Linn Energy Voting Securities, as the case may be,
(B) no Person (excluding any corporation resulting from such Business Combination or any employee benefit
plan (or related trust) of LINN or such corporation or other entity resulting from such Business Combination)
beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, thirty-five percent (35%) or more of, respectively, the then-
outstanding equity interests of the corporation or other entity resulting from such Business Combination or
the combined voting power of the then-outstanding voting securities of such corporation or other entity,
except to the extent that such ownership existed prior to the Business Combination, and (C) at least a
majority of the members of the board of directors of the corporation or equivalent body of any other entity
resulting from such Business Combination were members of the Incumbent Board at the time of the
execution of the initial agreement or of the action of the Board providing for such Business Combination; or
4. Consummation of a complete liquidation or dissolution of LINN.
Excise Taxes
If any benefits payable or otherwise provided under each Named Officer’s employment agreement would be subject to
the excise tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code (Excise Tax), then we will provide for the payment of, or
otherwise reimburse the executive for, an amount up to such Excise Tax and any related taxes, fees or penalties
thereon.
Non-Competition Provisions
The non-competition provisions of the employment agreements of each of the Named Officers are described above in
“Narrative Disclosure to the 2011 Summary Compensation Table.”
130
Table of Contents
Quantification of Payments on Termination
The chart below reflects the amount of compensation to each of LINN’s Named Officers (other than Mr. Linn whose
employment with LINN terminated on December 31, 2011) in the event of termination of such officer’s employment
pursuant to his or her employment agreement and our LTIP. The amount of compensation payable to each Named
Officer upon voluntary termination with “Good Reason,” involuntary termination other than for “Cause,” termination
following a “Change of Control” and the occurrence of the “Disability” or death of the executive is shown below. The
amounts shown are calculated assuming that such termination was effective as of December 31, 2011, and thus
include amounts earned through such time (other than amounts payable pursuant to LINN’s Retirement Savings Plan)
and are estimates of the amounts which would be paid to the executives upon their termination. The actual amounts
to be paid out can only be determined at the time of the Named Officer’s actual separation from LINN.
Name and Reason for
Termination
Mark E. Ellis (1)
Without cause or good reason
Change of Control
Disability or Death
Kolja Rockov (2)
Without cause or good reason
Change of Control
Disability or Death
Arden L. Walker, Jr. (2)
Without cause or good reason
Change of Control
Disability or Death
Charlene A. Ripley (3)
Without cause or good reason
Change of Control
Disability or Death
Severance
Bonus ($)
Health
Benefits
Early Vesting
of Equity
Estimated
Tax
Gross Up
($)(5)
Pay ($)
(4)
($)
Total ($)
Awards ($)(a)
1,500,000      750,000      40,105      12,429,238       —        14,719,343  
    5,400,000      750,000      60,157      12,429,238       —        18,639,395  
    
—        750,000       —        12,429,238       —        13,179,238  
  
     830,000      373,500      29,357       5,105,155       —         6,338,012  
    2,212,500      373,500      36,697       5,105,155       —         7,727,852  
    
—        373,500       —         5,105,155       —         5,478,655  
  
     830,000      373,500      27,767       3,828,836       —         5,060,103  
    1,900,000      373,500      27,767       3,828,836       —         6,130,103  
     3,828,836       —         4,202,336  
    
  
  
     750,000      300,000      31,670       3,385,569       —         4,467,239  
    1,470,000      300,000      31,670       3,385,569       —         5,187,239  
    
—        300,000       —         3,385,569       —         3,685,569
—        373,500
(a) Closing price of LINN units on December 30, 2011 was $37.91. All awards under the LTIP fully vest upon
termination without cause, good reason, disability or a change of control (as each is defined in the respective
employment agreements).
If Mr. Ellis’s employment is terminated without cause or by employee for good reason, his employment
agreement provides that, in addition to the amounts earned but unpaid, (1) he will receive a lump sum severance
payment of two times his base salary at the highest rate in effect at any time during the thirty-six (36) month
period immediately preceding the termination (Severance Pay), (2) LINN will pay its portion of COBRA
continuation coverage, as well as pay certain costs of continuing medical coverage for Mr. Ellis for up to six
months after the expiration of the maximum required period under COBRA; and 3) all of Mr. Ellis’s granted but
unvested awards under the LTIP shall immediately vest.
If Mr. Ellis is terminated without cause or by him for good reason during the period beginning six (6) months prior
to a Change of Control and ending two (2) years following a Change of Control (COC Period), he is entitled to the
same severance benefits described above, except that 1) the Severance Pay will be three times the sum of a)
his highest base salary in effect at any time during the 36 month period immediately preceding termination
(Highest Base Salary) and b) his highest annual EICP award in the 36 months prior to the change of control
(Highest EICP Award) and 2) the period for continued coverage of medical benefits will be up to eighteen months
after the expiration of the maximum required by COBRA. Mr. Ellis will also receive a gross up of any Excise Tax
(Excise Tax Gross Up) and of any Section 409A penalties and interest.
(1)
131
Table of Contents
(2)
(3)
If either of Mr. Rockov or Mr. Walker is terminated without cause or by him for good reason, his employment
agreement provides for severance benefits substantially similar to Mr. Ellis. If Mr. Rockov or Mr. Walker is
terminated without cause or by him for good reason during the COC Period, each will be entitled to substantially
the same benefits as Mr. Ellis except that 1) his Severance Pay is 2.5 times the sum of his Highest Base Salary
and Highest EICP Award and 2) the period for continued coverage of medical benefits will be up to twelve months
after the expiration of the maximum required period under COBRA. Mr. Rockov’s and Mr. Walker’s employment
agreements include the Excise Tax Gross Up but no gross up for penalties or interest under Section 409A.
If Ms. Ripley is terminated without cause or by her for good reason, her employment agreement provides for
severance benefits substantially similar to Mr. Ellis. If Ms. Ripley is terminated without cause or by her for good
reason during the COC Period, she will be entitled to substantially the same benefits as Mr. Ellis, except 1)
Severance Pay shall be two times the sum of her Highest Base Salary and Highest EICP Award and 2) the
period for continued coverage of medical benefits will remain up to six months after the expiration of the
maximum required period under COBRA. Ms. Ripley’s employment agreement includes the Excise Tax Gross Up
but no gross up for penalties or interest under Section 409A.
(4) The amounts listed under Bonus represent each Named Officer’s target EICP award for 2011. As described
above under “Payments Made Upon Termination Without Cause or for Good Reason,” if the Named Officer was
employed for the entire previous year but was terminated prior to the Compensation Committee finally
determining his or her EICP award for the preceding year (in the hypothetical case presented in the table above,
on December 31, 2011), he or she would have received his or her target EICP award. The Compensation
Committee determined actual EICP awards for 2011 performance on January 26, 2012; the actual awards for
each Named Officer are identified in column (g) of the Summary Compensation Table, but are not reflected in the
table above.
(5) Using a hypothetical termination date of December 31, 2011, LINN determined that none of its Named Officers
would have “excess parachute payments” as defined in Section 280G of the Code; thus none would be entitled to
a tax gross up.
Our Director Compensation
Officers or employees of Linn Energy, LLC who also serve as our directors will not receive additional compensation.
Each independent director will receive an annual fee of $7,500 for his services to us plus $500 for each meeting of the
board of directors or a committee of the board of directors of LinnCo that he attends from LINN. In addition, each
independent director is reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses in connection with attending meetings of the board of
directors or committees of LinnCo. Each director is indemnified by us for actions associated with being a director to
the full extent permitted under Delaware law.
LINN’s Director Compensation
LINN uses a combination of cash and unit-based incentive compensation to attract and retain qualified candidates to
serve on its Board. In setting director compensation, LINN considers the significant amount of time that directors
expend in fulfilling their duties to LINN as well as the skill level required by us of members of LINN’s Board.
Annual Retainer and Fees. In 2011, each independent director (as determined by LINN’s Board pursuant to applicable
NASDAQ listing standards) received the following cash compensation for serving on our Board:
•   An annual cash retainer of $50,000 paid in four installments quarterly;
•   A per meeting fee of $1,500, payable quarterly;
•   A per committee meeting fee of $1,000, payable quarterly; and
•   Committee chair fees (each payable quarterly) of:
132
Table of Contents
•
•
•
$15,000 for the Audit Committee chair;
$7,500 for the Nominating and Governance Committee chair; and
$10,000 for the Compensation Committee chair.
In January 2012, in connection with the appointment of a lead director of the Board, the Committee approved a
$10,000 per year fee to be paid to the lead director beginning in 2012.
Restricted Unit Grant. In January 2011, the Compensation Committee approved an annual grant of 4,663 restricted
units to each of LINN’s independent directors. Restricted units are granted under LINN’s LTIP and vest over three
years. The restricted units have the same terms and conditions as grants made to LINN’s Named Officers.
2011 Director Summary Compensation Table
The table below summarizes the compensation we paid to LINN’s independent directors for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2011.
(a)
Name (1)
George A. Alcorn
Terrence S. Jacobs
Joseph P. McCoy
Jeffrey C. Swoveland
(b)
Fees Earned
or Paid in
Cash ($)
90,000    
82,500    
97,500    
92,500
(c)
Unit Awards
($) (2) (3)
180,038    
  180,038    
  180,038    
  180,038
(d)
Option
Awards
($) (2)
    
  —      
  —      
  —      
  —
(e)
All  Other
Compensation
($) (4)
    
54,170    
54,170    
46,070    
54,170
(f)
Total
($)
324,208  
 316,708  
 323,608  
 326,708
(1) Michael C. Linn, LINN’s former Executive Chairman, and Mark E. Ellis, LINN’s Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer, are not included in this table as each was LINN’s employee in 2011 and thus received no
additional compensation for his service as director. Mr. Linn’s and Mr. Ellis’s compensation is shown in the
Summary Compensation Table above.
(2) Reflects the aggregate grant date fair value of 2011 awards computed in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718.
The following represents outstanding unit grant awards as of December 31, 2011:
Director
George A. Alcorn
Phantom
Unit
Awards (#)
Value at
Grant
Date ($)
Vested
Phantom
Units (#)
Vested
Unit
Options
(#)
Strike
Price
($)
Restricted
Unit
Awards
(#)
Value at
Grant
Date ($)
George A. Alcorn
Terrence S. Jacobs
Joseph P. McCoy
Jeffrey C. Swoveland
9,946      277,918       9,946       2,000      20.18       10,117      293,683  
9,946      277,918       9,946       —         —         10,117      293,683
6,946      196,798       6,946       —         —         10,117      293,683  
9,946      277,918       9,946      10,000      20.18       10,117      293,683
(3)
In addition, the Committee approved the following restricted unit grants to LINN’s directors on January 26, 2012:
Director
George A. Alcorn
Terrence S. Jacobs
Michael C. Linn
Joseph P. McCoy
Jeffrey C. Swoveland
Restricted
Unit
Awards (#)    
4,770    
 
 
4,770    
4,770    
 
4,770    
 
 
4,770
Value at
Grant Date
($)
177,826  
  177,826  
  177,826  
  177,826  
  177,826
(4) Reflects the dollar amount of distributions paid in 2011 on the phantom and restricted units reported in (2) above.
Table of Contents
133
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
Prior to this offering, none of our directors or officers have owned any of our shares or voting shares.
The following table sets forth as of July 27, 2012, the number of LINN units beneficially owned by: (i) each person who
is known to LINN to beneficially own more than 5% of a class of units; (ii) the current directors and nominees of
LINN’s board of directors; (iii) each of the following 2011 named officers of LINN: Michael C. Linn, LINN’s former
Executive Chairman, Mark E. Ellis, LINN’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Kolja Rockov, LINN’s
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Arden L. Walker, Jr., LINN’s Executive Vice President and
Chief Operating Officer and Charlene A. Ripley, LINN’s Senior Vice President and General Counsel; and (iv) all
directors and executive officers of LINN as of July 27, 2012 as a group. LINN obtained certain information in the table
from filings made with the SEC. Unless otherwise noted, each beneficial owner has sole voting power and sole
investment power.
Name of Beneficial Owner(1)
Mark E. Ellis(2)(3)(4)
Kolja Rockov (2)(3)(5)
Arden L. Walker, Jr.(2)(3)(6)
Charlene A. Ripley(2)(3)(7)
George A. Alcorn(2)(3)(8)
David D. Dunlap(2)(3)
Terrence S. Jacobs(2)(3)(9)
Michael C. Linn(2)(3)
Joseph P. McCoy(2)(3)
Percentage of
Units
Beneficially
Owned
Units
Beneficially
Owned
1,151,410    
  747,626    
  392,118    
  316,004    
25,615    
 
 
4,770    
  248,365    
  574,326
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*
Joseph P. McCoy(2)(3)
Jeffrey C. Swoveland(2)(3)(10)
All executive officers and directors as a group
(11 persons)(11)
29,710    
31,615
3,755,219
*  
*
1.88%
Less than 1% of class based on 199,557,167 units outstanding as of June 30, 2012.
*
(1) To LINN’s knowledge after reviewing Schedule 13G/Ds filed with the SEC, LINN is not aware of any holders who
beneficially own more than 5% of its units.
(2) The address of each beneficial owner, unless otherwise noted, is c/o Linn Energy, LLC, 600 Travis, Suite 5100,
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Houston, Texas 77002.
Includes unvested restricted unit awards that vest in equal installments, generally over approximately three
years. Please see “Outstanding Equity Awards at December 31, 2011” for vesting schedule of unvested awards
for all except Mr. Dunlap. Mr. Dunlap joined our Board in May 2012. His restricted units vest in equal 1/3
installments beginning January 19, 2014.
Includes 360,765 units underlying options currently exercisable. Includes 407,228 units Mr. Ellis has pledged to
secure certain personal accounts.
Includes 400 units as custodian under certain Uniform Gifts to Minors Accounts (UGMA) for immediate family
members as to which Mr. Rockov disclaims beneficial ownership. Includes 205,225 units Mr. Rockov has
pledged to secure certain personal accounts and 368,225 units underlying options currently exercisable.
Includes 153,550 units underlying options currently exercisable.
Includes 142,275 units underlying options currently exercisable.
Includes 2,000 units underlying options currently exercisable.
Includes 4,250 units owned indirectly by Mr. Jacobs as UGMA custodian for immediate family members and
140,000 units owned indirectly by Mr. Jacobs through Penneco Exploration Co LLC, a company of which, through
a trust, Mr. Jacobs owns 50% of the voting interests.
(10) Includes 10,000 units underlying options currently exercisable.
(11) Percentage ownership of executive officer and directors is based on total units outstanding as of June 30, 2012.
Table of Contents
134
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Our Relationship with Linn Energy, LLC
General. On the completion of this offering, we will own LINN units representing approximately     % of LINN’s
outstanding units. LINN controls our management and operations through its ownership of our sole voting share.
Omnibus Agreement. Concurrent with the closing of this offering, we will enter into an agreement with LINN (the
“Omnibus Agreement”) pursuant to which LINN will agree to provide us certain financial, legal, accounting, tax
advisory, financial advisory and engineering services or to pay on our behalf or reimburse us for any expenses
incurred in connection with securing these services from third parties, as well as printing costs and other
administrative and out-of-pocket expenses we incur, along with any other expenses we will incur in connection with
this offering or any future offering of our shares or as a result of being a publicly traded entity, including costs
associated with annual, quarterly and other reports to our shareholders, tax return and Form 1099 preparation and
distribution, NASDAQ listing fees, independent auditor fees and registrar and transfer agent fees. LINN will also
provide us with cash management services, including treasury services with respect to the payment of dividends and
allocation of reserves for taxes. These cash management services are intended to optimize the use of our cash on
hand and to reduce the likelihood of a change in the amount of any dividend paid to our shareholders across periods
other than as a result of any change in the amount of distributions paid by LINN. In addition, LINN will indemnify us for
damages suffered or costs incurred (other than income taxes payable by us) in connection with carrying out our
activities.
Future Offerings. The Omnibus Agreement will require LINN to provide us, pay on our behalf or reimburse us for all
expenses incurred in connection with future offerings of our shares, including legal and other expert fees, printing
costs and filing fees. We will conduct future offerings of our shares only with an agreement by LINN to sell us a
number of LINN units equal to the number of shares sold in such offering for an amount equal to the net proceeds of
such offering. As a result, LINN will indirectly bear the cost of any underwriting discounts or commissions and
expenses associated with future offerings of our shares.
Indemnification of Officers and Directors
Our limited liability company agreement provides that we will generally indemnify officers and members of our board of
directors to the fullest extent permitted by the law against all losses, claims, damages or similar events. Our limited
liability company agreement is filed as an exhibit to the registration statement. Subject to any terms, conditions or
restrictions set forth in our limited liability company agreement, Section 18-108 of the Delaware Limited Liability
Company Act (the “LLC Act”) empowers a Delaware limited liability company to indemnify and hold harmless any
member or manager or other person from and against all claims and demands whatsoever. We have also entered into
individual indemnity agreements with each of our executive officers and directors which supplement the
indemnification provisions in our limited liability company agreement.
Table of Contents
135
DESCRIPTION OF OUR SHARES
The shares represent limited liability company interests in us. The holders of shares are entitled to receive dividends
and exercise the rights or privileges available to shareholders under our limited liability company agreement. Please
read “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company Agreement.” Upon the
completion of this offering, assuming the underwriters do not exercise their option to purchase additional shares, we
will have                 shares outstanding.
Voting Rights
The shares you own will not entitle you to vote on the election of our directors. LINN owns the voting share entitled to
vote to elect our directors and will elect all of our directors. Owners of our shares will vote only on the specified
matters described in “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—Our Limited Liability Company
Agreement—Voting Rights.”
As a holder of LINN units, we will be entitled to vote on all matters on which holders of LINN units are entitled to vote,
which provides our shareholders the ability to indirectly influence LINN’s management. We will submit to a vote of our
shareholders, as described in “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—Our Limited Liability
Company Agreement—Voting Rights,” any matter submitted to us by LINN for a vote of holders of LINN units. We will
vote our LINN units in the same manner that our shareholders vote (or refrain from voting) their shares for or against a
proposal, including non-votes or abstentions.
Dividends
We will pay dividends on our shares of the cash we receive as distributions in respect of our LINN units, net of
reserves for income taxes payable by us within five days after we receive such distributions. If distributions are made
on the LINN units other than in cash, we will pay a dividend on our shares in substantially the same form, provided
that if LINN makes a distribution on the LINN units in the form of additional LINN units, we would distribute an equal
number of additional shares to our shareholders such that, immediately following such distributions, the number of our
shares outstanding is equal to the number of LINN units we hold. Our board of directors may choose to withhold some
of the cash we receive as distributions in respect of our LINN units as reserves for income taxes payable by us,
which would cause the dividends that we pay on our shares to be less than the distributions we receive from LINN.
Issuance of Additional Shares
Our limited liability company agreement authorizes us to issue an unlimited number of additional shares and voting
shares for the consideration and on the terms and conditions determined by our board of directors without the approval
of our shareholders. Our shareholders will not have preemptive rights to acquire additional shares or our other
securities.
Maintenance of Ratio of Shares to Units
Our limited liability company agreement provides that the number of our outstanding shares will at all times equal the
number of LINN units we own. If there is a change in the number of LINN units we own, we will issue to all
shareholders a share dividend or effect a share split or combination to provide that at all times the number of shares
outstanding equals the number of LINN units we own. In the event of a share repurchase, LINN would agree to
purchase an equal number of LINN units from us, or take any other such action as may be reasonable, to maintain the
one-to-one ratio of shares to LINN units.
Table of Contents
Transfer Agent and Registrar
136
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company has agreed to act as our transfer agent and will serve as registrar and
transfer agent for the shares. We pay all fees charged by the transfer agent for transfers of shares, except for the
following fees that will be paid by shareholders:
•   surety bond premiums to replace lost or stolen certificates, taxes and other governmental charges;
•   special charges for services requested by a holder of a shares; and
•   other similar fees or charges.
There will be no charge to holders for disbursements of our cash dividends. We will indemnify the transfer agent, its
agents and each of their shareholders, directors, officers and employees against all claims and losses that may arise
out of acts performed or omitted for its activities in that capacity, except for any liability due to any gross negligence
or intentional misconduct of the indemnified person or entity.
The transfer agent may at any time resign, by notice to us, or be removed by us. The resignation or removal of the
transfer agent will become effective upon our appointment of a successor transfer agent and registrar and its
acceptance of the appointment. If no successor has been appointed and has accepted the appointment within 30
days after notice of the resignation or removal, we are authorized to act as the transfer agent and registrar until a
successor is appointed.
Transfer of Shares
By transfer of shares in accordance with our limited liability company agreement, each transferee of shares will be
admitted as a shareholder with respect to the shares transferred when such transfer and admission is reflected on our
books and records. Additionally, each transferee of shares:
•   becomes the record holder of the shares;
•   automatically agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of, and is deemed to have executed and
delivered our limited liability company agreement;
•   represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to enter into the limited liability company
agreement;
•   grants powers of attorney to our officers and any liquidator of our company as specified in the limited liability
company agreement; and
•   is deemed to have the consents and waivers contained in our limited liability company agreement.
Until a share has been transferred on our books and records, we and the transfer agent, notwithstanding any notice to
the contrary, may treat the record holder of the share as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise
required by law or stock exchange regulations.
Table of Contents
137
DESCRIPTION OF THE LINN UNITS
The LINN units represent limited liability company interests in LINN. The holders of units are entitled to participate in
distributions and exercise the rights or privileges available to unitholders under LINN’s limited liability company
agreement. Please read “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—LINN’s Limited Liability Company
Agreement.” As of                     , 2012, LINN had                 units outstanding. No other member interests are
outstanding.
LINN’s Cash Distribution Policy
LINN must distribute on a quarterly basis all of its available cash to holders of the LINN units. LINN’s limited liability
company agreement defines “available cash” as, for each fiscal quarter, all cash on hand at the end of the quarter
less the amount of cash reserves established by the LINN board of directors to:
•   provide for the proper conduct of business (including reserves for future capital expenditures, future debt
service requirements, and anticipated credit needs); and
•   comply with applicable laws, debt instruments or other agreements;
plus all cash on hand on the date of determination of available cash for the quarter resulting from working capital
borrowings made after the end of the quarter for which the determination is being made.
Working capital borrowings are borrowings that will be made under LINN’s revolving credit facility and in all cases are
used solely for working capital purposes or to pay distributions to unitholders. LINN is prohibited from making any
distributions to unitholders if it would cause an event of default, or if an event of default is existing, under its credit
facility.
LINN’s ability to pay distributions is also subject to restrictions contained in the Credit Facility and the indentures
governing its Senior Notes.
Timing of Distributions
LINN pays distributions on its units within 45 days after each March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 to
unitholders of record on the applicable record date.
Issuance of Additional Units
LINN’s limited liability company agreement authorizes it to issue an unlimited number of additional securities and
rights to buy securities for the consideration and on the terms and conditions determined by its board of directors
without the approval of the unitholders. It is possible that LINN will fund acquisitions through the issuance of additional
units or other equity securities. Holders of any additional units LINN issues will be entitled to share equally with the
then-existing holders of units in its distributions of available cash. In addition, the issuance of additional units or other
equity securities may dilute the value of the interests of the then-existing holders of units in LINN’s net assets. In
accordance with Delaware law and the provisions of its limited liability company agreement, LINN may also issue
additional securities that, as determined by its board of directors, may have special voting rights to which the units
are not entitled. The holders of units will not have preemptive rights to acquire additional units or other securities.
Voting Rights
Unitholders have the right to vote with respect to the election of LINN’s board of directors, certain amendments to its
limited liability company agreement, the merger of LINN or the sale of all or substantially all of its assets, and the
dissolution of LINN. See “Description of the Limited Liability Company Agreements—LINN’s Limited Liability Company
Agreement—Voting Rights.”
Table of Contents
Exchange Listing
138
LINN’s units are traded on The NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “LINE.”
Transfer Agent and Registrar
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company is LINN’s transfer agent and serves as registrar and transfer agent for the
units. LINN pays all fees charged by the transfer agent for transfers of units, except for the following fees that will be
paid by unitholders:
•   surety bond premiums to replace lost or stolen certificates, taxes and other governmental charges;
•   special charges for services requested by a holder of a unit; and
•   other similar fees or charges.
There will be no charge to holders for disbursements of LINN’s cash distributions. LINN will indemnify the transfer
agent, its agents and each of their shareholders, directors, officers and employees against all claims and losses that
may arise out of acts performed or omitted for its activities in that capacity, except for any liability due to any gross
negligence or intentional misconduct of the indemnified person or entity.
The transfer agent may at any time resign, by notice to LINN, or be removed by LINN. The resignation or removal of
the transfer agent will become effective upon our appointment of a successor transfer agent and registrar and its
acceptance of the appointment. If no successor has been appointed and has accepted the appointment within 30
days after notice of the resignation or removal, LINN is authorized to act as the transfer agent and registrar until a
successor is appointed.
Transfer of Units
By transfer of units in accordance with LINN’s limited liability company agreement, each transferee of units will be
admitted as a unitholder with respect to the units transferred when such transfer and admission is reflected on LINN’s
books and records. Additionally, each transferee of units:
•   becomes the record holder of the units;
•   automatically agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of, and is deemed to have executed LINN’s
limited liability company agreement;
•   represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to enter into the limited liability company
agreement;
•   grants powers of attorney to LINN’s officers and any liquidator of LINN as specified in the limited liability
company agreement; and
•   makes the consents and waivers contained in the limited liability company agreement.
Until a unit has been transferred on LINN’s books, it and the transfer agent, notwithstanding any notice to the
contrary, may treat the record holder of the unit as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise required
by law or stock exchange regulations.
Table of Contents
139
DESCRIPTION OF THE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY AGREEMENTS
The following information and the information included under “Description of our Shares” and “Description of the LINN
Units” summarizes the material information contained in our limited liability company agreement and LINN’s limited
liability company agreement. For more detailed information, you should read LINN’s limited liability company
agreement, which is included as exhibit 3.1 to LINN’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed September 7, 2010 and
incorporated by reference as an exhibit to our registration statement filed with the SEC in connection with this offering,
and our limited liability company agreement, a copy of which has been filed as an exhibit to our registration statement
filed with the SEC in connection with this offering. Please read “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Our Limited Liability Company Agreement
We summarize the following provisions of our limited liability company agreement elsewhere in this prospectus:
•   with regard to dividends, please read “Description of our Shares—Dividends.”
•   with regard to issuances of additional shares, please read “Description of our Shares—Issuance of Additional
Shares.”
•   with regard to the transfer of shares, please read “Description of our Shares—Transfer of Shares.”
Organization and Duration
LinnCo was formed in April 2012 and will remain in existence until dissolved, wound up and terminated in accordance
with our limited liability company agreement.
Purpose
Our sole purpose is to hold LINN units and to provide for our officers and directors to exercise, at the direction of our
shareholders, all the rights of a LINN unitholder under LINN’s Limited Liability Company Agreement and the LLC Act.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Status as a Corporation
We have elected to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Shareholders
LINN is our founding member and owns our sole voting share. Our other members will be the owners of common
shares. LINN, as the holder of our sole voting share, will have the sole right to elect our directors.
Capital Contributions
Shareholders are not obligated to make additional capital contributions, except as described below under “—Limited
Liability.”
Limited Liability
The LLC Act provides that a shareholder who receives a distribution and knew at the time of the distribution that the
distribution was in violation of the LLC Act will be liable to us for the amount of the distribution for three years from the
date of the distribution. Under the LLC Act, we may not make a distribution to a shareholder if, after the distribution,
all of our liabilities, other than liabilities to shareholders in respect of their shares and liabilities for which the recourse
of creditors is limited to specific property of LinnCo, would exceed the fair
Table of Contents
140
value of our assets. For the purpose of determining the fair value of our assets, the LLC Act provides that the fair
value of property subject to liability for which recourse of creditors is limited will be included in our assets only to the
extent that the fair value of that property exceeds the nonrecourse liability. Under the LLC Act, an assignee who
becomes a shareholder is liable for the obligations of his assignor to make contributions to us, except that the
assignee is not obligated for liabilities unknown to him at the time he became a shareholder and that could not be
ascertained from our limited liability company agreement.
The Board
Our business and affairs will be managed by a board of directors. Members of the board will be elected, and may be
removed, solely by the owner of the voting share. The initial board will consist of seven directors, and its membership
at the closing of this offering will be identical to LINN’s board of directors. The authority and function of the board of
directors will be identical to the authority and functions of a board of directors of a corporation organized under the
General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, or DGCL, although the directors’ fiduciary duties will be limited as
described in “—Board of Directors; Fiduciary Duties.”
The board will hold regular meetings from time to time and special meetings at any time as may be necessary.
Regular meetings may be held without notice on dates set by the board from time to time. Special meetings of the
board may be called on one day’s notice to each director upon request of the chairman of the board, the chief
executive officer, if he is also a director, or upon the written request of any two directors. A quorum for a regular or
special meeting will exist when a majority of the directors are participating in the meeting either in person or by
conference telephone. Any action required or permitted to be taken at a meeting may be taken without a meeting,
without prior notice and without a vote if a majority of the directors then in office sign a written consent authorizing the
action.
The board can establish committees composed of two or more directors and can delegate power and authority without
limitation to these committees. We anticipate that we will have an audit committee composed of our five independent
directors, Messrs. Alcorn, Dunlap, Jacobs, McCoy and Swoveland, upon the closing of this offering. We do not
anticipate having any other board committees, including a compensation committee or a nominating and corporate
governance committee. See “Risk Factors—Risks Inherent in an Investment in LinnCo—We are a “controlled
company” within the meaning of the NASDAQ’s rules and intend to rely on exemptions from various corporate
governance requirements immediately following the closing of this offering.” Pursuant to the Omnibus Agreement,
LINN will be responsible for any compensation paid to our officers and directors. See “Certain Relationships and
Related Transactions—Our Relationship with Linn Energy, LLC —Omnibus Agreement.”
Officers and Employees
The board can appoint and terminate officers at any time in its sole discretion. The board can delegate power and
authority to officers, employees, agents and consultants, including the power to represent us and bind us in
accordance with the scope of their duties. The authority and function of our officers will be identical to the authority
and functions of officers of a corporation organized under the DGCL, except with respect to fiduciary duties. LINN’s
employees are expected to provide us with services required for our operation and administration. The costs of these
services will be borne by LINN. Our initial officers will be the same individuals who serve as officers of LINN.
Capital Structure
Our present capital structure consists of two classes of shares: (1) the common shares, which are the class of shares
being sold in this offering; and (2) the voting shares, of which there is currently one share outstanding, held by LINN.
We are authorized to issue an unlimited number of additional voting shares and shares of the class being sold in this
offering. Additional classes of shares may be created with the approval of the board, provided
Table of Contents
141
that any such additional class must be approved by a vote of holders of a majority of our outstanding shares and by
the holder(s) of our voting share(s), voting as separate classes. Our shareholders will not have preemptive or
preferential rights to acquire additional shares or other securities.
Dissolution and Winding Up
We will be dissolved and wound up only: (1) upon entry of a judicial decree of dissolution of us, (2) upon the approval
by the owner(s) of the voting share(s) and by the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of the class sold in
this offering, voting as separate classes, (3) if we cease to own any LINN units (whether as a result of a merger of
LINN or otherwise) and the owner(s) of the voting share(s) approve such dissolution, (4) in the event of a sale or other
disposition of all or substantially all of our assets other than in connection with certain non-cash mergers involving
LINN or (5) if at any time we have no members, unless a member is admitted to LinnCo and LinnCo is continued
without dissolution in accordance with the LLC Act. In the event that we are dissolved, our affairs will be wound up
and all our remaining assets, after payments to creditors and satisfaction of other obligations, will be distributed to the
holders of the outstanding shares.
If LINN or its successor is treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, LINN or such successor will
have the right to cause us to merge with and into LINN, in which case our shareholders would receive distributions in
kind of LINN units and other property we own, if any, after payments to creditors and satisfaction of other obligations.
Exculpation and Indemnification
Notwithstanding any express or implied provision of our limited liability company agreement, or any other legal duty or
obligation, none of our directors or officers or the owner(s) of the voting share(s) or its officers, directors or affiliates
will be liable to us, our affiliates or any other person for breach of fiduciary duty, except for acts or omissions not in
good faith. Additionally, our directors will not be responsible for any misconduct or negligence on the part of an agent
appointed by our board of directors in good faith. See “—Fiduciary Duties” for a description of good faith.
Under our limited liability company agreement and subject to specified limitations, we will indemnify to the fullest
extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines, penalties,
interest, settlement amounts, claims, damages or similar events any director or officer, or while serving as a director
or officer, any person who is or was serving as a director, officer, employee, partner, manager, fiduciary or trustee of
any or our affiliates. However, such directors, officers and persons are only entitled to indemnification if they acted in
good faith and in a manner reasonably believed to be in (or not opposed to) our best interests and, with respect to any
criminal proceeding or action, had no reasonable cause to believe that such conduct was unlawful. The termination of
any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere shall not
itself create a presumption that such good faith and reasonable belief standards were not met. Additionally, we may
indemnify any person who is or was an employee (other than an officer) or agent of us or LINN who is a party to a
threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, to the extent permitted by law and authorized by our
board of directors.
Any indemnification under our limited liability company agreement will be paid by LINN directly or indirectly on our
behalf. We are authorized to purchase, or have LINN purchase on our behalf, insurance against liabilities asserted
against and expenses incurred by directors, officers and persons in connection with our activities or their activities on
our behalf, regardless of whether we would have the power to indemnify the person against liabilities under our limited
liability company agreement.
Table of Contents
Amendments
142
Except as provided below, amendments to our limited liability company agreement and to our certificate of formation
can be approved in writing solely by the owner(s) of our voting share(s). Approval of a majority of our outstanding
shares is required for any amendment which:
•   is determined by our board of directors, in its sole discretion, to have a material adverse effect on the
preferences or rights of our shareholders;
•   reduces the time for any notice to which the holders of our shares may be entitled;
•   enlarges the obligations of our shareholders;
•   alters the circumstances under which LinnCo could be dissolved and wound up; or
•   changes the term of existence of LinnCo.
Certain amendments will not be considered material and may be made by our board of directors without the approval
of our shareholders, including amendments:
•   made in order to meet the requirements of applicable securities and other laws and regulations and exchange
rules;
•   to effect the intent of the provisions of our limited liability company agreement;
•   to facilitate the ability of our shareholders to obtain the benefits of, or to otherwise facilitate the consummation
of, a Terminal Transaction;
•   that our board of directors determines in its sole discretion will not have a material adverse effect on the
preferences or rights associated with the shares;
•   a change in our name, the location of our principal place of business, our registered agent or its registered
office;
•   the admission, substitution, withdrawal or removal of members in accordance with our limited liability
company agreement;
•   the merger of us into, or the conveyance of all of our assets to, a newly-formed entity if the sole purpose of
that merger or conveyance is to effect a mere change in the legal form into another limited liability entity that
is taxed as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes;
•   a change that the board of directors determines to be necessary or appropriate for us to qualify or continue its
qualification as an entity in which the members have limited liability under the laws of any state or to ensure
that we will be treated as an association taxable as a corporation or otherwise taxed as an entity for U.S.
federal income tax purposes;
•   an amendment that is necessary, in the opinion of our counsel, to prevent us, members of our board, or our
officers, agents or trustees from in any manner being subjected to the provisions of the Investment Company
Act of 1940, the Investment Advisors Act of 1940, or “plan asset” regulations adopted under the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or ERISA, whether or not substantially similar to plan asset
regulations currently applied or proposed;
•   an amendment that our board of directors determines to be necessary or appropriate for the authorization and
the issuance of additional common shares or voting shares;
•   any amendment expressly permitted in our limited liability company agreement to be made by the board of
directors acting alone;
•   an amendment effected, necessitated or contemplated by a merger agreement that has been approved under
the terms of our limited liability company agreement;
143
Table of Contents
•   a merger, conversion or conveyance effected in accordance with our limited liability company agreement; and
•   any other amendments substantially similar to any of the matters described in the clauses above.
The provision of our limited liability company agreement preventing the amendments having the effects described
above can be amended upon the approval of the holders of a majority of our outstanding shares and by the holder(s)
of our voting share(s), voting as separate classes. For more information regarding the voting rights of our shareholders
and other amendments we may make, please read “—Voting Rights.”
Meetings; Approvals
All notices of meetings of shareholders shall be sent or otherwise given in accordance with our limited liability
company agreement not less than 10 nor more than 60 days before the date of the meeting. The notice shall specify
the place, date and hour of the meeting and (i) in the case of a special meeting, the general nature of the business to
be transacted (no business other than that specified in the notice may be transacted) or (ii) in the case of the annual
meeting, those matters which the board of directors, at the time of giving the notice, intends to present for action by
the shareholders (but any proper matter may be presented at the meeting for such action). Any previously scheduled
meeting of the shareholders may be postponed, and any special meeting of the shareholders may be canceled, by
resolution of the board of directors upon public notice given prior to the date previously scheduled for such meeting of
shareholders.
Any action required or permitted to be taken by our shareholders (other than actions by the owner(s) of our voting
share(s), which may be taken by written consent) must be taken at a duly called annual or special meeting of
shareholders and may not be taken by any consent in writing by such shareholders.
Meetings of our shareholders may only be called by a majority of our board of directors or by the owner(s) of our
voting share(s). The owners of the class of shares being sold in this offering do not have the right to call a meeting of
the shareholders. Shareholders may vote either in person or by proxy at meetings. The holders of a majority of the
outstanding shares of the class or classes for which a meeting has been called represented in person or by proxy
shall constitute a quorum unless any action by the shareholders requires approval by holders of a greater percentage
of the shares, in which case the quorum shall be the greater percentage.
The act of a majority of a quorum at a meeting constitutes the act of the shareholders, except with respect to any
proposed action which we have agreed not to take without the approval of a majority of all outstanding shares of the
class sold in this offering. See “—Voting Rights.”
Shares held in nominee or street name accounts will be voted by the broker or other nominee in accordance with the
instruction of the beneficial owner unless the arrangement between the beneficial owner and its nominee provides
otherwise.
Any notice, demand, request, report or proxy material required or permitted to be given or made to record holders of
shares under our limited liability company agreement will be delivered to the record holder by us or by the transfer
agent.
Table of Contents
Voting Rights
144
The following matters require the shareholder vote specified below:
Election of members of the board of
directors
The shares that are being sold in this offering are not
entitled to vote to elect our board of directors.
The sole voting share that is entitled to vote to elect our
board of directors is owned by LINN.
Issuance of additional shares
No approval right.
Creation of additional classes of shares
Majority of outstanding shares and a majority of our
voting share(s), voting as separate classes.
Amendment, alteration, repeal or waiver of any
provision of our limited liability company
agreement
Majority of outstanding shares and a majority of our
voting share(s), voting as separate classes, for certain
amendments as described in “—Amendments.”
Certain amendments will not be considered material and
may be made by our board of directors without the
Amendment, alteration, repeal or waiver of any
provision of the Omnibus Agreement
approval of our shareholders, as described in “—
Amendments.”
Majority of outstanding shares and a majority of our
voting share(s), voting as separate classes, if such
amendment materially adversely affects the preferences
or rights of our shareholders (as determined in the sole
discretion of our board of directors).
Certain amendments to the Omnibus Agreement will not
be considered material and may be made by our board of
directors without the approval of our shareholders,
including amendments:
•   to effect the intent of the provisions of the
Omnibus Agreement;
•   to facilitate the ability of our shareholders to
obtain the benefits of, or otherwise facilitate the
consummation of, a Terminal Transaction;
•   to reflect any change in circumstances as a result
of certain non-cash mergers involving LINN; or
•   that our board of directors determines in its sole
discretion will not have a material adverse effect
on the preferences or rights associated with the
shares.
145
Table of Contents
Merger of LinnCo or the sale of all or substantially all of its
assets
Majority of outstanding shares and a majority of our
voting share(s), voting as separate classes.
Dissolution of LinnCo (other than in connection with a
Terminal Transaction)
Majority of outstanding shares and a majority of our
voting share(s), voting as separate classes.
LINN will not be prohibited from exercising any voting rights with respect to any shares it may own.
Fiduciary Duties
Our limited liability company agreement has modified, waived and limited fiduciary duties of our directors and officers
that would otherwise apply at law or in equity and replaced such duties with a contractual duty requiring our directors
and officers to act in good faith. For purposes of our limited liability company agreement, a person shall be deemed to
have acted in good faith if the action or omission of action was taken with the belief that it was in, or not opposed to,
the best interests of LinnCo. In addition, any action or omission of action shall be deemed to be in, or not opposed to,
the best interests of LinnCo and our shareholders if such action or omission of action would be in, or not opposed to,
the best interest of LINN and all its unitholders, taken together.
In taking (or refraining from taking) any action or making any recommendation to our shareholders, our directors, in
determining whether such action or recommendation is in the best interest of LinnCo and our shareholders, will be
permitted, but not required, to take into account the totality of the relationship between LINN and LinnCo. Accordingly,
any actions taken by our board will be deemed to be in good faith and in or not opposed to the best interest of LinnCo
and our shareholders if such actions would be in the best interest of LINN and all of its unitholders, taken together. In
addition, when acting in their individual capacities or as officers or directors of LINN or any other entity, our directors
will not be obligated to take into account the interests of LinnCo or our shareholders when taking (or refraining from
taking) any action or making any recommendation.
Our limited liability company agreement permits affiliates of our directors to engage in other business interests or
activities in preference to or to the exclusion of us and to engage in business interests that directly compete with us,
provided that the affiliate does not engage in such competing businesses as a result of or using confidential
information provided by or on behalf of us to such director. Additionally, our directors do not have any contractual
obligation or express or implied legal duty to present business opportunities to us that become available to their
affiliates, and neither we nor any of our shareholders have any rights in any business ventures of a director, and the
pursuit of any such ventures, even if in competition with us, are not a breach of any duty of such director otherwise
existing at law, in equity or otherwise.
Agreement to be Bound by Limited Liability Company Agreement; Power of Attorney
By purchasing one of our shares, you will be admitted as a shareholder of our company and will be deemed to have
agreed to be bound by the terms of our limited liability company agreement. Under that agreement, each shareholder
and each person who acquires a share from a shareholder grants to our board of directors (and, if appointed, a
liquidator) a power of attorney to, among other things, execute and file documents required for our qualification,
continuance or dissolution. The power of attorney also grants our board of directors the authority to make certain
amendments to, and to make consents and waivers under and in accordance with, our limited liability company
agreement. Such power of attorney shall be irrevocable and deemed coupled with an interest and shall survive a
shareholder’s death, disability, dissolution, bankruptcy or termination.
Table of Contents
Covenants
146
Our limited liability company agreement provides that our activities will be limited to owning LINN units and further
includes covenants that prohibit us from:
•   borrowing money or issuing debt;
•   selling, pledging or otherwise transferring any LINN units;
issuing options, warrants or other securities entitling the holder to purchase our shares (other than in
•
issuing options, warrants or other securities entitling the holder to purchase our shares (other than in
connection with employee benefit plans);
•   liquidating, merging or recapitalizing;
•   revoking or changing our election to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes; or
•   using the proceeds from sales of our shares other than to purchase LINN units.
These provisions can be amended or waived by the owners of a majority of our outstanding shares as described
above under “—Meetings; Approvals.”
In addition, LINN has agreed under our limited liability company agreement that neither it nor any of its subsidiaries
will take any action that would result in LINN and its subsidiaries ceasing to control the voting power of LinnCo except
in connection with a Terminal Transaction in which LINN’s successor:
•   is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes; and
•   assumes all of LINN’s obligations under our limited liability company agreement and the Omnibus Agreement.
These covenants can be amended or waived by the owners of a majority of our outstanding shares as described
under “—Meetings; Approvals” above.
Terminal Transactions Involving LINN
Mergers. If the LINN unitholders are asked to approve a merger of LINN with another entity, we will submit the merger
for a vote of our shareholders and will vote our LINN units in the same manner that our shareholders vote (or refrain
from voting) their shares.
Cash Consideration. In a merger involving LINN in which LINN unitholders receive cash, you will be entitled to receive
any cash we receive for our LINN units, net of income taxes payable by us. In the event of an all-cash merger of
LINN, we will dissolve and wind up our affairs after such distribution.
Non-Cash Consideration. In a merger involving LINN in which LINN unitholders receive securities of another entity,
you will be entitled to receive the securities received in connection with such merger. In the event of such a merger in
which LINN is not the surviving entity, we will dissolve and wind up our affairs unless:
•   LINN’s successor would be treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes; and
•   the surviving entity agrees to assume the obligations of LINN under our limited liability company agreement
and the Omnibus Agreement.
Tender Offers. If a third party makes a tender offer for LINN units, LINN may, but will not be obligated to, cooperate
with such third party to extend such tender offer to our shareholders or otherwise facilitate participation of our
shareholders in the tender offer for LINN units.
Going Private Transaction. If at any time a person owns more than 90% of the outstanding LINN units, such person
may elect to purchase all, but not less than all, of the remaining outstanding LINN units at a price equal to the higher
of the current market price (as defined in LINN’s limited liability company agreement) and
Table of Contents
147
the highest price paid by such person or any of its affiliates for any LINN units purchased during the 90-day period
preceding the date notice was mailed to the LINN unitholders informing them of such election. In this case, we will be
required to tender all of our outstanding LINN units and distribute the cash we receive, net of income taxes payable by
us, to our shareholders. Following such distribution, we will cancel all of our outstanding shares and dissolve and wind
up our affairs.
Sale of All or Substantially All of LINN’s Assets. If LINN sells all or substantially all of its assets in one or more
transactions for cash and makes a distribution of such cash to its unitholders, we will distribute the cash we receive,
net of income taxes payable by us, to our shareholders. Following such distribution, we will cancel all of our
outstanding shares and dissolve and wind up our affairs.
Change in Tax Treatment of LINN. If LINN or its successor ceases to be treated as a partnership for U.S. federal
income tax purposes, LINN or such successor will have the right to cause us to merge with and into LINN, in which
case each of our shareholders would receive a distribution in kind of the LINN units and other property we own, if any,
after payments to creditors and satisfaction of other obligations.
The transactions described above are referred to as “Terminal Transactions.”
Limited Call Rights
If at any time LINN or any of its affiliates own 80% or more of our then-outstanding shares, LINN has the right, which
it may assign to any of its affiliates, to purchase all, but not less than all, of our remaining outstanding shares as of a
record date selected by LINN, on at least 10 but not more than 60 days notice. If LINN elects to exercise this
purchase right, the purchase price per share will equal the greater of:
•   the highest cash price paid by LINN or any of its affiliates for any of our shares purchased within the 90 days
preceding the date on which LINN first mails notice of its election to shareholders; and
•   the current market price as of the date three days before the date the notice is mailed.
If a person acquires more than 90% of the outstanding LINN units, such person may require us to tender all of our
outstanding LINN units for cash, in which case we will distribute the cash we receive to our shareholders pro rata.
Following such distribution, we will cancel all of our outstanding shares and dissolve and wind up our affairs. See “—
Terminal Transactions Involving LINN—Going Private Transaction” above.
Merger, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets
Other than in connection with a Terminal Transaction, our board of directors is generally prohibited, without the prior
approval of the holders of a majority of our outstanding common shares and by the holder(s) of our voting share(s)
from causing us to, among other things, sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets in
a single transaction or a series of related transactions, including by way of merger, consolidation or otherwise.
Our board of directors may merge us into, or convey all of our assets to, a newly-formed entity if the sole purpose of
that merger or conveyance is to effect a mere change in our legal form into another limited liability entity that will be
treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Our shareholders are not entitled to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the limited liability company agreement or
applicable Delaware law in connection with any merger or consolidation, sale of all or substantially all of our assets or
any other transaction or event.
Books and Records
We are required to keep appropriate books of our business at our principal offices. The books will be maintained for
both tax and financial reporting purposes on an accrual basis. For tax purposes, our year end is November 30.
Table of Contents
148
We will furnish or make available to record holders of shares, an annual report containing audited financial statements
and a report on those financial statements by our independent public accountants in accordance with the requirements
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act.”). Except for our fourth quarter, we will also furnish or
make available summary financial information in accordance with the requirements of the Exchange Act.
Right to Inspect Books and Records
In addition to the reports referred to above in “—Books and Records,” our limited liability company agreement provides
that a shareholder can, for a purpose reasonably related to his interest as a shareholder, upon reasonable demand and
at his own expense, have furnished to him:
•   a current list of the name and last known address of each shareholder;
•   a copy of our tax returns;
•   information as to the amount of cash, and a description and statement of the agreed value of any other
property or services, contributed or to be contributed by each shareholder and the date on which each became
a shareholder; and
•   copies of our limited liability company agreement, our certificate of formation, related amendments and
powers of attorney under which they have been executed.
Our board of directors may, and intends to, keep confidential from our shareholders information that it believes to be
in the nature of trade secrets or other information, the disclosure of which our board of directors believes in good faith
is not in our best interests, information that could damage our company or our business, or information that we are
required by law or by agreements with a third party to keep confidential. These provisions are deemed to replace the
default provisions under Section 18-305 of the LLC Act.
LINN’s Limited Liability Company Agreement
Organization
Linn Energy, LLC was formed in April 2005 and will remain in existence until dissolved in accordance with its limited
liability company agreement.
Purpose
Under LINN’s limited liability company agreement, it is permitted to engage, directly or indirectly, in any activity that
its board of directors approves and that a limited liability company organized under Delaware law lawfully may
conduct; provided, that the board of directors shall not cause LINN to engage, directly or indirectly, in any business
activities that it determines would cause it to be treated as an association taxable as a corporation or otherwise
taxable as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Although LINN’s board of directors has the ability to cause it and its operating subsidiaries to engage in activities
other than the exploitation, development and production of natural gas reserves, LINN’s board of directors has no
current plans to do so. The board of directors is authorized in general to perform all acts it deems to be necessary or
appropriate to conduct LINN’s business.
Board of Directors; Fiduciary Duties
LINN’s limited liability company agreement provides that its business and affairs shall be managed under the direction
of its board of directors, which shall have the power to appoint its officers. The limited liability company agreement
further provides that the authority and function of the board of directors and officers shall be identical to the authority
and functions of a board of directors and officers of a corporation organized under the
Table of Contents
149
Delaware General Corporation Law, or DGCL. Finally, LINN’s limited liability company agreement provides that except
as specifically provided therein, the fiduciary duties and obligations owed to the limited liability company and to the
members shall be the same as the respective duties and obligations owed by officers and directors of a corporation
organized under the DGCL to their corporation and stockholders, respectively.
LINN’s limited liability company agreement permits affiliates of its directors to engage in other business interests or
activities in preference to or to the exclusion of LINN and to engage in business interests that directly compete with
LINN, provided that the affiliate does not engage in such competing businesses as a result of or using confidential
information provided by or on behalf of LINN to such director. Additionally, LINN’s directors do not have any
contractual obligation or express or implied legal duty to present business opportunities to LINN that become available
to their affiliates, and neither LINN nor any of its subsidiaries or members have any rights in any business ventures of
a director.
In addition, LINN’s limited liability company agreement establishes a conflicts committee of its board of directors,
consisting solely of independent directors, which will be authorized to review transactions involving potential conflicts
of interest. If the conflicts committee approves such a transaction, or if a transaction is on terms generally available
from third parties or an action is taken that is fair and reasonable to LINN, unitholders will not be able to assert that
such approval constituted a breach of fiduciary duties owed to them by LINN’s directors and officers.
Agreement to be Bound by Limited Liability Company Agreement; Power of Attorney
By purchasing units in LINN, LinnCo will be admitted as a unitholder of LINN and will be deemed to have agreed to be
bound by the terms of its limited liability company agreement. Pursuant to this agreement, each unitholder and each
person who acquires a unit from a unitholder grants to LINN Energy’s Chief Executive Officer, President and
Secretary (and, if appointed, a liquidator) a power of attorney to, among other things, execute and file documents
required for its qualification, continuance or dissolution. The power of attorney also grants the Chief Executive Officer,
President and Secretary (and, if appointed, a liquidator) the authority to make certain amendments to, and to make
consents and waivers under and in accordance with, LINN’s limited liability company agreement.
Capital Contributions
Unitholders are not obligated to make additional capital contributions, except as described below under “ —Limited
Liability.”
Limited Liability
Unlawful Distributions. The LLC Act provides that a unitholder who receives a distribution and knew at the time of the
distribution that the distribution was in violation of the LLC Act shall be liable to the company for the amount of the
distribution for three years from the date of the distribution. Under the LLC Act, a limited liability company may not
make a distribution to a unitholder if, after the distribution, all liabilities of the company, other than liabilities to
unitholders with respect to their membership interests and liabilities for which the recourse of creditors is limited to
specific property of the company, would exceed the fair value of the assets of the company. For the purpose of
determining the fair value of the assets of a company, the LLC Act provides that the fair value of property subject to
liability for which recourse of creditors is limited shall be included in the assets of the company only to the extent that
the fair value of that property exceeds the nonrecourse liability. Under the LLC Act, an assignee who becomes a
substituted unitholder of a company is liable for the obligations of his assignor to make contributions to the company,
except the assignee is not obligated for liabilities unknown to him at the time he became a unitholder and that could
not be ascertained from the limited liability company agreement.
Table of Contents
150
Failure to Comply with the Limited Liability Provisions of Jurisdictions in Which LINN Does Business. LINN’s
subsidiaries currently conduct business in the States of Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Louisiana, New Mexico,
Michigan, Illinois, California, North Dakota and Wyoming. They may decide to conduct business in other states, and
maintenance of limited liability for LINN, as a member of its operating subsidiaries, may require compliance with legal
requirements in the jurisdictions in which the operating subsidiaries conduct business, including qualifying the
subsidiaries to do business there. Limitations on the liability of unitholders for the obligations of a limited liability
company have not been clearly established in many jurisdictions. LINN operates in a manner that its board of
directors considers reasonable and necessary or appropriate to preserve the limited liability of its unitholders.
Voting Rights
The following matters require the unitholder vote specified below:
Election of members of the board of directors
LINN currently has seven directors. Its limited liability
company agreement provides that it will have a board of
not less than three and no more than eleven members.
Holders of LINN units, voting together as a single class,
will elect its directors. Please read “—Election of
Members of LINN’s Board of Directors.”
Issuance of additional units
No approval right.
Amendment of the limited liability company agreement
Certain amendments may be made by LINN’s board of
directors without the approval of the unitholders. Other
amendments generally require the approval of a unit
majority. Please read “—Amendment of the Limited
Liability Company Agreement.”
Merger of LINN or the sale of all or substantially all of its
Unit majority.
Merger of LINN or the sale of all or substantially all of its
assets
Dissolution of LINN
Unit majority.
Issuance of Additional Securities
LINN’s limited liability company agreement authorizes it to issue an unlimited number of additional securities and
authorizes it to buy securities for the consideration and on the terms and conditions determined by its board of
directors without the approval of the unitholders.
From time to time, LINN may fund acquisitions through the issuance of additional units or other equity securities.
Holders of any additional units LINN issues will be entitled to share pro rata with the then-existing holders of units in
its distributions of available cash. In addition, the issuance of additional units or other equity securities may dilute the
value of the interests of the then-existing holders of units in LINN’s net assets.
In accordance with Delaware law and the provisions of its limited liability company agreement, LINN may also issue
additional securities that, as determined by its board of directors, may have special voting or other rights to which the
units are not entitled.
Table of Contents
151
The holders of units will not have preemptive or preferential rights to acquire additional units or other securities.
Election of Members of LINN’s Board of Directors
At each annual meeting of unitholders, members of LINN’s board of directors are elected by its unitholders and are
subject to re-election on an annual basis.
Removal of Members of the Board of Directors
Any director may be removed, with or without cause, by the holders of a majority of the outstanding units then entitled
to vote at an election of directors.
Amendment of the Limited Liability Company Agreement
General. Amendments to our limited liability company agreement may be proposed only by or with the consent of our
board of directors. To adopt a proposed amendment, other than the amendments discussed below, our board of
directors is required to seek written approval of the holders of the number of units required to approve the amendment
or call a meeting of our unitholders to consider and vote upon the proposed amendment. Except as described below,
an amendment must be approved by a unit majority.
Prohibited Amendments. No amendment may be made that would:
•   enlarge the obligations of any unitholder without its consent, unless approved by at least a majority of the type
or class of member interests so affected;
•   provide that LINN is not dissolved upon an election to dissolve LINN by the board of directors that is approved
by a unit majority;
•   change the term of existence of LINN; or
•   give any person the right to dissolve LINN other than its board of directors’ right to dissolve it with the
approval of a unit majority.
The provision of LINN’s limited liability company agreement preventing the amendments having the effects described
in any of the clauses above can be amended upon the approval of the holders of at least 75% of the outstanding
units, voting together as a single class.
No Unitholder Approval. LINN’s board of directors may generally make amendments to its limited liability company
agreement without the approval of any unitholder or assignee to reflect:
•   a change in LINN’s name, the location of its principal place of business, its registered agent or its registered
office;
•   the admission, substitution, withdrawal or removal of members in accordance with its limited liability company
agreement;
•   the merger of LINN or any of its subsidiaries into, or the conveyance of all of its assets to, a newly-formed
entity if the sole purpose of that merger or conveyance is to effect a mere change in the legal form into
another limited liability entity;
•   a change that the board of directors determines to be necessary or appropriate for LINN to qualify or continue
its qualification as a company in which the members have limited liability under the laws of any state or to
ensure that neither it, its operating subsidiaries nor any of its subsidiaries will be treated as an association
taxable as a corporation or otherwise taxed as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes;
152
Table of Contents
•   an amendment that is necessary, in the opinion of our counsel, to prevent LINN, members of its board, or its
officers, agents or trustees from in any manner being subjected to the provisions of the Investment Company
Act of 1940, the Investment Advisors Act of 1940, or “plan asset” regulations adopted under the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or ERISA, whether or not substantially similar to plan asset
regulations currently applied or proposed;
•   an amendment that the board of directors determines to be necessary or appropriate for the authorization of
additional securities or rights to acquire securities;
•   any amendment expressly permitted in the limited liability company agreement to be made by the board of
directors acting alone;
•   an amendment effected, necessitated or contemplated by a merger agreement that has been approved under
the terms of the limited liability company agreement;
•   any amendment that LINN’s board of directors determines to be necessary or appropriate for the formation by
it of, or its investment in, any corporation, partnership or other entity, as otherwise permitted by its limited
liability company agreement;
•   a change in LINN’s fiscal year or taxable year and related changes;
•   a merger, conversion or conveyance effected in accordance with the limited liability company agreement; and
•   any other amendments substantially similar to any of the matters described in the clauses above.
In addition, LINN’s board of directors may make amendments to its limited liability company agreement without the
approval of any unitholder or assignee if its board of directors determines that those amendments:
•   do not adversely affect the unitholders (including any particular class of unitholders as compared to other
classes of unitholders) in any material respect;
•   are necessary or appropriate to satisfy any requirements, conditions or guidelines contained in any opinion,
directive, order, ruling or regulation of any federal or state agency or judicial authority or contained in any
federal or state statute;
•   are necessary or appropriate to facilitate the trading of units or to comply with any rule, regulation, guideline or
requirement of any securities exchange on which the units are or will be listed for trading, compliance with any
of which the board of directors deems to be in the best interests of LINN and its unitholders;
•   are necessary or appropriate for any action taken by the board of directors relating to splits or combinations of
units under the provisions of the limited liability company agreement; or
•   are required to effect the intent expressed in this prospectus or the intent of the provisions of the limited
liability company agreement or are otherwise contemplated by the limited liability company agreement.
Opinion of Counsel and Unitholder Approval. LINN’s board of directors will not be required to obtain an opinion of
counsel that an amendment will not result in a loss of limited liability to its unitholders or result in our being treated as
an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes if one of the amendments described above under “—No Unitholder
Approval” should occur. No other amendments to LINN’s limited liability company agreement will become effective
without the approval of holders of at least 90% of the units unless it obtains an opinion of counsel to the effect that
the amendment will not affect the limited liability under applicable law of any unitholder.
Any amendment that would have a material adverse effect on the rights or preferences of any type or class of
outstanding units in relation to other classes of units will require the approval of at least a majority of the type or class
of units so affected. Any amendment that reduces the voting percentage required to take any action is
Table of Contents
153
required to be approved by the affirmative vote of unitholders whose aggregate outstanding units constitute not less
than the voting requirement sought to be reduced.
Merger, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets
LINN’s board of directors is generally prohibited, without the prior approval of the holders of a unit majority from
causing it to, among other things, sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its assets in a
single transaction or a series of related transactions, including by way of merger, consolidation or other combination,
or approving on our behalf the sale, exchange or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of its
subsidiaries, provided that its board of directors may mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or grant a security interest in all
or substantially all of its assets without that approval. The board of directors may also sell all or substantially all of
LINN’s assets under a foreclosure or other realization upon the encumbrances above without that approval.
If the conditions specified in LINN’s limited liability company agreement are satisfied, LINN’s board of directors may
merge LINN or any of its subsidiaries into, or convey all of its assets to, a newly-formed entity if the sole purpose of
that merger or conveyance is to effect a mere change in its legal form into another limited liability entity. The
unitholders are not entitled to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the limited liability company agreement or
applicable Delaware law in the event of a merger or consolidation, a sale of all or substantially all of the assets or any
other transaction or event.
Termination and Dissolution
LINN will continue as a company until terminated under its limited liability company agreement. LINN will dissolve
upon: (1) the election of its board of directors to dissolve it if approved by the holders of a unit majority; (2) the sale,
exchange or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets and properties of LINN and its subsidiaries; or
(3) the entry of a decree of judicial dissolution of LINN.
Liquidation and Distribution of Proceeds
Upon dissolution of LINN, the liquidator authorized to wind up LINN’s affairs will, acting with all of the powers of the
board of directors of LINN that the liquidator deems necessary or desirable in its judgment, sell or otherwise dispose
of LINN’s assets. The liquidator will first apply the proceeds of liquidation to the payment of LINN’s creditors and then
distribute any remaining proceeds to the LINN unitholders in accordance with, and to the extent of, the positive
balances in their respective capital accounts in their units, as adjusted to reflect any gain or loss upon the sale or
other disposition of LINN’s assets in liquidation. The liquidator may defer liquidation or distribution of LINN’s assets for
a reasonable period of time or distribute assets to unitholders in kind if it determines that a sale would be impractical
or would cause undue loss to LINN’s unitholders.
Anti-Takeover Provisions
LINN’s limited liability company agreement contains specific provisions that are intended to discourage a person or
group from attempting to take control of LINN without the approval of the board of directors. Specifically, the limited
liability company agreement provides that LINN will elect to have Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation
Law apply to transactions in which an interested unitholder (as described below) seeks to enter into a merger or
business combination with it. Under this provision, such a holder will not be permitted to enter into a merger or
business combination with LINN unless:
•   prior to such time, LINN’s board of directors approved either the business combination or the transaction that
resulted in the unitholder’s becoming an interested unitholder;
•   upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the unitholder’s becoming an interested unitholder, the
interested unitholder owned at least 85% of the outstanding units at the time the transaction commenced,
excluding for purposes of determining the number of units outstanding those units owned:
154
Table of Contents
•   by persons who are directors and also officers;
•   by employee unit plans in which employee participants do not have the right to determine confidentially
whether units held subject to the plan will be tendered in a tender or exchange offer; or
•   at or subsequent to such time the business combination is approved by the board of directors and authorized
at an annual or special meeting of the unitholders, and not by written consent, by the affirmative vote of at
least a majority of the outstanding voting units that are not owned by the interested unitholder.
Section 203 defines “business combination” to include:
•   any merger or consolidation involving the company and the interested unitholder;
•   any sale, transfer, pledge or other disposition of 10% or more of the assets of the company involving the
interested unitholder;
•   subject to certain exceptions, any transaction that results in the issuance or transfer by the company of any
units of the company to the interested unitholder;
•   any transaction involving the company that has the effect of increasing the proportionate share of the units of
any class or series of the company beneficially owned by the interested unitholder; or
•   the receipt by the interested unitholder of the benefit of any loans, advances, guarantees, pledges or other
financial benefits provided by or through the company.
In general, by reference to Section 203, an “interested unitholder” is any entity or person who or which beneficially
owns (or within three years did own) 15% or more of the outstanding voting units of the company and any entity or
person affiliated with or controlling or controlled by such entity or person.
The existence of this provision would be expected to have an anti-takeover effect with respect to transactions not
approved in advance by LINN’s board of directors, including discouraging attempts that might result in a premium over
the market price for units held by unitholders.
Limited Call Right
If at any time any person owns more than 90% of the then-issued and outstanding membership interests of any class,
such person will have the right, which it may assign in whole or in part to any of its affiliates or to LINN, to acquire all,
but not less than all, of the remaining membership interests of the class held by unaffiliated persons as of a record
date to be selected by LINN’s management, on at least 10 but not more than 60 days’ notice. The unitholders are not
entitled to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the limited liability company agreement or applicable Delaware law if
this limited call right is exercised. The purchase price in the event of this purchase is the greater of:
•   the highest cash price paid by such person for any membership interests of the class purchased within the 90
days preceding the date on which such person first mails notice of its election to purchase those membership
interests; or
•   the closing market price as of the date three days before the date the notice is mailed.
As a result of this limited call right, a holder of membership interests in LINN may have his membership interests
purchased at an undesirable time or price. Please read “Risk Factors—Risks Inherent in an Investment in LinnCo—
Your shares are subject to limited call rights that could result in your having to involuntarily sell your shares at a time
or price that may be undesirable.” The tax consequences to a unitholder of the exercise of this call right are the same
as a sale by that unitholder of his units in the market. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
Table of Contents
Meetings; Voting
155
All notices of meetings of unitholders shall be sent or otherwise given in accordance with Section 11.4 of LINN’s
limited liability company agreement not less than 10 nor more than 60 days before the date of the meeting. The notice
shall specify the place, date and hour of the meeting and (i) in the case of a special meeting, the general nature of the
business to be transacted (no business other than that specified in the notice may be transacted) or (ii) in the case of
the annual meeting, those matters which the board of directors, at the time of giving the notice, intends to present for
action by the unitholders (but any proper matter may be presented at the meeting for such action). The notice of any
meeting at which directors are to be elected shall include the name of any nominee or nominees who, at the time of
the notice, the board of directors intends to present for election. Any previously scheduled meeting of the unitholders
may be postponed, and any special meeting of the unitholders may be canceled, by resolution of the board of
directors upon public notice given prior to the date previously scheduled for such meeting of unitholders.
Any action required or permitted to be taken by the unitholders must be effected at a duly called annual or special
meeting of unitholders and may not be effected by any consent in writing by such unitholders.
Meetings of the unitholders may only be called by a majority of the board of directors. Unitholders may vote either in
person or by proxy at meetings. The holders of a majority of the outstanding units of the class or classes for which a
meeting has been called represented in person or by proxy shall constitute a quorum unless any action by the
unitholders requires approval by holders of a greater percentage of the units, in which case the quorum shall be the
greater percentage.
Each record holder of a unit has a vote according to his percentage interest in LINN, although additional units having
special voting rights could be issued. Please read “—Issuance of Additional Securities.” Units held in nominee or
street name accounts will be voted by the broker or other nominee in accordance with the instruction of the beneficial
owner unless the arrangement between the beneficial owner and its nominee provides otherwise.
Any notice, demand, request, report or proxy material required or permitted to be given or made to record holders of
units under the limited liability company agreement will be delivered to the record holder by LINN or by the transfer
agent.
Non-Citizen Assignees; Redemption
If LINN or any of its subsidiaries is or becomes subject to federal, state or local laws or regulations that, in the
reasonable determination of the board of directors, create a substantial risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any property
that it has an interest in because of the nationality, citizenship or other related status of any unitholder or assignee,
LINN may redeem, upon 30 days’ advance notice, the units held by the unitholder or assignee at their current market
price. To avoid any cancellation or forfeiture, the board of directors may require each unitholder or assignee to furnish
information about his nationality, citizenship or related status. If a unitholder or assignee fails to furnish information
about his nationality, citizenship or other related status within 30 days after a request for the information or the board
of directors determines after receipt of the information that the unitholder or assignee is not an eligible citizen, the
unitholder or assignee may be treated as a non-citizen assignee. In addition to other limitations on the rights of an
assignee who is not a substituted unitholder, a non-citizen assignee does not have the right to direct the voting of his
units and may not receive distributions in kind upon the liquidation of LINN.
156
Table of Contents
Exculpation and Indemnification
Notwithstanding any express or implied provision of its limited liability company agreement, or any other legal duty or
obligation, none of LINN’s officers, directors or affiliates will be liable to LINN, LINN’s affiliates or any other person for
breach of fiduciary duty, except for a breach of the duty of loyalty to LINN or its members, for acts or omissions not in
good faith or involving intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law, or for any transaction from which a director
derived an improper personal benefit. Additionally, LINN’s directors will not be responsible for any misconduct or
negligence on the part of an agent appointed by LINN’s board of directors in good faith.
Under the terms of its limited liability company agreement and subject to specified limitations, LINN will indemnify to
the fullest extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments,
fines, penalties, interest, settlement amounts, claims, damages or similar events any director or officer, or while
serving as a director or officer, any person who is or was serving as a tax matters member or as a director, officer,
tax matters member, employee, partner, manager, fiduciary or trustee of LINN or any of its affiliates. However, such
directors, officers and persons are only entitled to indemnification if they acted in good faith and in a manner
reasonably believed to be in (or not opposed to) LINN’s best interests and, with respect to any criminal proceeding or
action, had no reasonable cause to believe that such conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or
proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere shall not itself create a
presumption that such good faith and reasonable belief standards were not met. Additionally, LINN may indemnify any
person who is or was an employee (other than an officer) or agent of LINN who is a party to a threatened, pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding, to the extent permitted by law and authorized by LINN’s board of directors.
Any indemnification under the limited liability company agreement will only be out of LINN’s assets. LINN is
authorized to purchase insurance against liabilities asserted against and expenses incurred by directors, officers and
persons in connection with LINN’s activities or their activities on behalf of LINN, regardless of whether it would have
the power to indemnify the person against liabilities under its limited liability company agreement.
Books and Reports
LINN is required to keep appropriate books of its business at its principal offices. The books are maintained for both
tax and financial reporting purposes on an accrual basis. For tax and fiscal reporting purposes, LINN’s fiscal year is
the calendar year.
LINN will furnish or make available to record holders of units, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, an
annual report containing audited financial statements and a report on those financial statements by its independent
public accountants. Except for our fourth quarter, LINN will also furnish or make available summary financial
information within 90 days after the close of each quarter.
LINN will furnish each record holder of a unit with information reasonably required for tax reporting purposes within 90
days after the close of each calendar year. This information is expected to be furnished in summary form so that
some complex calculations normally required of unitholders can be avoided. LINN’s ability to furnish this summary
information to unitholders will depend on the cooperation of unitholders in supplying it with specific information. Every
unitholder will receive information to assist him in determining his federal and state tax liability and filing his federal
and state income tax returns, regardless of whether he supplies LINN with information.
Right To Inspect LINN’s Books and Records
LINN’s limited liability company agreement provides that a unitholder can, for a purpose reasonably related to his
interest as a unitholder, upon reasonable demand and at his own expense, have furnished to him:
•   a current list of the name and last known address of each unitholder;
157
Table of Contents
•   a copy of LINN’s tax returns;
•   information as to the amount of cash, and a description and statement of the agreed value of any other
property or services, contributed or to be contributed by each unitholder and the date on which each became a
unitholder;
•   copies of the limited liability company agreement, the certificate of formation of LINN, related amendments
and powers of attorney under which they have been executed;
•   information regarding the status of LINN’s business and financial condition; and
•   any other information regarding its affairs as is just and reasonable.
LINN’s board of directors may, and intends to, keep confidential from its unitholders information that it believes to be
in the nature of trade secrets or other information, the disclosure of which the board of directors believes in good faith
is not in LINN’s best interests, information that could damage LINN or its business, or information that it is required by
law or by agreements with a third party to keep confidential.
Comparison of LINN’s Units with Our Shares
The following table compares important features of the LINN units with our shares.
Numbers of units and
shares
Distributions and
Dividends
Dissolution
Table of Contents
LINN Units
units outstanding as of                     ,
2012.
LinnCo Shares
One voting share currently outstanding.
On a quarterly basis, LINN is required to
distribute to the owners of all classes of its
units an amount equal to its available cash.
shares to be issued in this
offering.
On a quarterly basis, LinnCo is required to
pay a dividend equal to the amount of cash
received from LINN in respect of the LINN
units owned by LinnCo, less reserves for
income taxes payable by LinnCo.
For the periods ending December 31, 2012,
2013, 2014 and 2015, we estimate that
LinnCo’s income tax liability will not
exceed     % of the cash distributed to
LinnCo.
LINN will dissolve upon: (1) the election of
its board of directors to dissolve it if
approved by the holders of a unit majority;
(2) the sale, exchange or other disposition of
all or substantially all of the assets and
properties of LINN and its subsidiaries; or (3)
the entry of a decree of judicial dissolution of
LINN.
158
LINN Units
We will be dissolved and wound up only (1)
upon entry of a judicial decree, (2) upon the
approval by the owner(s) of the voting
share(s) and by the holders of a majority of
the outstanding shares of the class sold in
this offering, voting as separate classes,
(3) if we cease to own any LINN units
(whether as a result of a merger of LINN or
otherwise) and the owner(s) of the voting
share(s) approve such dissolution, (4) in
the event of a sale or other disposition of
all or substantially all of our assets other
than
LinnCo Shares
in connection with certain non-cash
mergers involving LINN or (5) if at any time
we have no members, unless a member is
admitted to LinnCo and LinnCo is continued
without dissolution in accordance with the
LLC Act. In the event that we are
dissolved, our affairs will be wound up and
all our remaining assets, after payments to
creditors and satisfaction of other
Voting
Limited Call Rights
Table of Contents
obligations, will be distributed to the holders
of the outstanding shares.
If LINN or its successor is treated as a
corporation for U.S. federal income tax
purposes, LINN or such successor will
have the right to cause us to merge with
and into LINN, in which case our
shareholders would receive distributions in
kind of LINN units and other property we
own, if any, after payments to creditors and
satisfaction of other obligations.
Our shareholders are not entitled to vote to
elect our board of directors.
Our shareholders will be entitled to vote on
certain fundamental matters affecting us,
such as certain amendments to our limited
liability company agreement, certain
mergers of our company, the sale of all or
substantially all of our assets and our
voluntary dissolution and winding up.
We will submit to a vote of our
shareholders any matter submitted by LINN
to a vote of its unitholders, including the
election of LINN’s directors. We will vote
the LINN units that we hold in the same
manner as the owners of our shares vote
(or refrain from voting) their shares on
those matters.
If LINN or any of its affiliates own 80% or
more of our shares, LINN has the right,
which it may assign to any of its affiliates,
to purchase all of our remaining outstanding
shares, at a
LinnCo Shares
purchase price not less than the then-
current market price of our shares.
In addition, we may be required to sell our
LINN units in the event that a person owns
more than 90% of the outstanding LINN
Unitholders have the right to vote with
respect to the election of LINN’s directors,
certain amendments to LINN’s limited
liability company agreement, the merger of
LINN or the sale of all or substantially all of
its assets and the dissolution of LINN.
If at any time a person owns more than 90%
of the outstanding LINN units, such person
may elect to purchase all, but not less than
all, of the remaining outstanding units at a
price equal to the higher of the
159
LINN Units
current market price (as defined in LINN’s
limited liability company agreement) or the
highest price paid by such person or any of
its affiliates for any LINN units purchased
during the 90-day period preceding the date
notice was mailed to the LINN unitholders
informing them of such election.
units and exercises the call right
associated therewith. In such event, we will
distribute to the holders of outstanding
shares of all classes any cash we receive,
net of any income taxes payable by us and
after payments to creditors and satisfaction
of other obligations, and our shares will be
canceled and we will be dissolved.
We intend to apply to list our shares on the
NASDAQ Global Select Market under the
symbol “LNCO.”
The voting share(s) will not be listed for
trading on any stock exchange.
Listing Exchange
Table of Contents
Units are traded on the NASDAQ Global
Select Market under the symbol “LINE.”
160
SHARES ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
Upon completion of the offering, we will have outstanding                  shares. All of the shares sold in the offering will
be freely tradable without restriction.
Prior to the offering, there has been no public trading market for our shares. Sales of substantial amounts of shares in
the open market, or the perception that those sales could occur, could adversely affect prevailing market prices and
could impair our ability to raise capital in the future through the sale of our equity securities.
Our limited liability company agreement provides that we may issue an unlimited number of common shares and
voting shares without a vote of our shareholders. Any issuance of additional common shares would result in a
corresponding decrease in the proportionate ownership interest in us represented by, and could adversely affect the
dividends to and market price of, shares then outstanding. Please read “Description of Our Shares—Issuance of
Additional Shares.”
Table of Contents
Scope of Discussion
161
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following is a discussion of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences relating to an investment in the
shares. This discussion is limited to holders that hold the shares as “capital assets” within the meaning of
Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). For purposes of this discussion,
“holder” means either a U.S. holder (as defined below) or a non-U.S. holder (as defined below) or both, as the context
may require.
This discussion does not address any aspect of non-income taxation, any state, local or foreign taxation or the effect
of any tax treaty. Moreover, this discussion does not address all of the U.S. federal income tax consequences that
may be relevant to holders in light of their particular circumstances or, except as specifically discussed below, to
holders who may be subject to special treatment under U.S. federal income tax laws, such as:
•   banks, thrifts, insurance companies and other financial institutions;
•   tax-exempt organizations;
•   partnerships or other pass-through entities (or their investors or beneficiaries);
•   regulated investment companies and mutual funds;
•   real estate investment trusts;
•   dealers or traders in stocks and securities, foreign currencies or notional principal contracts;
•   holders subject to the alternative minimum tax provisions of the Code;
•   certain expatriates or former long-term residents of the United States;
•   U.S. holders that have a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar;
•   personal holding companies;
•   “controlled foreign corporations,” “passive foreign investment companies” or corporations that accumulate
earnings to avoid U.S. federal income tax;
•   holders that own, or are deemed to own, more than 5% of the shares;
•   holders that received shares as compensation for the performance of services or pursuant to the exercise of
options or warrants; or
•   holders that hold shares as part of a hedge, conversion or constructive sale transaction, straddle, wash sale
or other risk reduction transaction or other integrated transaction.
If a partnership (including an entity or other arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax
purposes) is an owner of shares, the tax treatment of a partner will generally depend on the status of the partner, the
activities of the partnership and certain determinations made at the partner level. Partners of partnerships that are
owners of shares should consult their tax advisors.
All statements as to matters of law and legal conclusions, but not as to factual matters, contained in this section,
unless otherwise noted, are the opinions of Baker Botts L.L.P. (“Counsel”) and are based on the accuracy of
representations made by us.
In providing this opinion, Counsel has examined and is relying upon the truth and accuracy at all relevant times of this
prospectus, the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, representations made by us and LINN
and such other records and documents as in Counsel’s judgment are necessary or appropriate to enable Counsel to
provide this opinion. Counsel has not, however, undertaken any independent investigation of any factual matter set
forth in any of the foregoing.
Table of Contents
162
This opinion is based upon Counsel’s interpretation of the Code, its regulations, court decisions, published positions
of the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other applicable authorities, all as in effect on the date of this prospectus
and all of which are subject to change or differing interpretations, possibly with retroactive effect. This opinion is
rendered as of the date of this prospectus, and Counsel assumes no obligation to advise us or you of any change in
fact, circumstances or law which may alter, affect or modify this opinion. This opinion is not binding on the IRS or a
court, and no ruling has been or will be obtained from the IRS regarding any of the matters addressed in this opinion.
As a result, no assurance can be given that the IRS will not assert, or that a court will not sustain, a position contrary
to the matters addressed in this opinion.
THIS DISCUSSION IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR AN INDIVIDUAL ANALYSIS OF THE TAX CONSEQUENCES
RELATING TO AN INVESTMENT IN THE SHARES. WE URGE YOU TO CONSULT YOUR OWN TAX ADVISOR
CONCERNING THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES TO YOU IN LIGHT OF YOUR FACTS AND
CIRCUMSTANCES AND ANY CONSEQUENCES ARISING UNDER THE LAWS OF ANY STATE, LOCAL,
FOREIGN OR OTHER TAXING JURISDICTION OR UNDER ANY APPLICABLE TAX TREATY.
LINN Partnership Status
Section 7704 of the Code provides that publicly traded partnerships will, as a general rule, be treated as corporations
for U.S. federal income tax purposes. However, an exception, referred to as the “Qualifying Income Exception,” exists
with respect to publicly traded partnerships of which 90% or more of the gross income for every taxable year consists
of “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code. If a publicly traded partnership meets this
exception and has not elected to be treated as a corporation, it will be treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income
tax purposes.
Qualifying income includes income and gains derived from the exploration, development, mining or production,
processing, transportation and marketing of natural resources, including crude oil, natural gas and products thereof.
Other types of qualifying income include interest (other than from a financial business), dividends, gains from the sale
of real property and gains from the sale or other disposition of capital assets held for the production of income that
otherwise constitutes qualifying income. LINN estimates that less than 5% of its current gross income is not
qualifying income; however, this estimate could change from time to time.
Subject to the assumptions, qualifications and limitations set forth above, Counsel is of the opinion that at least 90%
of LINN’s current gross income constitutes qualifying income, that LINN will be treated as a partnership for U.S.
federal income tax purposes and that LINN’s principal operating subsidiary, Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (the “Operating
Company”), will be disregarded as an entity separate from LINN for U.S. federal income tax purposes. In providing this
opinion, Counsel has relied upon representations made by us and LINN that:
•   neither LINN nor the Operating Company has elected or will elect to be treated as a corporation; and
•   for each taxable year since LINN’s inception, more than 90% of LINN’s gross income will be income that
Counsel has opined or will opine is “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
LinnCo U.S. Federal Income Taxation
We have elected to be treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Thus, we are obligated to pay
U.S. federal income tax on our net taxable income. Currently, the maximum regular U.S. federal income tax rate for a
corporation is 35%, but we may be subject to a 20% alternative minimum tax on our alternative minimum taxable
income to the extent that the alternative minimum tax exceeds our regular income tax.
Although the Code generally provides that a regulated investment company does not pay an entity-level income tax,
provided that it distributes all or substantially all of its income, we do not meet the current tests for
Table of Contents
163
qualification as a regulated investment company under the Code because most or substantially all of our investments
will consist of investments in LINN units. The regulated investment company tax rules therefore have no application
to us.
Consequences to U.S. Holders
The following is a discussion of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences that will apply to U.S. holders.
The term “U.S. holder” means a beneficial owner of shares that, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, is:
•   an individual citizen or resident alien of the United States;
•   a corporation (or any other entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes) created or
organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof of the District of Columbia;
•   an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
•   a trust if it (1) is subject to the primary supervision of a court within the United States and one or more United
States persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust, or (2) has a valid election in
effect under applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations to be treated as a United States person.
Distributions on the Shares
Because we are a corporation, rather than a partnership, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, a holder will not
receive a Schedule K-1 from us and will not include its allocable share of our income, gains, losses or deductions in
computing the holder’s own taxable income. Distributions paid with respect to our shares will constitute dividends for
U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent of our current or accumulated earnings and profits. Our earnings and
profits generally will equal the taxable income allocated to us by LINN, with certain adjustments. These adjustments
include recovering depreciation, depletion and intangible drilling costs more slowly than permitted in computing taxable
income and will generally result in our having earnings and profits in excess of our taxable income. Distributions in
excess of our earnings and profits will be treated first as a tax-free return of capital to the extent of the U.S. holder’s
tax basis in the shares and will reduce (but not below zero) such basis. A distribution in excess of our earnings and
profits and the U.S. holder’s tax basis in the shares will be treated as capital gain realized on the sale or exchange of
such shares. All distributions on our shares will be reportable to holders on Form 1099-DIV.
We estimate that if you own the shares that you purchase in this offering through December 31, 2015, you will
recognize, on a cumulative basis, an amount of taxable dividend income that will be         % or less of the cash
dividends paid to you during that period. However, the ratio of taxable dividend income to cash dividends for any
single year in that period may be higher or lower. The excess of the cash dividends that you receive over your taxable
dividend income during that period will reduce your tax basis in your shares. After December 31, 2015, the ratio of
taxable dividend income to cash dividends may increase due to reduced depletion deductions if the rate of LINN’s oil
and natural gas production from LINN’s reserves declines over time and reduced depreciation deductions allowable in
each succeeding year under the accelerated depreciation schedule applicable to LINN’s assets. Moreover, as
described above, all distributions made in excess of our earnings and profits and a holder’s tax basis in our shares will
be taxable to the holder in full as capital gain. These estimates are based upon assumptions with respect to LINN’s
earnings from its operations, the amount of those earnings allocated to us, our income tax liabilities and the amount of
the distributions paid to us by LINN, including assumptions that LINN will not significantly decrease its drilling activity
and that there will not be an issuance of significant additional units by LINN without a corresponding increase in the
aggregate tax deductions generated by LINN. These estimates and assumptions are subject to, among other things,
numerous business, economic, regulatory, legislative, competitive and political uncertainties beyond our control,
including the enactment of proposed legislation that would eliminate the current deduction of intangible drilling costs
and other tax incentives to the oil and natural gas industry, or a significant increase in oil and natural gas prices.
Further, the estimates are based on current tax law and tax reporting positions that we and LINN will adopt and with
which the IRS could
Table of Contents
164
disagree. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that these estimates will prove to be correct. The actual ratio of taxable
dividend income to cash dividends could be higher or lower than expected, and any differences could be material and
could materially affect the value of the shares.
Distributions that are treated as dividends generally will be taxable as ordinary income to U.S. holders but (i) are
expected to be treated as “qualified dividend income” that is currently subject to reduced rates of U.S. federal income
taxation for non-corporate U.S. holders and (ii) may be eligible for the dividends received deduction available to
corporate U.S. holders, in each case provided that certain holding period requirements are met. Qualified dividend
income is currently taxable to non-corporate U.S. holders at a maximum U.S. federal income tax rate of 15% for
taxable years beginning before January 1, 2013. Thereafter, qualified dividend income will be taxed at ordinary income
rates unless further legislative action is taken. The reduced maximum tax rate on dividends will not apply to dividends
received to the extent that the U.S. holder elects to treat such dividends as “investment income,” which may be offset
by investment expense.
Certain limitations apply to the availability of the dividends received deduction for corporate holders, including
limitations on the aggregate amount of the deduction that may be claimed and limitations based on the holding period
of the shares on which the dividend is paid, which holding period may be reduced if the holder engages in risk
reduction transactions with respect to its shares.
U.S. holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the holding period and other requirements that must be
satisfied in order to qualify for the reduced maximum tax rate on dividends and the dividends received deduction.
Sale, Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Shares
Generally, the sale, exchange or other taxable disposition of shares will result in taxable gain or loss to a U.S. holder
equal to the difference between (1) the amount of cash plus the fair market value of any other property received by
such U.S. holder in the sale, exchange or other taxable disposition and (2) such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in
the shares. A U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the shares will generally equal its cost for the shares, decreased (but
not below zero) by the amount of any distributions treated as a tax-free return of capital as described above under “—
Distributions on the Shares.”
Gain or loss recognized on the sale, exchange or other taxable disposition of shares will generally be capital gain or
loss and will be long-term capital gain or loss if the shares are held for more than one year. A reduced tax rate on
capital gain generally will apply to long-term capital gain of a non-corporate U.S. holder. There are limitations on the
deductibility of capital losses.
Investment by Tax-Exempt Investors and Regulated Investment Companies
A tax-exempt investor will not have unrelated business taxable income attributable to its ownership of shares or to its
sale, exchange or other disposition of shares unless its ownership of shares is debt-financed. In general, shares
would be debt-financed if the tax-exempt investor incurs debt to acquire shares or otherwise incurs or maintains a
debt that would not have been incurred or maintained if those shares had not been acquired.
Distributions that constitute dividends with respect to the shares will result in income that is qualifying income for a
regulated investment company or a mutual fund. Furthermore, any gain from the sale, exchange or other disposition of
shares will constitute gain from the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock or securities and will also result in
income that is qualifying income for a regulated investment company. Finally, the shares will constitute qualifying
assets to regulated investment companies, which generally must own at least 50% in qualifying assets and not more
than 25% in certain non-qualifying assets at the end of each quarter, provided such regulated investment companies
do not violate certain percentage ownership limitations with respect to the shares.
Table of Contents
165
Backup Withholding and Information Reporting
In general, distributions in respect of the shares, and the proceeds of a sale, exchange or other taxable disposition of
the shares, paid to a U.S. holder are subject to information reporting and may be subject to U.S. federal backup
withholding unless the U.S. holder (i) is an exempt recipient or (ii) provides us with a correct taxpayer identification
number and certifies that it is not subject to backup withholding. Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Any
amount withheld from a payment to a U.S. holder under the backup withholding rules is allowable as a credit against
such holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability and may entitle such holder to a refund, provided that the required
information is timely furnished to the IRS.
Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders
The following is a discussion of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences that will apply to non-U.S.
holders. The term “non-U.S. holder” means a beneficial owner of shares (other than a partnership) who is not a U.S.
holder.
Distributions on the Shares
Dividends paid to a non-U.S. holder generally will be subject to withholding of U.S. federal income tax at a 30% rate
(or such lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty) unless the dividends are effectively
connected with a trade or business carried on by the non-U.S. holder in the United States (and, if required by an
applicable income tax treaty, are attributable to a permanent establishment or fixed base of the non-U.S. holder in the
United States). A non-U.S. holder that is eligible for a reduced rate of withholding tax under an income tax treaty may
obtain a refund or credit of any excess amounts withheld by filing an appropriate claim for refund with the IRS. Under
applicable Treasury Regulations, a non-U.S. holder (including, in the case of certain non-U.S. holders that are entities,
the owner or owners of these entities) will be required to satisfy certain certification requirements as set forth on IRS
Form W-8BEN (or other applicable form) in order to claim a reduced rate of withholding pursuant to an applicable
income tax treaty. Non-U.S. holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding their entitlement to benefits under
an applicable income tax treaty and the manner of claiming the benefits of such treaty.
Dividends that are effectively connected with a trade or business carried on by the non-U.S. holder in the United
States (and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, are attributable to a permanent establishment or fixed base
of the non-U.S. holder in the United States) generally are not subject to the withholding tax described above but
instead are subject to U.S. federal income tax on a net income basis at applicable graduated U.S. federal income tax
rates. A non-U.S. holder must satisfy certain certification requirements, including, if applicable, the furnishing of an
IRS Form W-8ECI (or other applicable form), for its effectively connected dividends to be exempt from the withholding
tax described above. Dividends that are effectively connected with a corporate non-U.S. holder’s conduct of a trade or
business in the United States may be subject to an additional branch profits tax at a 30% rate (or such lower rate as
may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty).
To the extent distributions paid on our shares exceed our current and accumulated earnings and profits, such
distributions will constitute a return of capital and will reduce the adjusted tax basis in such shares, but not below
zero. The amounts of any such distribution in excess of such adjusted tax basis will be treated as gain from the sale
of shares and will have the tax consequences described under “—Sale, Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of
Shares” below.
Sale, Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Shares
Subject to the discussion below under “—Other Recently Enacted Legislation,” a non-U.S. holder generally will not be
subject to U.S. federal income or withholding tax on any gain realized on a sale, exchange or other taxable disposition
of shares, unless:
•   the non-U.S. holder is an individual present in the United States for 183 days or more during the taxable year
of that disposition and certain other conditions are met;
166
Table of Contents
•   the gain is effectively connected with the non-U.S. holder’s conduct of a trade or business in the United
States (and, if a tax treaty applies, the gain is attributable to a permanent establishment or fixed base
maintained by the non-U.S. holder in the United States);
•   our shares constitute a “United States real property interest” by reason of our being a “United States real
property holding corporation” (“USRPHC”) and the “regularly traded” exception (discussed below) does not
apply to such non-U.S. holder; or
•   the non-U.S. holder does not qualify for an exemption from backup withholding, as discussed in “—Information
Reporting and Backup Withholding” below.
An individual non-U.S. holder described in the first bullet point above will be taxed on his or her gains from the sale,
exchange or other taxable disposition of shares at a flat rate of 30% (or such lower rate as may be specified by an
applicable income tax treaty), which may be offset by certain U.S. source capital losses of such non-U.S. holder
provided that such non-U.S. holder has timely filed U.S. federal income tax returns with respect to such losses.
Non-U.S. holders that recognize gain from the sale, exchange or other taxable disposition of shares described in the
second bullet point above will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on a net income basis at applicable graduated
U.S. federal income tax rates in much the same manner as if such holder were a resident of the United States, and in
the case of corporate non-U.S. holders, the branch profits tax discussed above also may apply.
If a non-U.S. holder is subject to U.S. federal income tax because of our status as a USRPHC and the regularly
traded exception (discussed below) does not apply to such non-U.S. holder, then, in the case of any disposition of
shares by the non-U.S. holder, the purchaser may be required to deduct and withhold a tax equal to 10% of the
amount realized on the disposition. Non-U.S. holders subject to U.S. federal income tax will also be subject to certain
U.S. filing and reporting requirements. We believe that we are a USRPHC. Nevertheless, such income tax and such
withholding will not apply unless such non-U.S. holder’s shares (including shares that are attributed to such holder
under applicable attribution rules) represent more than 5% of the total fair market value of all of the shares at any time
during the five-year period ending on the date of disposition of such shares by the non-U.S. holder, assuming that the
shares are “regularly traded” on an established securities market within the meaning of applicable Treasury
Regulations, which provide that a class of interests that is traded on an established securities market located in the
United States is considered to be regularly traded for any calendar quarter during which it is regularly quoted by
brokers or dealers making a market in these interests. We expect to satisfy this regularly traded exception, but this
cannot be assured. Prospective investors should consult their own tax advisors regarding the application of the
regularly traded exception.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
In general, backup withholding will apply to dividends in respect of the shares paid to a non-U.S. holder unless such
non-U.S. holder has provided the required certification that it is not a United States person and the payor does not
have actual knowledge (or reason to know) that the non-U.S. holder is a United States person or such non-U.S. holder
otherwise establishes an exemption from backup withholding. Dividends paid to a non-U.S. holder generally will be
exempt from backup withholding if the non-U.S. holder provides a properly executed IRS Form W-8BEN or otherwise
establishes an exemption from backup withholding. Generally, information regarding the amount of distributions paid,
the name and address of the recipient and the amount, if any, of tax withheld will be reported to the IRS and to the
recipient even if no tax was required to be withheld. Copies of these information reports may also be made available
under the provisions of an applicable treaty or other agreement to the tax authorities of the country in which the non-
U.S. holder is a resident for purposes of such treaty or agreement.
In general, backup withholding and information reporting will apply to the payment of proceeds from the disposition of
shares by a non-U.S. holder through a U.S. office of a broker unless such non-U.S. holder has provided the required
certification that it is not a United States person and the payor does not have actual
Table of Contents
167
knowledge (or reason to know) that the holder is a United States person, or such non-U.S. holder otherwise
establishes an exemption. In general, backup withholding and information reporting will not apply to the payment of
proceeds from the disposition of shares by a non-U.S. holder through the non-U.S. office of a broker, except that, in
the case of a broker that is a United States person or has certain specified relationships or connections with the
United States, information reporting will apply unless the broker has documentary evidence in its files that the holder
is not a United States person and the broker does not have actual knowledge (or reason to know) that the holder is a
United States person and certain other conditions are satisfied, or the holder otherwise establishes an exemption.
Backup withholding will apply if the sale is subject to information reporting and the broker has actual knowledge that
the non-U.S. holder is a United States person.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Any amount withheld from a payment to a non-U.S. holder under the
backup withholding rules is allowable as a credit against such holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability and may entitle
such holder to a refund, provided that the required information is timely furnished to the IRS.
Non-U.S. holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the application of the information reporting and
backup withholding rules to them.
Medicare Tax
Recently enacted legislation requires certain holders who are individuals, estates or trusts to pay a 3.8% unearned
income Medicare contribution tax on, among other things, dividends on and capital gains from the sale or other
disposition of shares for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2012. Holders should consult their tax advisors
regarding the effect, if any, of this legislation on their ownership and disposition of shares.
Other Recently Enacted Legislation
An additional withholding tax will apply to certain types of payments made after December 31, 2012 (unless certain
proposed regulations providing otherwise are finalized, as discussed further below), to “foreign financial institutions”
and certain other non-U.S. entities. Specifically, a 30% withholding tax will be imposed on dividends on, or gross
proceeds from the sale or other disposition of, the shares paid to a foreign financial institution or to a non-financial
foreign entity, unless (i) the foreign financial institution undertakes certain diligence and reporting obligations or (ii) the
non-financial foreign entity either certifies it does not have any substantial U.S. owners or furnishes identifying
information regarding each substantial U.S. owner. If the payee is a foreign financial institution, it must enter into an
agreement with the U.S. Treasury requiring, among other things, that it undertake to identify accounts held by certain
U.S. persons or U.S.-owned foreign entities, annually report certain information about such accounts, and withhold
30% on payments to account holders whose actions prevent it from complying with these reporting and other
requirements. Under certain circumstances, a holder may be eligible for refunds or credits of such taxes. The United
States Treasury Department and the IRS have recently issued proposed regulations that, if finalized, would provide
that the withholding described above would not apply to payments made before January 1, 2014 (with respect to
dividends on the shares) or January 1, 2015 (with respect to gross proceeds from the sale or other disposition of the
shares). The proposed regulations will not be effective until issued in final form, and there can be no assurance as to
when those final regulations will be issued or the particular form they might take.
Prospective purchasers of shares should consult their own tax advisors with respect to the tax consequences of
these rules.
Table of Contents
168
ERISA CONSIDERATIONS
The following is a summary of material considerations arising under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974, as amended (“ERISA”) and the prohibited transaction provisions of the Code that may be relevant to a
prospective purchaser of our shares. The discussion does not purport to deal with all aspects of ERISA or section
4975 of the Code that may be relevant to particular shareholders in light of their particular circumstances.
We base the foregoing discussion on current provisions of ERISA and the Code, existing ERISA and Code
regulations, DOL administrative rulings, and reported judicial decisions. No assurance can be given that legislative,
administrative or judicial changes will not affect the accuracy of any statements herein with respect to transactions
entered into or contemplated prior to the effective date of such changes.
Fiduciary Requirements
Each fiduciary of a pension, profit-sharing or other employee benefit plan subject to Title I of ERISA (“ERISA Plan”)
should consider carefully whether an investment in our shares is consistent with its fiduciary responsibilities under
ERISA. In particular, the ERISA fiduciary responsibilities require an ERISA Plan’s investments to be (1) prudent and
in the best interests of the ERISA Plan, its participants and its beneficiaries, (2) diversified in order to minimize the
risk of large losses, unless it is clearly prudent not to do so and (3) authorized under the terms of the ERISA Plan’s
governing documents (provided the documents are consistent with ERISA). In determining whether an investment in
our shares is prudent for purposes of ERISA, the appropriate fiduciary of an ERISA Plan should consider all of the
facts and circumstances, including whether the investment is reasonably designed, as a part of the ERISA Plan’s
portfolio for which the fiduciary has investment responsibility, to meet the objectives of the ERISA Plan, taking into
consideration the risk of loss and opportunity for gain (or other return) from the investment, diversification, cash flow
and funding requirements of the ERISA Plan’s portfolio.
The fiduciary of an individual retirement account (“IRA”) or a governmental plan, church plan or plan that does not
cover common-law employees that is not subject to Title I of ERISA (“Non-ERISA Plan”) may only make investments
that are authorized by the appropriate governing documents and under applicable state law.
Prohibited Transaction Issues
Fiduciaries of ERISA Plans and fiduciaries or other persons making the investment decision for an IRA or Non-ERISA
Plan should consider the application of the prohibited transaction provisions of ERISA and the Code in making their
investment decision. Under the prohibited transaction rules, an ERISA Plan, IRA and Non-ERISA Plan are prohibited
from engaging in specified transactions involving plan assets with persons or entities who are “parties in interest,”
within the meaning of ERISA, or “disqualified persons,” within the meaning of section 4975 of the Code, unless an
exemption is available. A “party in interest” or “disqualified person” with respect to an ERISA Plan or an IRA or Non-
ERISA Plan is subject to (1) an initial 15% excise tax on the amount involved in any prohibited transaction involving
the assets of the plan or IRA and (2) an excise tax equal to 100% of the amount involved if any prohibited transaction
is not timely corrected. If the disqualified person who engages in the transaction is the individual on behalf of whom
an IRA is maintained (or his beneficiary), the IRA will lose its tax-exempt status and its assets will be deemed to have
been distributed to such individual in a taxable distribution (and no excise tax will be imposed) on account of the
prohibited transaction. In addition, a fiduciary who permits an ERISA Plan to engage in a transaction that the fiduciary
knows or should know is a prohibited transaction may be liable to the ERISA Plan for any loss the ERISA Plan incurs
as a result of the transaction or for any profits earned by the fiduciary in the transaction.
Plan Asset Issues
Certain rules apply in determining whether the fiduciary requirements of ERISA and the prohibited transaction
provisions of ERISA and the Code apply to an entity because one or more investors in the equity interests in the
entity is an ERISA Plan or an IRA or a Non-ERISA Plan subject to section 4975 of the Code. An
Table of Contents
169
ERISA Plan fiduciary should consider the relevance of the fiduciary requirements of ERISA and the prohibited
transaction provisions of ERISA and the Code with respect to ERISA’s prohibition on improper delegation of control
over or responsibility for “plan assets” and ERISA’s imposition of co-fiduciary liability with respect to who participates
in, permits (by action or inaction) the occurrence of or fails to remedy a known breach by another fiduciary.
Regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor (“DOL”) defining “plan assets,” known as the “Plan Asset Regulations,”
generally provide that when an ERISA Plan or a Non-ERISA Plan or an IRA acquires a security that is an equity
interest in an entity and the security is neither a “publicly offered security” nor a security issued by an investment
company registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, the ERISA or Non-ERISA Plan’s or IRA’s assets
include both the equity interest and an undivided interest in each of the underlying assets of the issuer of such equity
interest, unless one or more exceptions specified in the Plan Asset Regulations are satisfied.
For purposes of the Plan Asset Regulations, a “publicly offered security” is a security that is “freely transferable,” part
of a class of securities that is “widely held,” and either (a) is sold to the ERISA Plan as part of an offering of securities
to the public pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities Act and the class of securities to
which such security is a part is registered under the Exchange Act within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year of
the issuer during which the offering of such securities to the public has occurred or (b) is part of a class of securities
that is registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act. The Plan Asset Regulations provide that a security is “widely
held” only if it is part of a class of securities that is owned by 100 or more investors independent of the issuer and one
another. A security will not fail to be “widely held” because the number of independent investors falls below 100
subsequent to the initial offering thereof as a result of events beyond the control of the issuer. The Plan Asset
Regulations provide that whether a security is “freely transferable” is a factual question to be determined on the basis
of all the relevant facts and circumstances.
We anticipate that our shares to be sold in this offering will meet the criteria of publicly offered securities under the
Plan Asset Regulations, although no assurances can be given in this regard. The underwriters expect (although no
assurance can be given) that our shares will be (1) held beneficially by more than 100 independent persons at the
conclusion of the offering and thus widely held, (2) freely transferable as no restrictions will be imposed on the transfer
of our shares and (3) sold as part of an offering pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities
Act of 1933. As a result, we anticipate that our shares will be timely registered under the Exchange Act.
Governmental plans, certain church plans and non-U.S. plans, while not subject to the fiduciary responsibility or
prohibited transaction provisions of ERISA or section 4975 of the Code, may nevertheless be subject to other federal,
state, local, non-U.S. or other laws that are substantially similar to the foregoing provisions of ERISA or the Code
(“Similar Laws”).
Careful Consideration of ERISA and Code Issues Is Recommended
The foregoing discussion is not intended as a substitute for careful consideration of issues under ERISA and the
Code which may be relevant to a person purchasing our shares with “plan assets.” The ERISA and prohibited
transaction provisions and regulations applicable to persons investing “plan assets” are complex and are subject to
varying interpretations. Moreover, the effect of such laws and regulations and the potential availability of exemptions
thereto will vary with the particular circumstances of each prospective holder and in reviewing this prospectus these
matters should be considered. Each fiduciary or other person considering the purchase of our shares on behalf
of, or with the assets of, any ERISA plan, IRA or Non-ERISA Plan is advised to consult with its legal advisor
concerning the matters described above regarding issues under ERISA, section 4975 of the Code and Similar
Laws.
Table of Contents
170
UNDERWRITING
Barclays Capital Inc. and                 are acting as representatives of the underwriters and as joint book-running
managers of this offering. Under the terms of an underwriting agreement, which will be filed as an exhibit to the
registration statement, each of the underwriters named below has severally agreed to purchase from us the respective
number of shares shown opposite its name below:
Underwriter
Barclays Capital Inc.  
Total
Number
of Shares
The underwriting agreement provides that the underwriters’ obligation to purchase shares depends on the satisfaction
of the conditions contained in the underwriting agreement including:
•   the obligation to purchase all of the shares offered hereby (other than those shares covered by their option to
purchase additional shares as described below), if any of the shares are purchased;
the representations and warranties made by us to the underwriters are true;
•   the representations and warranties made by us to the underwriters are true;
•   there is no material change in our business the financial markets; and
•   we deliver customary closing documents to the underwriters.
Commissions and Expenses
The following table summarizes the underwriting discounts and commissions we will pay to the underwriters. These
amounts are shown assuming both no exercise and full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional
shares. The underwriting fee is the difference between the initial price to the public and the amount the underwriters
pay us for the shares.
Per share
Total
No Exercise    
$                 
$
Full Exercise 
$               
$
The representatives of the underwriters have advised us that the underwriters propose to offer the shares directly to
the public at the public offering price on the cover of this prospectus and to selected dealers, which may include the
underwriters, at such offering price less a selling concession not in excess of $         per share. After the offering, the
representatives may change the offering price and other selling terms. Sales of shares made outside of the United
States may be made by affiliates of the underwriters.
The expenses of the offering that are payable by us are estimated to be $         (excluding underwriting discounts and
commissions).
Option to Purchase Additional Shares
We have granted the underwriters an option exercisable for 30 days after the date of this prospectus, to purchase,
from time to time, in whole or in part, up to an aggregate of                 shares at the public offering price less
underwriting discounts and commissions. This option may be exercised if the underwriters sell more than
                shares in connection with this offering. To the extent that this option is exercised, each underwriter will be
obligated, subject to certain conditions, to purchase its pro rata portion of these additional shares based on the
underwriter’s underwriting commitment in the offering as indicated in the table at the beginning of this Underwriting
Section.
Table of Contents
Lock-Up Agreements
171
We have agreed that, without the prior written consent of Barclays Capital Inc., we will not directly or indirectly,
(1) offer for sale, sell, pledge or otherwise dispose of (or enter into any transaction or device that is designed to, or
could be expected to, result in the disposition by any person at any time in the future of) any shares (including,
without limitation, shares that may be deemed to be beneficially owned by us in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the SEC and shares that may be issued upon exercise of any options or warrants) or securities
convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for shares or sell or grant options, rights or warrants with respect to
any shares or securities convertible into or exchangeable for shares (other than the sale of the shares to the
underwriters in this offering), (2) enter into any swap or other derivative transaction that transfers to another, in whole
or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of the shares, (3) make any demand for or exercise any
right or file or cause to be filed a registration statement, including any amendments thereto, with respect to the
registration of any shares or securities convertible, exercisable or exchangeable into shares or any of our other
securities (4) publicly disclose the intention to do any of the foregoing for a period of     days after the date of this
prospectus.
The     -day restricted period described in the preceding paragraph will be extended if:
•   during the last 17 days of the     -day restricted period we issue an earnings release or material news or a
material event relating to us occurs; or
•   prior to the expiration of the     -day restricted period, we announce that we will release earnings results during
the 16-day period beginning on the last day of the     -day period, in which case the restrictions described in
the preceding paragraph will continue to apply until the expiration of the 18-day period beginning on the
issuance of the earnings release or the announcement of the material news or occurrence of a material event,
unless such extension is waived in writing by Barclays Capital Inc.
Barclays Capital Inc., in its sole discretion, may release the shares and other securities subject to the lock-up
agreements described above in whole or in part at any time with or without notice. When determining whether or not to
release shares and other securities from lock-up agreements, Barclays Capital Inc. will consider, among other factors,
the holder’s reasons for requesting the release, the number of shares and other securities for which the release is
being requested and market conditions at the time. Barclays Capital Inc. has informed us that it does not presently
intend to release any shares or other securities subject to the lock-up agreements.
Offering Price Determination
Prior to this offering, there has been no public market for the shares. The initial public offering price will be negotiated
between the representatives and us. In determining the initial public offering price of the shares, the representatives
will consider:
•   estimates of distributions to LINN’s unitholders and dividends to our shareholders;
•   the history and prospects for the energy industry;
•   LINN’s financial information;
•   the prevailing securities markets at the time of this offering; and
•   the recent market prices of, and the demand for, publicly traded shares of companies similar to LINN.
Indemnification
We have agreed to indemnify the several underwriters against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the
Securities Act, and to contribute to payments that the underwriters may be required to make for these liabilities.
Table of Contents
172
Stabilization, Short Positions and Penalty Bids
The representatives may engage in stabilizing transactions, short sales and purchases to cover positions created by
short sales, and penalty bids or purchases for the purpose of pegging, fixing or maintaining the price of the shares, in
accordance with Regulation M under the Exchange Act:
•   Stabilizing transactions permit bids to purchase the underlying security so long as the stabilizing bids do not
exceed a specified maximum.
•   A short position involves a sale by the underwriters of shares in excess of the number of shares the
underwriters are obligated to purchase in the offering, which creates the syndicate short position. This short
position may be either a covered short position or a naked short position. In a covered short position, the
number of shares involved in the sales made by the underwriters in excess of the number of shares they are
obligated to purchase is not greater than the number of shares that they may purchase by exercising their
option to purchase additional shares. In a naked short position, the number of shares involved is greater than
the number of shares in their option to purchase additional shares. The underwriters may close out any short
position by either exercising their option to purchase additional shares and/or purchasing shares in the open
market. In determining the source of shares to close out the short position, the underwriters will consider,
among other things, the price of shares available for purchase in the open market as compared to the price at
which they may purchase shares through their option to purchase additional shares. A naked short position is
more likely to be created if the underwriters are concerned that there could be downward pressure on the price
of the shares in the open market after pricing that could adversely affect investors who purchase in the
offering.
•   Syndicate covering transactions involve purchases of the shares in the open market after the distribution has
been completed in order to cover syndicate short positions.
•   Penalty bids permit the representatives to reclaim a selling concession from a syndicate member when the
shares originally sold by the syndicate member are purchased in a stabilizing or syndicate covering
transaction to cover syndicate short positions.
These stabilizing transactions, syndicate covering transactions and penalty bids may have the effect of raising or
maintaining the market price of the shares or preventing or retarding a decline in the market price of the shares. As a
result, the price of the shares may be higher than the price that might otherwise exist in the open market. These
transactions may be effected on the NASDAQ Global Select Market or otherwise and, if commenced, may be
discontinued at any time.
Neither we nor any of the underwriters make any representation or prediction as to the direction or magnitude of any
effect that the transactions described above may have on the price of the shares. In addition, neither we nor any of
the underwriters make any representation that the representatives will engage in these stabilizing transactions or that
any transaction, once commenced, will not be discontinued without notice.
Electronic Distribution
A prospectus in electronic format may be made available on the Internet sites or through other online services
maintained by one or more of the underwriters and/or selling group members participating in this offering, or by their
affiliates. In those cases, prospective investors may view offering terms online and, depending upon the particular
underwriter or selling group member, prospective investors may be allowed to place orders online. The underwriters
may agree with us to allocate a specific number of shares for sale to online brokerage account holders. Any such
allocation for online distributions will be made by the representatives on the same basis as other allocations.
Other than the prospectus in electronic format, the information on any underwriter’s or selling group member’s web
site and any information contained in any other web site maintained by an underwriter or selling group member is not
part of the prospectus or the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, has not been approved
and/or endorsed by us or any underwriter or selling group member in its capacity as underwriter or selling group
member and should not be relied upon by investors.
173
Table of Contents
NASDAQ Global Select Market
We intend to apply to list the shares on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “LNCO.” In connection
with that listing application, the underwriters have undertaken to sell the minimum number of shares to the minimum
number of beneficial owners necessary to meet the NASDAQ Global Select Market listing requirements.
Passive Market Making
In connection with the offering, underwriters and selling group members may engage in passive market making
transactions in LinnCo shares and LINN units on the NASDAQ Global Select Market in accordance with Rule 103 of
Regulation M under the Exchange Act during the period before the commencement of offers or sales of shares and
units and extending through the completion of distribution. A passive market maker must display its bids at a price
not in excess of the highest independent bid of the security. However, if all independent bids are lowered below the
passive market maker’s bid that bid must be lowered when specified purchase limits are exceeded.
Discretionary Sales
The underwriters have informed us that they do not intend to confirm sales to discretionary accounts that exceed 5%
of the total number of shares offered by them.
Stamp Taxes
If you purchase shares offered in this prospectus, you may be required to pay stamp taxes and other charges under
the laws and practices of the country of purchase, in addition to the offering price listed on the cover page of this
prospectus.
Selling Restrictions
European Economic Area
In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus Directive
(each, a “Relevant Member State”) an offer to the public of any shares which are the subject of the offering
contemplated by this Prospectus (the “shares”) may not be made in that Relevant Member State except that an offer
to the public in that Relevant Member State of any shares may be made at any time under the following exemptions
under the Prospectus Directive, if they have been implemented in that Relevant Member State:
(a) to legal entities which are qualified investors as defined under the Prospectus Directive;
(b) by the Underwriters to fewer than 100, or, if the Relevant Member State has implemented the relevant provisions
of the 2010 PD Amending Directive, 150, natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the
Prospectus Directive), as permitted under the Prospectus Directive, subject to obtaining the prior consent of Barclays
Capital Inc. for any such offer; or
(c) in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,
provided that no such offer of shares shall result in a requirement for LinnCo or any Underwriter to publish a
prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 16 of the
Prospectus Directive.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer to the public” in relation to any shares in any Relevant
Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the terms of the
offer and any shares to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase any shares, as the same may be
varied in that Member State by any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in that Member
Table of Contents
174
State, the expression “Prospectus Directive” means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including the
2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented in the Relevant Member State), and includes any relevant
implementing measure in each Relevant Member State and the expression “2010 PD Amending Directive” means
Directive 2010/73/EU.
United Kingdom
This prospectus is only being distributed to, and is only directed at, persons in the United Kingdom that are qualified
investors within the meaning of Article 2(1)(e) of the Prospectus Directive (“Qualified Investors”) that are also (i)
investment professionals falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial
Promotion) Order 2005 (the “Order”) or (ii) high net worth entities, and other persons to whom it may lawfully be
communicated, falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Order (all such persons together being referred to as “relevant
persons”). This prospectus and its contents are confidential and should not be distributed, published or reproduced (in
whole or in part) or disclosed by recipients to any other persons in the United Kingdom. Any person in the United
Kingdom that is not a relevant persons should not act or rely on this document or any of its contents.
Australia
No prospectus or other disclosure document (as defined in the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) of Australia (“Corporations
Act”)) in relation to the shares has been or will be lodged with the Australian Securities & Investments Commission
(“ASIC”). This document has not been lodged with ASIC and is only directed to certain categories of exempt persons.
Accordingly, if you receive this document in Australia:
(a) you confirm and warrant that you are either:
(i)
a “sophisticated investor” under section 708(8)(a) or (b) of the Corporations Act;
(ii)
a “sophisticated investor” under section 708(8)(c) or (d) of the Corporations Act and that you have
provided an accountant’s certificate to us which complies with the requirements of section 708(8)(c)(i)
or (ii) of the Corporations Act and related regulations before the offer has been made;
(iii)
a person associated with the company under section 708(12) of the Corporations Act; or
(iv)
a “professional investor” within the meaning of section 708(11)(a) or (b) of the Corporations Act,
and to the extent that you are unable to confirm or warrant that you are an exempt sophisticated investor, associated
person or professional investor under the Corporations Act any offer made to you under this document is void and
incapable of acceptance; and
(b) you warrant and agree that you will not offer any of the shares for resale in Australia within 12 months of those
shares being issued unless any such resale offer is exempt from the requirement to issue a disclosure document
under section 708 of the Corporations Act.
Hong Kong
The shares may not be offered or sold in Hong Kong, by means of any document, other than (a) to “professional
investors” as defined in the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571, Laws of Hong Kong) and any rules made
under that Ordinance or (b) in other circumstances which do not result in the document being a “prospectus” as
defined in the Companies Ordinance (Cap. 32, Laws of Hong Kong) or which do not constitute an offer to the public
within the meaning of that Ordinance. No advertisement, invitation or document relating to the shares may be issued
or may be in the possession of any person for the purpose of the issue, whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere, which is
directed at, or the contents of which are likely to be read by, the public in Hong Kong (except if permitted to do so
under the laws of Hong Kong) other than with respect to the shares which are intended to be disposed of only to
persons outside Hong Kong or only to “professional investors” as defined in the Securities and Futures Ordinance
(Cap. 571, Laws of Hong Kong) or any rules made under that Ordinance.
Table of Contents
India
175
This prospectus has not been and will not be registered as a prospectus with the Registrar of Companies in India or
with the Securities and Exchange Board of India. This prospectus or any other material relating to these securities is
for information purposes only and may not be circulated or distributed, directly or indirectly, to the public or any
members of the public in India and in any event to not more than 50 persons in India. Further, persons into whose
possession this prospectus comes are required to inform themselves about and to observe any such restrictions.
Each prospective investor is advised to consult its advisors about the particular consequences to it of an investment
in these securities. Each prospective investor is also advised that any investment in these securities by it is subject
to the regulations prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India and the Foreign Exchange Management Act and any
regulations framed thereunder.
Japan
No securities registration statement (“SRS”) has been filed under Article 4, Paragraph 1 of the Financial Instruments
and Exchange Law of Japan (Law No. 25 of 1948, as amended) (“FIEL”) in relation to the shares. The shares are
being offered in a private placement to “qualified institutional investors” (tekikaku-kikan-toshika) under Article 10 of the
Cabinet Office Ordinance concerning Definitions provided in Article 2 of the FIEL (the Ministry of Finance Ordinance
No. 14, as amended) (“QIIs”), under Article 2, Paragraph 3, Item 2 i of the FIEL. Any QII acquiring the shares in this
offer may not transfer or resell those shares except to other QIIs.
Korea
The shares may not be offered, sold and delivered directly or indirectly, or offered or sold to any person for reoffering
or resale, directly or indirectly, in Korea or to any resident of Korea except pursuant to the applicable laws and
regulations of Korea, including the Korea Securities and Exchange Act and the Foreign Exchange Transaction Law
and the decrees and regulations thereunder. The shares have not been registered with the Financial Services
Commission of Korea for public offering in Korea. Furthermore, the shares may not be resold to Korean residents
unless the purchaser of the shares complies with all applicable regulatory requirements (including but not limited to
government approval requirements under the Foreign Exchange Transaction Law and its subordinate decrees and
regulations) in connection with the purchase of the shares.
Singapore
This prospectus has not been registered as a prospectus with the Monetary Authority of Singapore. Accordingly, this
prospectus and any other document or material in connection with the offer or sale, or invitation for subscription or
purchase, of the shares may not be circulated or distributed, nor may the shares be offered or sold, or be made the
subject of an invitation for subscription or purchase, whether directly or indirectly, to persons in Singapore other than
(i) to an institutional investor under Section 274 of the Securities and Future Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore (the
“SFA”), (ii) to a “relevant person” as defined in Section 275(2) of the SFA, or any person pursuant to Section 275 (1A),
and in accordance with the conditions, specified in Section 275 of the SFA or (iii) otherwise pursuant to, and in
accordance with the conditions of, any other applicable provision of the SFA.
Where the shares are subscribed and purchased under Section 275 of the SFA by a relevant person which is:
(a) a corporation (which is not an accredited investor (as defined in Section 4A of the SFA)) the sole business of
which is to hold investments and the entire share capital of which is owned by one or more individuals, each
of whom is an accredited investor; or
(b) a trust (where the trustee is not an accredited investor (as defined in Section 4A of the SFA)) whose sole
whole purpose is to hold investments and each beneficiary is an accredited investor,
176
Table of Contents
shares, debentures and units of shares and debentures of that corporation or the beneficiaries’ rights and interest
(howsoever described) in that trust shall not be transferable within six months after that corporation or that trust has
acquired the shares under Section 275 of the SFA except:
(i)
to an institutional investor under Section 274 of the SFA or to a relevant person (as defined in Section 275(2)
of the SFA) and in accordance with the conditions, specified in Section 275 of the SFA;
(ii)
(in the case of a corporation) where the transfer arises from an offer referred to in Section 275(1A) of the
SFA, or (in the case of a trust) where the transfer arises from an offer that is made on terms that such rights
or interests are acquired at a consideration of not less than S$200,000 (or its equivalent in a foreign
currency) for each transaction, whether such amount is to be paid for in cash or by exchange of securities or
other assets;
(iii) where no consideration is or will be given for the transfer; or
(iv) where the transfer is by operation of law.
By accepting this prospectus, the recipient hereof represents and warrants that he is entitled to receive it in
accordance with the restrictions set forth above and agrees to be bound by limitations contained herein. Any failure to
comply with these limitations may constitute a violation of law.
Dubai International Financial Centre
This prospectus relates to an Exempt Offer in accordance with the Offered Securities Rules of the Dubai Financial
Services Authority (“DFSA”). This prospectus is intended for distribution only to persons of a type specified in the
Offered Securities Rules of the DFSA. It must not be delivered to, or relied on by, any other person. The DFSA has
no responsibility for reviewing or verifying any documents in connection with Exempt Offers. The DFSA has not
approved this prospectus nor taken steps to verify the information set forth herein and has no responsibility for the
prospectus. The securities to which this prospectus relates may be illiquid and/or subject to restrictions on their
resale. Prospective purchasers of the securities offered should conduct their own due diligence on the securities. If
you do not understand the contents of this prospectus you should consult an authorized financial advisor.
FINRA Rules
The underwriters and their respective affiliates are full service financial institutions engaged in various activities,
which may include securities trading, commercial and investment banking, financial advisory, investment
management, investment research, principal investment, hedging, financing and brokerage activities. Certain of the
underwriters and their respective affiliates have, from time to time, performed, and may in the future perform, various
financial advisory and investment banking services for LINN or for us, for which they received or will receive
customary fees and expenses.
In the ordinary course of their various business activities, the underwriters and their respective affiliates may make or
hold a broad array of investments and actively trade debt and equity securities (or related derivative securities) and
financial instruments (including bank loans) for their own account and for the accounts of their customers, and such
investment and securities activities may involve securities and/or instruments of us or LINN. The underwriters and
their respective affiliates may also make investment recommendations and/or publish or express independent
research views in respect of such securities or instruments and may at any time hold, or recommend to clients that
they acquire, long and/or short positions in such securities and instruments.
Affiliates of certain of the underwriters in this offering are lenders under LINN’s Credit Facility and, accordingly, if LINN
elects to use the proceeds it receives from LinnCo to repay debt outstanding under its Credit Facility, those lenders
would indirectly receive a portion of the net proceeds from this offering.
Table of Contents
177
VALIDITY OF THE SHARES
The validity of the shares will be passed upon for us by Baker Botts L.L.P., Houston, Texas. Certain legal matters in
connection with the shares offered hereby will be passed upon for the underwriters by Latham  & Watkins LLP,
Houston, Texas.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Linn Energy, LLC as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, and for each of the
years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2011, and the balance sheet of Linn Co, LLC as of April 30, 2012,
have been included herein and in the registration statement in reliance upon the reports of KPMG LLP, independent
registered public accounting firm, appearing elsewhere herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in
accounting and auditing.
The statement of revenues and direct operating expenses of the assets acquired by Linn Energy, LLC from BP
America Production Company for the year ended December 31, 2011, appearing in this prospectus and registration
statement have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, independent auditors, as set forth in their report thereon
appearing elsewhere herein, and are included in reliance upon such report given on the authority of such firm as
experts in accounting and auditing.
Certain estimates of the proved oil and natural gas reserves of Linn Energy, LLC included or incorporated by reference
herein were based in part upon engineering reports prepared by DeGolyer and MacNaughton, independent petroleum
engineers. These estimates are included or incorporated by reference herein in reliance on the authority of such firm
as an expert in such matters.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission a registration statement on Form S-l regarding the
shares. This prospectus does not contain all of the information found in the registration statement. For further
information regarding us, LINN and the shares offered by this prospectus, you may desire to review the full
registration statement, including its exhibits and schedules, filed under the Securities Act. The registration statement
of which this prospectus forms a part, including its exhibits and schedules, may be inspected and copied at the public
reference room maintained by the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. Copies of the
materials may also be obtained from the SEC at prescribed rates by writing to the public reference room maintained
by the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. You may obtain information on the operation
of the public reference room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330.
The SEC maintains a web site on the Internet at http://www.sec.gov. Our registration statement, of which this
prospectus constitutes a part, can be downloaded from the SEC’s web site and can also be inspected and copied at
the offices of the New York Stock Exchange, Inc., 20 Broad Street, New York, New York 10005.
Upon completion of this offering, we will file with or furnish to the SEC periodic reports and other information. These
reports and other information may be inspected and copied at the public reference facilities maintained by the SEC or
obtained from the SEC’s website as provided above. Our website is located at www.                     .com and will be
activated immediately following this offering. We expect to make available our periodic reports and other information
filed with or furnished to the SEC free of charge through our website, as soon as reasonably practicable after those
reports and other information are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. Information on our website or any
other website is not incorporated by reference herein and does not constitute a part of this prospectus.
We intend to furnish or make available to our unitholders annual reports containing our audited financial statements
and furnish or make available to our unitholders quarterly reports containing our unaudited interim financial information,
including the information required by Form 10-Q, for the first three fiscal quarters of each fiscal year.
Table of Contents
178
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus contains forward-looking statements that are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, many of
which are beyond our control. These statements may include, but are not limited to, statements about Linn Energy,
LLC’s:
•   business strategy;
•   acquisition strategy;
•   financial strategy;
•   drilling locations;
•   oil, gas and natural gas liquid (“NGL”) reserves;
•   realized oil, gas and NGL prices;
•   production volumes;
•   lease operating expenses, general and administrative expenses and development costs;
•   future operating results; and
•   plans, objectives, expectations and intentions.
All of these types of statements, other than statements of historical fact, are forward-looking statements. In some
cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terminology such as “may,” “will,” “could,” “should,” “expect,”
“plan,” “project,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “pursue,” “target,” “continue,” the
negative of such terms or other comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are largely based on our and LINN’s expectations, which
reflect estimates and assumptions made by our respective management. These estimates and assumptions reflect
our and LINN’s best judgment based on currently known market conditions and other factors. Although we believe
such estimates to be reasonable, they are inherently uncertain and involve a number of risks and uncertainties
beyond our control. In addition, management’s assumptions may prove to be inaccurate. We caution that the forward-
looking statements contained in this prospectus are not guarantees of future performance and that such statements
may not be realized or the forward-looking statements or events may not occur. Actual results may differ materially
from those anticipated or implied in forward-looking statements due to factors described in this prospectus or any
prospectus supplement and in the reports and other information we file with the SEC. These forward-looking
statements speak only as of the date made, and other than as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly
update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Table of Contents
179
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
LinnCo, LLC Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Balance Sheet as of April 30, 2012
Notes to Balance Sheet
Linn Energy, LLC Pro Forma Financial Statements
Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statement of Operations for the six months ended June 30, 2012
(Unaudited)
Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2011
(Unaudited)
Notes to Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Statements (Unaudited)
Linn Energy, LLC Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
Consolidated Statements of Unitholders’ Capital for the years ended December  31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Linn Energy, LLC Interim Financial Statements
Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2012 (Unaudited) and December 31, 2011
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations for the three months and six months ended June 30,
2012 and June 30, 2011 (Unaudited)
Condensed Consolidated Statement of Unitholders’ Capital for the six months ended June 30, 2012
(Unaudited)
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2012 and June 30,
2011 (Unaudited)
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited)
Linn Energy, LLC Statements of Revenues and Direct Operating Expenses of the Assets Acquired
from BP America Production Company
Report of Independent Auditors
Statements of Revenues and Direct Operating Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2011 (Audited)
and the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011 (Unaudited)
Notes to Statements of Revenues and Direct Operating Expenses
F-2  
  F-3  
  F-4
F-5
F-6  
  F-7
F-14  
 F-15  
 F-16  
 F-17  
 F-18  
 F-19
F-58
F-59
F-60
F-61  
 F-62
F-80
F-81  
 F-82
Table of Contents
F-1
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Shareholder
Linn Co, LLC
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Linn Co, LLC as of April 30, 2012. This financial statement is
the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on this financial
statement based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
balance sheet is free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in that balance sheet. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall balance sheet presentation. We believe
that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the balance sheet referred to above presents fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Linn Co, LLC as of April 30, 2012, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
/s/ KPMG LLP
F-2
LINN CO, LLC
BALANCE SHEET
April 30, 2012
Houston, Texas
May 10, 2012
Table of Contents
ASSETS
Cash
Total assets
EQUITY
Voting shares; unlimited shares authorized; 1 share issued and outstanding
Shares; unlimited shares authorized; 0 shares issued
Total equity
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this financial statement.
F-3
Linn Co, LLC
Notes to Balance Sheet
Note 1—Formation and Ownership
$          1,000  
  
   
 
1,000  
   $
 
   
  
  
1,000  
—    
 
1,000
$
 
  
  
   
   $
Linn Co, LLC (“LinnCo”) is a Delaware limited liability company formed on April 30, 2012, under the Delaware Limited
Liability Company Act. Linn Energy, LLC (“LINN”), an independent oil and natural gas company traded on the
NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “LINE,” owns LinnCo’s sole voting share.
Note 2—Capitalization
LinnCo’s authorized capital structure consists of two classes of interests: (1) shares with limited voting rights and (2)
voting shares, 100% of which are currently held by LINN. At May 10, 2012, LinnCo’s issued capitalization consisted
of $1,000 contributed by LINN in connection with LinnCo’s formation and in exchange for its voting share. Additional
classes of equity interests may be approved by the board of directors and the holders of a majority of the common
shares and the voting share(s), voting as separate classes.
LinnCo expects to issue shares for cash to the public as discussed in Note 3, using all of the net proceeds to
purchase a number of units from LINN equal to the number of LinnCo shares issued and sold. LinnCo’s governing
documents require it to maintain a one-to-one ratio between the number of LinnCo shares outstanding and the number
of LINN units it owns. When LINN makes distributions on its units, LinnCo will pay a dividend on its shares of the
cash LinnCo receives in respect of its LINN units, net of reserves for income taxes payable by LinnCo.
Note 3—Business
LinnCo proposes to file a registration statement with respect to an initial public offering of shares. At no time after
LinnCo’s formation and prior to the public offering has LinnCo had or does it expect to have any operations or own any
interest in LINN. After the public offering, LinnCo’s sole purpose is to own LINN units and it expects to have no assets
or operations other than those related to its interest in LINN.
LINN has agreed to pay, on LinnCo’s behalf, any legal, accounting, tax advisory, financial advisory and engineering
fees, printing costs or other administrative and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by LinnCo, along with any other
expenses incurred in connection with the public offering of shares or incurred as a result of being a publicly traded
entity, including costs associated with annual, quarterly and other reports to holders of LinnCo shares, tax return and
Form 1099 preparation and distribution, NASDAQ listing fees, independent auditor fees and registrar and transfer
agent fees. In addition, LINN will also agree to indemnify LinnCo for damages suffered or costs incurred (other than
income taxes payable by LinnCo) in connection with carrying out LinnCo’s activities.
Note 4—Income Tax
LinnCo is a limited liability company that has elected to be treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes.
Table of Contents
F-4
LINN ENERGY, LLC
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
Six Months Ended June 30, 2012
Revenues and other:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales
Gains on oil and natural gas derivatives
Marketing revenues
LINN
Energy
Historical
BP
Hugoton
Historical
Pro Forma
Adjustments
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
$ 696,122   
441,678
$56,882    
  —
$
—    
—
LINN
Energy
Pro Forma
$ 753,004  
441,678
Marketing revenues
Other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses
Exploration costs
Bad debt expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Taxes, other than income taxes
Losses on sale of assets and other, net
Other income and (expenses):
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
Other, net
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income
Net income per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average units outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
12,131   
4,756   
   
   
  1,154,687   
   
   
 
141,765   
32,377   
7,150   
84,506   
817   
(22)  
260,782   
 
146,499   
55,851   
1,514   
   
731,239   
   
 
(171,909)  
 
 
(11,225)  
   
   
 
(183,134)  
   
   
 
240,314   
 
(9,430)  
   
   
$ 230,884   
   
   
 
1.17   
   
1.16   
   
 
195,382   
   
196,039
$
   
$
—      
  —      
   
    
  56,882    
    
   
  
  20,129    
  —      
  6,188    
  —      
  —      
  —      
  —      
  
  —      
  4,995    
  —      
   
    
  31,312    
    
   
  
  —      
  
  —      
   
    
  —      
   
    
  25,570    
  —      
   
    
$25,570
$ (36,035)
—    
—
12,131  
4,756
—
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—
1,211,569
146,499  
60,846  
1,514  
 
779,199
161,894  
32,377  
13,338  
84,506  
817  
(22) 
277,430
16,306(a)   
342(b)   
—    
 
 
—    
 
 
—    
 
 
     
 
16,648  
 
 
     
 
 
(18,436)(c)  
(951)(d)  
—    
 
(11,225) 
 
     
 
 
(19,387) 
 
(202,521) 
 
     
 
 
 
(36,035) 
229,849  
 
 
—  (e)   
(9,430) 
     
 
  $ 220,419  
     
 
 
  $
     
  $
195,382  
 
196,039
1.11  
 
1.11
(191,296)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these pro forma condensed combined statements of operations.
Table of Contents
F-5
LINN ENERGY, LLC
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2011
Revenues and other:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids
sales
  
Gains on oil and natural gas derivatives   
Marketing revenues
  
Other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses
Exploration costs
Bad debt expenses
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Taxes, other than income taxes
  
Losses on sale of assets and other, net
Other income and (expenses):
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Interest expense, net of amounts
capitalized
Income before income taxes
Income tax expense
Weighted average units outstanding:   
Basic
Net income per unit:
Basic
Net income
Other, net
Diluted
Diluted
LINN
Energy
Historical
$1,162,037   
449,940   
 
5,868   
 
 
4,609   
   
   
  1,622,454   
   
   
 
232,619   
28,358   
3,681   
133,272   
2,390   
(22)
334,084   
 
78,522   
3,516   
   
816,420   
   
 
(94,612)
(259,725)  
 
 
(7,792)  
   
   
 
(362,129)  
   
   
 
443,905   
 
(5,466)  
   
   
$ 438,439   
   
   
 
2.52   
   
2.51   
   
 
172,004   
   
172,729
$
   
$
BP
2011
Hugoton
Historical
Acquisitions
Historical
Pro Forma
Adjustments
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
LINN
Energy
Pro Forma
$290,240    
—      
 
—      
 
 
—      
   
    
  290,240    
   
    
  
  80,493    
 
—      
  37,675    
 
—      
—      
 
 
—
—      
  
  22,997    
 
—      
   
    
  141,165    
   
    
  
—
—      
  
—      
 
    
   
—      
 
   
    
  149,075    
 
—      
   
    
$149,075
$ 197,424    
—      
 
—      
 
 
—      
   
    
  197,424    
   
    
  
36,725    
—      
—      
—      
—      
—
—      
  
12,750    
—      
    
49,475    
    
  
—
—      
  
—      
 
    
   
—      
 
   
    
  147,949    
 
—      
   
    
$ 147,949
$
—    
—    
—    
—    
 
—
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—
$1,649,701  
 
449,940  
 
 
5,868  
 
 
4,609  
 
 
     
  2,110,118
349,837  
28,358  
41,356  
133,272  
2,390  
(22)
436,786
114,269  
3,516  
 
  1,109,762
100,618(a)   
2,084(b)   
 
 
—    
 
 
 
—    
 
 
   
     
 
  102,702
—
(94,612)
(359,547)
—    
 
 
   
(99,822) 
 
   
 
  (202,524) 
 
   
 
$ (202,524)
(95,226)(c)  
(4,596)(d)  
 
(7,792) 
 
     
 
 
(461,951) 
 
     
 
 
538,405  
 
—  (e)   
 
(5,466) 
     
 
  $ 532,939  
     
 
 
  $
     
  $
173,728  
 
174,453
3.04  
 
3.03
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these pro forma condensed combined statements of operations.
F-6
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Note 1—Basis of Presentation
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2012, is
derived from:
•   the historical consolidated financial statements of LINN Energy; and
•   the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of certain oil and natural gas properties
acquired from BP America Production Company (“BP” and the properties, the “BP Hugoton Properties”).
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2011, is
derived from:
•   the historical consolidated financial statements of LINN Energy;
•   the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of certain oil and natural gas properties
acquired from BP;
•   the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of certain oil and natural gas properties
acquired from Plains Exploration & Production Company (“Plains” and the properties, the “Plains Properties”);
•   the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of certain oil and natural gas properties
acquired from Panther Energy Company, LLC and Red Willow Mid-Continent, LLC (collectively referred to as
“Panther” and the properties, the “Panther Properties”);
•   the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of certain oil and natural gas properties
acquired from SandRidge Exploration and Production, LLC (“SandRidge” and the properties, the “SandRidge
Properties”); and
•   the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of certain oil and natural gas properties
acquired from an affiliate of Concho Resources Inc. (“Concho” and the properties, the “Concho Properties” and
together with the Plains Properties, Panther Properties and the SandRidge Properties, the “2011 Acquisitions
Properties”).
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations give effect to the acquisition from BP as if it
had been completed as of January 1, 2011, and the acquisitions from Plains, Panther, SandRidge and Concho as if
they had been completed as of January 1, 2010. The transactions and the related adjustments are described in the
accompanying notes. In the opinion of Company management, all adjustments have been made that are necessary to
present fairly, in accordance with Regulation S-X, the pro forma condensed combined statements of operations.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations are presented for illustrative purposes only,
and do not purport to be indicative of the results of operations that would actually have occurred if the transactions
described had occurred as presented in such statements or that may be obtained in the future. In addition, future
results may vary significantly from those reflected in such statements due to factors described in “Risk Factors”
included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, and elsewhere in the
Company’s reports and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations should be read in conjunction with the
Company’s historical consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in its Annual Report on
Table of Contents
F-7
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS—Continued
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011. The pro forma statements should also be read in conjunction with
the historical statements of revenues and direct operating expenses for the BP Hugoton Properties and the notes
thereto filed elsewhere in this prospectus.
Note 2—Acquisition Dates
The results of operations of the BP Hugoton Properties and the 2011 Acquisitions Properties have been included in
the historical financial statements of the Company since their acquisition dates.
The acquisition of BP Hugoton Properties was completed on March 30, 2012, with an effective date of January 1,
2012, for total consideration of approximately $1.17 billion.
The acquisition of Plains Properties was completed on December 15, 2011, with an effective date of November 1,
2011, for total consideration of approximately $555 million.
The acquisition of Panther Properties was completed on June 1, 2011, with an effective date of January 1, 2011, for
total consideration of approximately $223 million.
The acquisition of SandRidge Properties was completed on April 1, 2011, with the same effective date, for total
consideration of approximately $201 million.
The acquisition of Concho Properties was completed on March 31, 2011, with an effective date of March 1, 2011, for
total consideration of approximately $194 million.
Note 3—Preliminary Acquisition Accounting
The acquisitions are accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting. Accordingly, the Company conducts
assessments of net assets acquired and recognizes amounts for identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed
at their estimated acquisition date fair values, while transaction and integration costs associated with the acquisitions
are expensed as incurred. The initial accounting for the acquisition of the BP Hugoton Properties is not complete and
adjustments to estimated amounts, or recognition of additional assets acquired or liabilities assumed, may occur as
more detailed analyses are completed and additional information is obtained about the facts and circumstances that
existed as of the acquisition date.
Table of Contents
F-8
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS—Continued
The following presents the values assigned to the net assets acquired from BP as of the acquisition date (in
thousands):
Assets:
Current
Noncurrent
Oil and natural gas properties
Total assets acquired
Liabilities:
Current
Asset retirement obligations
Total liabilities assumed
Net assets acquired
7,154  
$
207,735  
 
988,317  
 
   
 
$1,203,206
8,823  
$
27,418  
 
 
   
36,241  
$
   
 
$1,166,965
Current assets include receivables and noncurrent assets include other property and equipment. Current liabilities
include payables, ad valorem taxes payable and environmental liabilities.
The fair value measurements of assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on inputs that are not observable
in the market and therefore represent Level 3 inputs. The fair value of oil and natural gas properties and asset
retirement obligations were measured using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted
amount. Significant inputs to the valuation of oil and natural gas properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future
operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity prices; (iv) estimated future cash flows; and (v) a market-
based weighted average cost of capital rate. These inputs require significant judgments and estimates by the
Company’s management at the time of the valuation and are the most sensitive and subject to change.
Note 4—Pro Forma Adjustments
The Company’s historical results of operations include the results of properties acquired since the acquisition dates.
The pro forma statements of operations include adjustments to reflect the acquisition from BP as if it had been
completed as of January 1, 2011, and the acquisitions from Plains, Panther, SandRidge and Concho as if they had
been completed as of January 1, 2010. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations have
been adjusted to:
(a)
record incremental depreciation, depletion and amortization expense, using the units-of-production method,
related to oil and natural gas properties acquired as follows:
•   for the period from January 1 through March 30, 2012, and for the year ended December 31, 2011, $16 million
and $65 million, respectively, related to the BP Hugoton Properties
•   for the period from January 1 through December 15, 2011, $23 million related to the Plains Properties
•   for the period from January 1 through June 1, 2011, $7 million related to the Panther Properties
•   for the period from January 1 through April 1, 2011, $2 million related to the SandRidge Properties
•   for the period from January 1 through March 31, 2011, $3 million related to the Concho Properties
F-9
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS—Continued
Table of Contents
(b)
record accretion expense related to asset retirement obligations on oil and natural gas properties acquired as
follows:
•   for the period from January 1 through March 30, 2012, and for the year ended December 31, 2011, $342,000
and $1 million, respectively, related to the BP Hugoton Properties
for the period from January 1 through December 15, 2011, $520,000 related to the Plains Properties
for the period from January 1 through December 15, 2011, $520,000 related to the Plains Properties
•
•   for the period from January 1 through June 1, 2011, $26,000 related to the Panther Properties
•   for the period from January 1 through April 1, 2011, $128,000 related to the SandRidge Properties
•   for the period from January 1 through March 31, 2011, $3,000 related to the Concho Properties
(c)
record interest expense as follows:
•   incremental debt of approximately $1.17 billion incurred to fund the estimated closing price for the BP Hugoton
Properties; the assumed interest rate was 6.25%
•   incremental debt of approximately $544 million incurred to fund the purchase price of the Plains Properties;
the assumed interest rate was 2.9%
•   incremental debt of approximately $223 million incurred to fund the purchase price of the Panther Properties;
the assumed interest rate was 6.5%
A 1/8 percentage change in the assumed interest rate would result in an adjustment to pro forma net income (loss) as
follows:
(d)
BP Hugoton Properties
Plains Properties
Panther Properties
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2012
(in thousands)
$
 
 
   
$
369   
—     
—     
   
369
$
 
 
   
$
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
1,475  
688  
141  
 
2,304
record incremental amortization of deferred financing fees associated with debt incurred to fund the purchase
price of the BP Hugoton Properties and the Panther Properties
(e) The Company is treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes. The Company subsidiaries
that acquired the Properties are also treated as partnerships for federal and state income tax purposes.
Accordingly, no recognition has been given to federal and state income taxes in the accompanying unaudited pro
forma condensed combined statements of operations.
The pro forma statements of operations also include an adjustment to the weighted average units outstanding to
reflect units issued to fund the purchase price of the SandRidge Properties and the Concho Properties.
Table of Contents
F-10
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS—Continued
Note 5—Supplemental Oil and Natural Gas Reserve Information
The following tables set forth certain unaudited pro forma information concerning LINN Energy’s proved oil, natural gas
and natural gas liquids (“NGL”) reserves for the year ended December 31, 2011, giving effect to the Properties
acquired from BP as if they had occurred on January 1, 2011. There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating
the quantities of proved reserves and projecting future rates of production and timing of development costs. The
following reserve data represent estimates only and should not be construed as being precise.
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Purchase of minerals in place
Extension and discoveries
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:
Year Ended December 31, 2011
BP
LINN
Energy
Historical
Hugoton
Historical   
Natural Gas (Bcf)
 
 
 
472   
  1,233   
 
 
(71)  
7   
  —     
337   
 
  —     
240   
 
 
(64)  
 
(29)  
   
   
  
   
450   
 
  1,675   
  
   
   
   
 
 
472   
805   
450   
998   
 
 
428   
  —     
  —     
677
LINN
Energy
Pro
Forma
1,705  
 
(64) 
  337  
  240  
 
(93) 
  
 
 2,125
1,277  
 1,448
428  
  677
Year Ended December 31, 2011
LINN
Energy
Historical
BP
Hugoton
Historical
Oil and NGL (MMBbls)
LINN
Energy
Pro
Forma
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Purchase of minerals in place
Extension and discoveries
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
227.3   
(8.3)  
 
40.3   
 
 
34.9   
(11.7)  
 
  
   
  282.5   
   
  
 
  142.9   
  172.6   
 
 
84.4   
  109.9
46.7   
 
 
0.8   
  —     
  —     
(3.1)  
 
   
  
 
44.4   
   
  
 
46.7   
44.4   
 
  —     
  —
274.0  
 
(7.5) 
  40.3  
  34.9  
  (14.8) 
  
 
 326.9
189.6  
 217.0
84.4  
 109.9
F-11
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS—Continued
Table of Contents
Proved developed and undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Purchase of minerals in place
Extension and discoveries
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Year Ended December 31, 2011
LINN
Energy
Historical
2,597   
(121)  
 
 
579   
450   
 
(135)  
 
  
   
  3,370   
   
  
 
  1,662   
  2,034   
 
 
935   
  1,336
BP
Hugoton
Historical
Total (Bcfe)
752   
 
 
13   
  —     
  —     
(48)  
 
   
   
 
717   
   
   
 
752   
717   
 
  —     
  —
LINN
Energy
Pro
Forma
3,349  
  (108) 
  579  
  450  
  (183) 
  
 
 4,087
2,414  
 2,751
935  
 1,336
Summarized in the following table is information for the standardized measure of discounted cash flows relating to
proved reserves as of December 31, 2011, giving effect to the BP Hugoton Properties. There are no future income tax
expenses because the Company is not subject to federal income taxes. Limited liability companies are subject to
state income taxes in Texas; however, these amounts are immaterial. The standardized measure of discounted future
net cash flows does not purport to be, nor should it be interpreted to present, the fair value of the oil and natural gas
reserves of the properties. An estimate of fair value would also take into account, among other things, the recovery of
reserves not presently classified as proved, the value of unproved properties, and consideration of expected future
economic and operating conditions. For a discussion of the assumptions used in preparing the information presented,
refer to the Company’s financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2011, as well as to the historical
statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of the BP Hugoton Properties included elsewhere in this
prospectus.
LINN Energy
December 31, 2011
BP
Hugoton
Historical
LINN Energy
Pro Forma
Future estimated revenues
Future estimated production costs
Future estimated development costs
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated
timing of cash flows
Historical
(in thousands)
$ 29,319,369    $ 3,892,894    $ 33,212,263  
 
  (11,205,230) 
  
 
 
(2,883,250) 
  
   
 
      
  19,123,783
(9,464,319)  
(2,848,497)  
   
  17,006,553
(1,740,911)  
 
(34,753)  
   
   
  2,117,230
(10,391,693)
(1,138,761)
(11,530,454)
Standardized measure of discounted
future net cash flows
Representative NYMEX prices: (1)
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
$ 6,614,860    $
   
      
  
   $
   $
4.12   
95.84
978,469    $ 7,593,329
(1)
In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves at December 31, 2011, were estimated using the average price
during the 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month price for
F-12
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS—Continued
each month, unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future
conditions. The price used to estimate reserves is held constant over the life of the reserves.
The following table summarizes the principal sources of change in the standardized measure of discounted future net
cash flows:
Year Ended December 31, 2011
LINN
Energy
BP
Hugoton
LINN
Energy
Sales and transfers of oil, natural gas and
NGL produced during the period
Changes in estimated future development
costs
Net change in sales and transfer prices and
production costs related to future production  
Purchase of minerals in place
  
Extensions, discoveries, and improved
recovery
Previously estimated development costs
incurred during the period
Net change due to revisions in quantity
estimates
Accretion of discount
Changes in production rates and other
Historical
Historical    
(in thousands)
Pro Forma
$ (822,602)   $(149,075)   $ (971,677)
27,236
784,308   
  1,452,169
552,704
306,827
(59)
27,177
94,698   
—
879,006  
  1,452,169
—
—
552,704
306,827
(292,343)  
422,353   
(39,324)
19,811   
  106,219   
  (155,318)
(272,532) 
 
  
528,572  
 
  
(194,642) 
 
  
      
 
   $2,391,328    $ (83,724)   $2,307,604
It is necessary to emphasize that the data presented should not be viewed as representing the expected cash flow
from, or current value of, existing proved reserves since the computations are based on a large number of estimates
and arbitrary assumptions. Reserve quantities cannot be measured with precision and their estimation requires many
judgmental determinations and frequent revisions. The required projection of production and related expenditures over
time requires further estimates with respect to pipeline availability, rates of demand and governmental control. Actual
future prices and costs are likely to be substantially different from the current prices and costs utilized in the
computation of reported amounts. Any analysis or evaluation of the reported amounts should give specific recognition
to the computational methods utilized and the limitations inherent therein.
Table of Contents
F-13
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
The Board of Directors and Unitholders
Linn Energy, LLC:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Linn Energy, LLC and subsidiaries as of
December 31, 2011 and 2010, and the related consolidated statements of operations, unitholders’ capital, and cash
flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2011. These consolidated financial
statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of Linn Energy, LLC and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2011, in conformity
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States), Linn Energy, LLC’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2011, based on criteria
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission (COSO), and our report dated February 23, 2012, expressed an unqualified opinion on the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Houston, Texas
February 23, 2012, except for Note 16, as to which the date is May 8, 2012
/s/ KPMG LLP
F-14
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
December 31,
2011
2010
(in thousands,
except unit amounts)
Table of Contents
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable—trade, net
Derivative instruments
Other current assets
Total current assets
Noncurrent assets:
Oil and natural gas properties (successful efforts method)
Less accumulated depletion and amortization
Other property and equipment
Less accumulated depreciation
Derivative instruments
Other noncurrent assets
Total noncurrent assets
Total assets
$ 236,001  
184,624  
 
234,675  
 
55,609  
 
   
 
710,909
5,664,503  
(719,035) 
 
   
 
  4,945,468
139,903  
(35,151) 
 
104,752
56,895  
 
115,124  
 
 
   
172,019  
 
   
 
  5,222,239
$
1,114   
284,565   
255,063   
80,734   
   
621,476   
   
 
  7,835,650   
  (1,033,617)  
   
   
  6,802,033
197,235   
(48,024)  
   
149,211
321,840   
 
105,577   
 
   
   
427,417   
 
   
   
  7,378,661
Total assets
LIABILITIES AND UNITHOLDERS’ CAPITAL
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable and accrued expenses
Derivative instruments
Other accrued liabilities
Total current liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities:
Credit facility
Senior notes, net
Derivative instruments
Other noncurrent liabilities
Total noncurrent liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Note 11)
Unitholders’ capital:
177,364,558 units and 159,009,795 units issued and outstanding at December 31,
2011, and December 31, 2010, respectively
Accumulated income
Total liabilities and unitholders’ capital
$ 8,000,137
$5,933,148
$
403,450   
14,060   
75,898   
   
493,408   
   
 
 
940,000   
  3,053,657   
3,503   
 
 
80,659   
   
   
  4,077,819
2,751,354   
  
677,556   
 
  
   
   
  
  3,428,910   
  
  
   
   
   $ 8,000,137
$ 219,830  
12,839  
 
 
82,439  
   
 
315,108
—    
  2,742,902  
39,797  
 
 
47,125  
   
 
  2,829,824
2,549,099  
239,117  
 
   
 
  2,788,216  
   
 
$5,933,148
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
F-15
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues and other:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives
Marketing revenues
Other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses
Year Ended December 31,
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
2011                2010                2009       
 
 
 
  $ 1,162,037    $
449,940     
   
5,868     
   
   
4,609     
   
     
    1,622,454     
   
     
 
 
   
232,619     
28,358
690,054    $
75,211     
3,966     
3,049     
     
772,280     
     
 
158,382     
19,594
408,219  
(141,374) 
4,380  
1,924  
 
273,149
132,647  
18,202
3,681
2,716
2,154
General and administrative expenses
Exploration costs
Bad debt expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Taxes, other than income taxes
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net
Other income and (expenses):
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
Losses on interest rate swaps
Other, net
Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
Income tax benefit (expense)
Income (loss) from continuing operations
Discontinued operations:
Losses on sale of assets, net of taxes
Loss from discontinued operations, net of taxes
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per unit—continuing operations:
Basic
Diluted
Loss per unit—discontinued operations:
Basic
Diluted
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average units outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
Distributions declared per unit
$
   
 
  $
   
  $
   
 
  $
   
  $
   
 
  $
   
  $
   
 
   
   
   
   
  $
133,272
99,078
86,134
2,390     
(22)    
334,084     
—       
78,522     
3,516     
     
816,420     
     
 
(94,612)    
(259,725)    
—       
(7,792)    
     
(362,129)    
     
443,905     
(5,466)    
     
438,439     
 
—       
—       
     
—       
438,439    $
5,168     
(46)    
238,532     
38,600     
45,182     
6,536     
     
613,742     
     
 
—       
(193,510)    
(67,908)    
(7,167)    
     
(268,585)    
     
(110,047)    
(4,241)    
     
(114,288)    
 
—       
—       
     
—       
(114,288)   $
7,169  
401  
201,782  
—    
27,605  
(24,598) 
 
451,496
—    
(92,701) 
(26,353) 
(2,661) 
 
(121,715) 
 
(300,062) 
4,221  
 
(295,841)
(158) 
(2,193) 
 
(2,351) 
(298,192)
2.52    $
     
2.51    $
—      $
     
—      $
(0.80)   $
     
(0.80)   $
—      $
     
—      $
2.52    $
     
2.51    $
     
 
172,004     
     
172,729     
     
2.70    $
(0.80)   $
     
(0.80)   $
     
 
142,535     
     
142,535     
     
2.55    $
(2.48) 
 
(2.48)
(0.02) 
 
(0.02)
(2.50) 
 
(2.50)
119,307  
 
119,307  
 
2.52
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
F-16
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF UNITHOLDERS’ CAPITAL
Total
Unitholders’
Capital
$2,760,686
279,299  
494  
—    
(2,696) 
(303,316) 
15,089
63
577  
 
(298,192) 
 
   
 
  2,452,004
809,774  
4,418  
—    
(11,832) 
(365,711) 
13,792
59  
 
(114,288) 
   
 
  2,788,216
651,522  
7,446  
—    
(17,352) 
(466,488) 
22,243
79
December 31, 2008
Sale of units, net of underwriting discounts
and expenses of $12,369
Issuance of units
Cancellation of units
Purchase of units
Distributions to unitholders
Unit-based compensation expenses
Reclassification of distributions paid on
forfeited restricted units
Excess tax benefit from unit-based
compensation
Net loss
December 31, 2009
Sale of units, net of underwriting discounts
and expenses of $34,556
Issuance of units
Cancellation of units
Purchase of units
Distributions to unitholders
Unit-based compensation expenses
Reclassification of distributions paid on
forfeited restricted units
Net loss
December 31, 2010
Sale of units, net of underwriting discounts
and expenses of $27,427
Issuance of units
Cancellation of units
Purchase of units
Distributions to unitholders
Unit-based compensation expenses
Reclassification of distributions paid on
forfeited restricted units
Excess tax benefit from unit-based
compensation
Net income
December 31, 2011
14,950   
1,098   
 
 
(187)
129,941
28,750   
 
815   
(496)
159,010
17,514   
1,371   
 
(530)
Accumulated
Unitholders’
Units
Capital
Income
(Deficit)
114,080
$2,109,089
(in thousands)
$ 651,597
Treasury
Units
(at Cost)
279,299   
494   
(2,696)  
—     
(303,316)  
15,089
63
$ —
—     
  —     
 
2,696   
 
(2,696)  
  —     
  —
—     
—     
—     
—     
—     
—
—
—
577   
 
—     
 
   
   
  2,098,599
—     
(298,192)  
   
353,405
809,774   
4,418   
(11,832)  
—     
(365,711)  
13,792
—     
—     
—     
—     
—     
—
59   
 
—     
   
   
  2,549,099
—     
(114,288)  
   
239,117
651,522   
7,446   
(17,352)  
—     
(466,488)  
22,243
79
—     
—     
—     
—     
—     
—
—     
  —     
   
   
  —
—     
  —     
  11,832   
  (11,832)  
  —     
  —
—     
  —     
   
   
  —
—     
  —     
  17,352   
  (17,352)  
  —     
  —
—
—
177,365
4,805   
 
—     
   
   
$2,751,354
—     
 
438,439   
   
   
$ 677,556
—     
  —     
   
   
$ —
4,805  
 
438,439  
   
 
$3,428,910
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-17
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash flow from operating activities:
Net income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by
operating activities:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Unit-based compensation expenses
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Amortization and write-off of deferred financing fees and other
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net
Deferred income tax
Mark-to-market on derivatives:
Total (gains) losses
Cash settlements
Cash settlements on canceled derivatives
Premiums paid for derivatives
Changes in assets and liabilities:
(Increase) decrease in accounts receivable—trade, net
(Increase) decrease in other assets
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued expenses
Increase (decrease) in other liabilities
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash flow from investing activities:
Acquisition of oil and natural gas properties, net of cash acquired
Development of oil and natural gas properties
Purchases of other property and equipment
Proceeds from sale of properties and equipment and other
Net cash used in investing activities
Cash flow from financing activities:
Proceeds from sale of units
Proceeds from borrowings
Repayments of debt
Distributions to unitholders
Financing fees, offering expenses and other, net
Excess tax benefit from unit-based compensation
Purchase of units
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents:
Beginning
2011
Year Ended December 31,
2010
(in thousands)
2009
438,439
$
$ (114,288)
$(298,192)
334,084   
—     
22,243   
94,612   
23,828   
(281)  
310   
 
(449,940)  
237,134   
26,752   
(134,352)  
 
(120,055)  
(2,951)  
58,216   
(9,333)  
   
518,706   
   
 
  (1,500,193)  
 
(574,635)  
(55,229)  
 
(303)  
 
   
   
  (2,130,360)  
   
   
 
 
678,949   
  2,534,240   
  (1,301,029)  
(466,488)  
 
 
(56,358)  
4,805   
 
(17,352)  
 
   
   
  1,376,767   
   
   
(234,887)  
 
 
236,001
238,532   
38,600   
13,792   
—     
27,014   
1,718   
3,088   
 
(7,303)  
302,875   
(123,865)  
(120,376)  
 
(66,283)  
2,926   
25,457   
49,031   
   
270,918   
   
 
  (1,351,033)  
 
(204,832)  
(18,181)  
 
(7,362)  
 
   
   
  (1,581,408)  
   
   
 
 
844,330   
  3,300,816   
  (2,150,000)  
(365,711)  
 
 
(93,343)  
—     
 
(11,832)  
 
   
   
  1,524,260   
   
   
213,770   
 
 
22,231
201,782  
—    
 
15,089  
 
—    
 
 
21,824  
(22,842) 
 
 
(6,436)
167,727  
  362,936  
48,977  
 
 
(93,606)
29,117  
 
(3,051) 
 
(4,675) 
 
8,154  
 
   
 
  426,804
(130,735) 
  (170,458) 
(7,784) 
 
26,704  
 
   
 
  (282,273)
291,668  
  639,203  
  (704,893) 
  (303,316) 
 
(71,511) 
577  
 
(2,696) 
 
   
 
  (150,968) 
   
 
(6,437)
28,668
$
1,114
$
236,001
$ 22,231
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Ending
F-18
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1—Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies
Nature of Business
Linn Energy, LLC (“LINN Energy” or the “Company”) is an independent oil and natural gas company that began
operations in March 2003 and was formed as a Delaware limited liability company in April 2005. The Company
completed its initial public offering (“IPO”) in January 2006 and its units representing limited liability company interests
(“units”) are listed on The NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “LINE.” LINN Energy’s mission is to
acquire, develop and maximize cash flow from a growing portfolio of long-life oil and natural gas assets. The
Company’s properties are located in the United States (“U.S.”), primarily in the Mid-Continent, the Permian Basin,
Michigan, California and the Williston Basin.
The operations of the Company are governed by the provisions of a limited liability company agreement executed by
and among its members. The agreement includes specific provisions with respect to the maintenance of the capital
accounts of each of the Company’s unitholders. Pursuant to applicable provisions of the Delaware Limited Liability
Company Act (the “Delaware Act”) and the Third Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Linn
Energy, LLC (the “Agreement”), unitholders have no liability for the debts, obligations and liabilities of the Company,
except as expressly required in the Agreement or the Delaware Act. The Company will remain in existence unless and
until dissolved in accordance with the terms of the Agreement.
Principles of Consolidation and Reporting
The Company presents its financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles
(“GAAP”). The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned
subsidiaries. All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated upon consolidation.
Investments in noncontrolled entities over which the Company exercises significant influence are accounted for under
the equity method. Subsequent events were evaluated through the issuance date of the financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements for previous periods include certain reclassifications that were made to conform
to current presentation. Such reclassifications have no impact on previously reported net income (loss) or unitholders’
capital.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations in 2009 primarily represent activity related to post-closing adjustments associated with the
Company’s Appalachian Basin and Mid Atlantic Well Service, Inc. operations disposed of in 2008.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the accompanying consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires
management of the Company to make estimates and assumptions about future events. These estimates and the
underlying assumptions affect the amount of assets and liabilities reported, disclosures about contingent assets and
liabilities, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses. The estimates that are particularly significant to the
financial statements include estimates of the Company’s reserves of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids (“NGL”),
future cash flows from oil and natural gas properties, depreciation, depletion and amortization, asset retirement
obligations, fair values of commodity and interest rate derivatives, if any, and fair values of assets acquired and
liabilities assumed. As fair value is a market-based measurement, it is determined based on the assumptions that
market participants would use. These estimates and assumptions are based on management’s
Table of Contents
F-19
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
best estimates and judgment. Management evaluates its estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using
historical experience and other factors, including the current economic environment, which management believes to
be reasonable under the circumstances. Such estimates and assumptions are adjusted when facts and
circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could
differ from these estimates. Any changes in estimates resulting from continuous changes in the economic
environment will be reflected in the financial statements in future periods.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted
In December 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an Accounting Standards Update
(“ASU”) that requires an entity to disclose information about offsetting and related arrangements to enable users of its
financial statements to understand the effect of those arrangements on its financial position. The ASU requires
disclosure of both gross information and net information about both instruments and transactions eligible for offset in
the statement of financial position and instruments and transactions subject to an agreement similar to a master
netting arrangement. The ASU will be applied retrospectively and is effective for periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2013. The Company is currently evaluating the impact, if any, of the adoption of this ASU on its
consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In May 2011, the FASB issued an ASU that further addresses fair value measurement accounting and related
disclosure requirements. The ASU clarifies the FASB’s intent regarding the application of existing fair value
measurement and disclosure requirements, changes the fair value measurement requirements for certain financial
instruments, and sets forth additional disclosure requirements for other fair value measurements. The ASU will be
applied prospectively and is effective for periods beginning after December 15, 2011. The Company is currently
evaluating the impact, if any, of the adoption of this ASU on its consolidated financial statements and related
disclosures.
Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the consolidated statements of cash flows, the Company considers all highly liquid short-term
investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Outstanding checks in excess of
funds on deposit are included in “accounts payable and accrued expenses” on the consolidated balance sheets and
are classified as financing activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Accounts Receivable—Trade, Net
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest. The Company maintains an
allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses inherent in its accounts receivable portfolio. In establishing the
required allowance, management considers historical losses, current receivables aging, and existing industry and
national economic data. The Company reviews its allowance for doubtful accounts monthly. Past due balances over
90 days and over a specified amount are reviewed individually for collectibility. Account balances are charged off
against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential recovery is remote. The
balance in the Company’s allowance for doubtful accounts related to trade accounts receivable was approximately $1
million at December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010.
Inventories
Materials, supplies and commodity inventories are valued at the lower of average cost or market.
Table of Contents
F-20
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Proved Properties
The Company accounts for oil and natural gas properties in accordance with the successful efforts method. In
accordance with this method, all leasehold and development costs of proved properties are capitalized and amortized
on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the proved reserves and proved developed reserves,
respectively.
The Company evaluates the impairment of its proved oil and natural gas properties on a field-by-field basis whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The carrying values of
proved properties are reduced to fair value when the expected undiscounted future cash flows are less than net book
value. The fair values of proved properties are measured using valuation techniques consistent with the income
approach, converting future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair
values of proved properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future
commodity prices; and (iv) a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. The underlying commodity prices
embedded in the Company’s estimated cash flows are the product of a process that begins with New York Mercantile
Exchange (“NYMEX”) forward curve pricing, adjusted for estimated location and quality differentials, as well as other
factors that Company management believes will impact realizable prices. Costs of retired, sold or abandoned
properties that constitute a part of an amortization base are charged or credited, net of proceeds, to accumulated
depreciation, depletion and amortization unless doing so significantly affects the unit-of-production amortization rate,
in which case a gain or loss is recognized currently. Gains or losses from the disposal of other properties are
recognized currently. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs necessary to maintain properties in operating
condition are expensed as incurred. Estimated dismantlement and abandonment costs are capitalized, net of salvage,
at their estimated net present value and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the related
proved developed reserves. The Company capitalizes interest on borrowed funds related to its share of costs
associated with the drilling and completion of new oil and natural gas wells. Interest is capitalized only during the
periods in which these assets are brought to their intended use. The Company capitalized interest costs of
approximately $2 million, $1 million and $300,000 for the years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and
December 31, 2009, respectively.
Impairment of Proved Properties
Based on the analysis described above, the Company recorded no impairment charge of proved oil and natural gas
properties for the years ended December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2009. For the year ended December 31, 2010,
the Company recorded a noncash impairment charge, before and after tax, of approximately $39 million primarily
associated with proved oil and natural gas properties related to an unfavorable marketing contract. The carrying
values of the impaired proved properties were reduced to fair value, estimated using inputs characteristic of a Level 3
fair-value measurement. The charges are included in “impairment of long-lived assets” on the consolidated statements
of operations.
Unproved Properties
Costs related to unproved properties include costs incurred to acquire unproved reserves. Because these reserves do
not meet the definition of proved reserves, the related costs are not classified as proved properties. The fair values of
unproved properties are measured using valuation techniques consistent with the income approach, converting future
cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair values of unproved properties
include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity prices; and (iv) a
market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. The market-based
Table of Contents
F-21
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
weighted average cost of capital rate is subjected to additional project-specific risking factors. Unproved leasehold
costs are capitalized and amortized on a composite basis if individually insignificant, based on past success,
experience and average lease-term lives. Individually significant leases are reclassified to proved properties if
successful and expensed on a lease by lease basis if unsuccessful or the lease term expires. Unamortized leasehold
costs related to successful exploratory drilling are reclassified to proved properties and depleted on a unit-of-
production basis. The Company assesses unproved properties for impairment quarterly on the basis of its experience
in similar situations and other factors such as the primary lease terms of the properties, the average holding period of
unproved properties, and the relative proportion of such properties on which proved reserves have been found in the
past.
Exploration Costs
Geological and geophysical costs, delay rentals, amortization and impairment of unproved leasehold costs and costs
to drill exploratory wells that do not find proved reserves are expensed as exploration costs. The costs of any
exploratory wells are carried as an asset if the well finds a sufficient quantity of reserves to justify its capitalization as
a producing well and as long as the Company is making sufficient progress towards assessing the reserves and the
economic and operating viability of the project. The Company recorded noncash leasehold impairment expenses
related to unproved properties of approximately $2 million, $5 million and $7 million for the years ended December 31,
2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, which are included in “exploration costs” on the consolidated
statements of operations.
Other Property and Equipment
Other property and equipment includes natural gas gathering systems, pipelines, buildings, software, data processing
and telecommunications equipment, office furniture and equipment, and other fixed assets. These items are recorded
at cost and are depreciated using the straight-line method based on expected lives ranging from three to 39 years for
the individual asset or group of assets.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues representative of the Company’s ownership interest in its properties are presented on a gross basis on the
consolidated statements of operations. Sales of oil, natural gas and NGL are recognized when the product has been
delivered to a custody transfer point, persuasive evidence of a sales arrangement exists, the rights and responsibility
of ownership pass to the purchaser upon delivery, collection of revenue from the sale is reasonably assured, and the
sales price is fixed or determinable.
The Company has elected the entitlements method to account for natural gas production imbalances. Imbalances
occur when the Company sells more or less than its entitled ownership percentage of total natural gas production. In
accordance with the entitlements method, any amount received in excess of the Company’s share is treated as a
liability. If the Company receives less than its entitled share, the underproduction is recorded as a receivable. At
December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010, the Company had natural gas production imbalance receivables of
approximately $19 million and $18 million, respectively, which are included in “accounts receivable – trade, net” on the
consolidated balance sheets and natural gas production imbalance payables of approximately $9 million and $8
million, respectively, which are included in “accounts payable and accrued expenses” on the consolidated balance
sheets.
The Company engages in the purchase, gathering and transportation of third-party natural gas and subsequently
markets such natural gas to independent purchasers under separate arrangements. As such, the Company separately
reports third-party marketing sales and marketing expenses.
Table of Contents
F-22
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
The Company generates electricity with excess natural gas, which it uses to serve certain of its operating facilities in
Brea, California. Any excess electricity is sold to the California wholesale power market. This revenue is included in
“other revenues” on the consolidated statements of operations.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash of approximately $4 million and $3 million is included in “other noncurrent assets” on the consolidated
balance sheets at December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010, respectively, and represents cash the Company has
deposited into a separate account and designated for asset retirement obligations in accordance with contractual
agreements.
Derivative Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments to reduce exposure to fluctuations in the prices of oil and natural
gas. By removing a significant portion of the price volatility associated with future production, the Company expects
to mitigate, but not eliminate, the potential effects of variability in cash flow from operations due to fluctuations in
commodity prices. These transactions are primarily in the form of swap contracts and put options. In addition, the
Company may from time to time enter into derivative contracts in the form of interest rate swaps to minimize the
effects of fluctuations in interest rates. At December 31, 2011, the Company had no outstanding interest rate swap
agreements.
Derivative instruments (including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts that require bifurcation)
are recorded at fair value and included on the consolidated balance sheets as assets or liabilities. The Company did
not designate these contracts as cash flow hedges; therefore, the changes in fair value of these instruments are
recorded in current earnings. The Company uses certain pricing models to determine the fair value of its derivative
financial instruments. Inputs to the pricing models include publicly available prices and forward price curves generated
from a compilation of data gathered from third parties. Company management validates the data provided by third
parties by understanding the pricing models used, obtaining market values from other pricing sources, analyzing
pricing data in certain situations and confirming that those securities trade in active markets. See Note 7 and Note 8
for additional details about the Company’s derivative financial instruments.
Unit-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes expense for unit-based compensation over the requisite service period in an amount equal
to the fair value of unit-based payments granted to employees and nonemployee directors. The fair value of unit-
based payments, excluding liability awards, is computed at the date of grant and is not remeasured. The fair value of
liability awards is remeasured at each reporting date through the settlement date with the change in fair value
recognized as compensation expense over that period. The Company currently does not have any awards accounted
for as liability awards.
The Company has made a policy decision to recognize compensation expense for service-based awards on a
straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the entire award. See Note 5 for additional details about the
Company’s accounting for unit-based compensation.
The benefit of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation costs is required to be reported as financing
cash flow rather than operating cash flow. This requirement reduces net operating cash flow and increases net
financing cash flow in periods in which such tax benefit exists. The amount of the Company’s excess tax benefit is
reported in “excess tax benefit from unit-based compensation” on the consolidated statements of unitholders’ capital.
Table of Contents
F-23
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Deferred Financing Fees
The Company incurred legal and bank fees related to the issuance of debt (see Note 6). At December 31, 2011, and
December 31, 2010, net deferred financing fees of approximately $94 million and $102 million, respectively, are
included in “other noncurrent assets” on the consolidated balance sheets. These debt issuance costs are amortized
over the life of the debt agreement. For the years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31,
2009, amortization expense of approximately $16 million, $17 million and $14 million, respectively, is included in
“interest expense, net of amounts capitalized” on the consolidated statements of operations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying values of the Company’s receivables, payables and Credit Facility (as defined in Note 6) are estimated
to be substantially the same as their fair values at December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010. See Note 6 for fair
value disclosures related to the Company’s other outstanding debt. As noted above, the Company carries its
derivative financial instruments at fair value. See Note 8 for details about the fair value of the Company’s derivative
financial instruments.
Income Taxes
The Company is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, with
the exception of the states of Texas and Michigan, with income tax liabilities and/or benefits of the Company passed
through to unitholders. As such, with the exception of the states of Texas and Michigan, the Company is not a
taxable entity, it does not directly pay federal and state income tax and recognition has not been given to federal and
state income taxes for the operations of the Company except as described below.
Limited liability companies are subject to state income taxes in Texas and Michigan. In addition, certain of the
Company’s subsidiaries are Subchapter C-corporations subject to federal and state income taxes, which are
accounted for using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax
consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and
liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those
temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a
change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. See Note 14 for detail of
amounts recorded in the consolidated financial statements.
Note 2—Acquisitions, Divestitures and Discontinued Operations
Acquisitions—2011
On December 15, 2011, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located
primarily in the Granite Wash of Texas and Oklahoma from Plains Exploration & Production Company (“Plains”). The
results of operations of these properties have been included in the consolidated financial statements since the
acquisition date. The Company paid approximately $544 million in total consideration for these properties. The
transaction was financed initially with borrowings under the Company’s Credit Facility, as defined in Note 6.
On November 1, 2011, and November 18, 2011, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural
gas properties located in the Permian Basin. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the
consolidated financial statements since the acquisition dates. The Company paid approximately
Table of Contents
F-24
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
$108 million in cash and recorded a payable of approximately $2 million, resulting in total consideration for the
acquisitions of approximately $110 million. The transactions were financed initially with borrowings under the
Company’s Credit Facility.
On June 1, 2011, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties in the Cleveland
play, located in the Texas Panhandle, from Panther Energy Company, LLC and Red Willow Mid-Continent, LLC
(collectively referred to as “Panther”). The results of operations of these properties have been included in the
consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date. The Company paid approximately $223 million in total
consideration for these properties. The transaction was financed primarily with proceeds from the Company’s May
2011 debt offering, as described below.
On May 2, 2011, and May 11, 2011, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties
located in the Williston Basin. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the consolidated
financial statements since the acquisition dates. The Company paid approximately $154 million in cash and recorded
a receivable of approximately $1 million, resulting in total consideration for the acquisitions of approximately $153
million. The transactions were financed initially with borrowings under the Company’s Credit Facility.
On April 1, 2011, and April 5, 2011, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties
located in the Permian Basin, including properties from SandRidge Exploration and Production, LLC (“SandRidge”).
The results of operations of these properties have been included in the consolidated financial statements since the
acquisition dates. The Company paid approximately $239 million in total consideration for the acquisitions. The
transactions were financed initially with borrowings under the Company’s Credit Facility.
On March 31, 2011, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the
Williston Basin from an affiliate of Concho Resources Inc. (“Concho”). The results of operations of these properties
have been included in the consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date. The Company paid $196
million in cash and recorded a receivable from Concho of approximately $2 million, resulting in total consideration for
the acquisition of approximately $194 million. The transaction was financed primarily with proceeds from the
Company’s March 2011 public offering of units, as described below.
During 2011, the Company completed other smaller acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties located in its various
operating regions. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the consolidated financial
statements since the acquisition dates. The Company, in the aggregate, paid approximately $38 million in total
consideration for these properties.
These acquisitions were accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting. Accordingly, the Company
conducted assessments of net assets acquired and recognized amounts for identifiable assets acquired and liabilities
assumed at their estimated acquisition date fair values, while transaction and integration costs associated with the
acquisitions were expensed as incurred. The initial accounting for the business combinations is not complete and
adjustments to provisional amounts, or recognition of additional assets acquired or liabilities assumed, may occur as
more detailed analyses are completed and additional information is obtained about the facts and circumstances that
existed as of the acquisition dates.
Table of Contents
F-25
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
The following presents the values assigned to the net assets acquired as of the acquisition dates (in thousands):
Assets:
Current
Noncurrent
Oil and natural gas properties
Total assets acquired
Liabilities:
Current
Asset retirement obligations
Total liabilities assumed
Net assets acquired
5,981  
$
 
748  
  1,516,737  
   
 
$1,523,466
$
2,130  
 
19,853  
   
 
$
21,983  
   
 
$1,501,483
Current assets include receivables, prepaids and inventory and noncurrent assets include other property and
equipment. Current liabilities include payables, ad valorem taxes payable and other liabilities.
The fair values of oil and natural gas properties and asset retirement obligations were measured using valuation
techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs to the valuation of oil and
natural gas properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future
commodity prices; (iv) estimated future cash flows; and (v) a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate.
The revenues and expenses related to the properties acquired from Plains, Panther, SandRidge and Concho are
included in the condensed consolidated results of operations of the Company as of December 15, 2011, June 1, 2011,
April 1, 2011, and March 31, 2011, respectively. The following unaudited pro forma financial information presents a
summary of the Company’s condensed consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2011,
and December 31, 2010, assuming the acquisitions of Plains, Panther, SandRidge and Concho had been completed
as of January 1, 2010, including adjustments to reflect the values assigned to the net assets acquired. The pro forma
financial information is not necessarily indicative of the results of operations if the acquisitions had been effective as
of this date.
Total revenues and other
Total operating expenses
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Table of Contents
Other
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
2010
(in thousands, except
per unit amounts)
$1,819,878    
$ 901,967    
$ 528,046
3.01    
    
3.00
$
   
$
$939,572  
$720,360  
$ (86,952)
$
   
$
(0.57) 
 
(0.57)
F-26
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
In July 2010, the Company entered into a definitive purchase and sale agreement (“PSA”) to acquire certain oil and
natural gas properties for a contract price of $95 million. Upon the execution of the PSA, the Company paid a deposit
of approximately $9 million. In September 2010, in accordance with the terms of the PSA, the Company terminated
the PSA as a result of certain conditions to closing not being met. The other party to the PSA disputed the
termination of the PSA and held the deposit. On March 28, 2011, an arbitration panel granted a favorable final ruling to
the Company with regard to the termination of the PSA and the return of the deposit. The deposit plus interest was
received by the Company in April 2011.
Acquisitions—2010 and 2009
The following is a summary of certain significant acquisitions completed by the Company during the years ended
December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009:
•   On November 16, 2010, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties
located in the Wolfberry trend of the Permian Basin from Element Petroleum, LP for approximately $118
million.
•   On October 14, 2010, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties
located in the Wolfberry trend of the Permian Basin from Crownrock, LP and Patriot Resources Partners LLC
for approximately $260 million.
•   On August 16, 2010, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located
in the Permian Basin from Crownrock, LP and Element Petroleum, LP for approximately $95 million.
•   On May 27, 2010, the Company completed the acquisition of interests in Henry Savings LP and Henry
Savings Management LLC that primarily hold oil and natural gas properties located in the Permian Basin for
approximately $323 million.
•   On April 30, 2010, the Company completed the acquisition of interests in two wholly owned subsidiaries of
HighMount Exploration & Production LLC that hold oil and natural gas properties in the Antrim Shale located in
northern Michigan for approximately $327 million.
•   On January 29, 2010, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located
in the Anadarko Basin in Oklahoma and Kansas and the Permian Basin in Texas and New Mexico from
certain affiliates of Merit Energy Company for approximately $151 million.
•   On August 31, 2009, and September 30, 2009, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and
natural gas properties located in the Permian Basin in Texas and New Mexico from Forest Oil Corporation and
Forest Oil Permian Corporation for approximately $114 million.
Divestitures
In 2009, certain post-closing matters related to the 2008 sale of the deep rights interests in certain central Oklahoma
acreage were resolved and the Company recorded a gain of approximately $25 million, which is included in “(gains)
losses on sale of assets and other, net” on the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended
December 31, 2009.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations of approximately $2 million in 2009 primarily represent activity related to post-closing
adjustments associated with the Company’s Appalachian Basin and Mid Atlantic Well Service, Inc. operations
disposed of in 2008.
Table of Contents
F-27
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Note 3—Unitholders’ Capital
Equity Distribution Agreement
On August 23, 2011, the Company entered into an equity distribution agreement, pursuant to which it may from time
to time issue and sell units representing limited liability company interests having an aggregate offering price of up to
$500 million. In connection with entering into the agreement, the Company incurred expenses of approximately
$423,000. Sales of units, if any, will be made through a sales agent by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions, in
block transactions, or as otherwise agreed with the agent. The Company expects to use the net proceeds from any
sale of the units for general corporate purposes, which may include, among other things, capital expenditures,
acquisitions and the repayment of debt.
In September 2011, the Company issued and sold 16,060 units representing limited liability company interests at an
average unit price of $38.25 for proceeds of approximately $602,000 (net of approximately $12,000 in commissions).
In December 2011, the Company issued and sold 772,104 units representing limited liability company interests at an
average unit price of $38.03 for proceeds of approximately $29 million (net of approximately $587,000 in
commissions). In connection with the issue and sale of these units, the Company incurred professional service
expenses of approximately $139,000. The Company used the net proceeds for general corporate purposes including
the repayment of a portion of the indebtedness outstanding under its Credit Facility. At December 31, 2011, units
equaling approximately $470 million in aggregate offering price remained available to be issued and sold under the
agreement.
Public Offering of Units
In March 2011, the Company sold 16,726,067 units representing limited liability company interests at $38.80 per unit
($37.248 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $623 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $26 million). The Company used a portion of the net proceeds from
the sale of these units to fund the March 2011 redemptions of a portion of the outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and
2018 Senior Notes and to fund the cash tender offers and related expenses for a portion of the remaining 2017 Senior
Notes and 2018 Senior Notes (see Note 6). The Company used the remaining net proceeds from the sale of units to
finance a portion of the March 31, 2011, acquisition in the Williston Basin.
In December 2010, the Company sold 11,500,000 units representing limited liability company interests at $35.92 per
unit ($34.48 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $396 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $17 million). The Company used the net proceeds from the sale of
these units to repay all outstanding indebtedness under its Credit Facility and for other general corporate purposes,
including the partial notes redemption (see Note 6).
In March 2010, the Company sold 17,250,000 units representing limited liability company interests at $25.00 per unit
($24.00 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $414 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $17 million). The Company used a portion of the net proceeds from
the sale of these units to finance the HighMount acquisition.
In October 2009, the Company sold 8,625,000 units representing limited liability company interests at $21.90 per unit
($21.024 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $181 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $8 million). The Company used the net proceeds from the sale of
these units to reduce indebtedness under the Credit Facility.
Table of Contents
F-28
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
In May 2009, the Company sold 6,325,000 units representing limited liability company interests at $16.25 per unit
($15.60 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $98 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $4 million). The Company used the net proceeds from the sale of
these units to reduce indebtedness under the Credit Facility.
Equity Distribution Agreement and Public Offering of Units—Subsequent Events
In January 2012, the Company, under its equity distribution agreement, issued and sold 1,539,651 units representing
limited liability company interests at an average unit price of $38.02 for proceeds of approximately $57 million (net of
approximately $1 million in commissions). The Company used the net proceeds for general corporate purposes
including the repayment of a portion of the indebtedness outstanding under its Credit Facility. At January 31, 2012,
units equaling approximately $411 million in aggregate offering price remained available to be issued and sold under
the agreement.
In January 2012, the Company also completed a public offering of units in which it sold 19,550,000 units representing
limited liability company interests at $35.95 per unit ($34.512 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of
approximately $674 million (after underwriting discount and offering expenses of approximately $28 million). The
Company used the net proceeds from the sale of these units to repay a portion of the outstanding indebtedness under
its Credit Facility.
Unit Repurchase Plan
In October 2008, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of the
Company’s outstanding units from time to time on the open market or in negotiated purchases. During the year ended
December 31, 2011, 529,734 units were repurchased at an average unit price of $32.76 for a total cost of
approximately $17 million. During the year ended December 31, 2010, 486,700 units were repurchased at an average
unit price of $23.79 for a total cost of approximately $12 million. During the year ended December 31, 2009, 123,800
units were repurchased at an average unit price of $12.99 for a total cost of approximately $2 million. All units were
subsequently canceled.
At December 31, 2011, approximately $56 million was available for unit repurchase under the program. The timing and
amounts of any such repurchases will be at the discretion of management, subject to market conditions and other
factors, and in accordance with applicable securities laws and other legal requirements. The repurchase plan does not
obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of units and may be discontinued at any time. Units are
repurchased at fair market value on the date of repurchase.
Issuance and Cancellation of Units
During the years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, the Company purchased 9,055 units and 63,031
units for approximately $300,000 and $1 million, respectively, in conjunction with units received by the Company for
the payment of minimum withholding taxes due on units issued under its equity compensation plan (see Note 5). All
units were subsequently canceled. The Company purchased no units during the year ended December 31, 2011.
Distributions
Under the Agreement, Company unitholders are entitled to receive a quarterly distribution of available cash to the
extent there is sufficient cash from operations after establishment of cash reserves and payment of fees and
expenses. Distributions paid by the Company are presented on the consolidated statements of unitholders’
Table of Contents
F-29
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
capital. On January 27, 2012, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a cash distribution of $0.69 per unit with
respect to the fourth quarter of 2011. The distribution, totaling approximately $138 million, was paid February 14,
2012, to unitholders of record as of the close of business February 7, 2012.
Note 4—Business and Credit Concentrations
Cash
The Company maintains its cash in bank deposit accounts, which, at times, may exceed federally insured amounts.
The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts. The Company believes it is not exposed to any
significant credit risk on its cash.
Revenue and Trade Receivables
The Company has a concentration of customers who are engaged in oil and natural gas purchasing, transportation
and/or refining within the U.S. This concentration of customers may impact the Company’s overall exposure to credit
risk, either positively or negatively, in that the customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other
conditions. The Company’s customers consist primarily of major oil and natural gas purchasers and the Company
generally does not require collateral since it has not experienced significant credit losses on such sales. The
Company routinely assesses the recoverability of all material trade and other receivables to determine collectibility
(see Note 1).
For the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company’s three largest customers represented 13%, 10% and 10%,
respectively, of the Company’s sales. For the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company’s three largest
customers represented 17%, 14% and 13%, respectively, of the Company’s sales. For the year ended December 31,
2009, the Company’s three largest customers represented 22%, 18% and 15%, respectively, of the Company’s sales.
At December 31, 2011, trade accounts receivable from three customers represented approximately 12%, 10% and
10%, respectively, of the Company’s receivables. At December 31, 2010, trade accounts receivable from three
customers represented approximately 16%, 12% and 11%, respectively, of the Company’s receivables.
Note 5—Unit-Based Compensation and Other Benefit Plans
Incentive Plan Summary
The Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the “Plan”), originally became
effective in December 2005. The Plan, which is administered by the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors (“Compensation Committee”), permits granting unit grants, unit options, restricted units, phantom units and
unit appreciation rights to employees, consultants and nonemployee directors under the terms of the Plan. The unit
options and restricted units vest ratably over three years. The contractual life of unit options is 10 years. Unit awards
were initially issued in conjunction with the Company’s IPO in January 2006.
The Plan limits the number of units that may be delivered pursuant to awards to 12.2 million units. The Board of
Directors and the Compensation Committee have the right to alter or amend the Plan or any part of the Plan from time
to time, including increasing the number of units that may be granted, subject to unitholder approval as required by the
exchange upon which the units are listed at that time. However, no change in any outstanding grant may be made that
would materially reduce the benefits to the participant without the consent of the participant.
Table of Contents
F-30
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Upon exercise or vesting of an award of units, or an award settled in units, the Company will issue new units, acquire
units on the open market or directly from any person, or use any combination of the foregoing, at the Compensation
Committee’s discretion. If the Company issues new units upon exercise or vesting of an award, the total number of
units outstanding will increase. To date, the Company has issued awards of unit grants, unit options, restricted units
and phantom units. The Plan provides for all of the following types of awards:
Unit Grants—A unit grant is a unit that vests immediately upon issuance.
Unit Options—A unit option is a right to purchase a unit at a specified price at terms determined by the Compensation
Committee. Unit options will have an exercise price that will not be less than the fair market value of the units on the
date of grant, and in general, will become exercisable over a vesting period but may accelerate upon a change in
control of the Company. If a grantee’s employment or service relationship terminates for any reason other than death,
the grantee’s unvested unit options will be automatically forfeited unless the option agreement or the Compensation
Committee provides otherwise.
Restricted Units—A restricted unit is a unit that vests over a period of time and that during such time is subject to
forfeiture, and may contain such terms as the Compensation Committee shall determine. The Company intends the
restricted units under the Plan to serve as a means of incentive compensation for performance and not primarily as an
opportunity to participate in the equity appreciation of its units. Therefore, Plan participants will not pay any
consideration for the restricted units they receive. If a grantee’s employment or service relationship terminates for any
reason other than death, the grantee’s unvested restricted units will be automatically forfeited unless the
Compensation Committee or the terms of the award agreement provide otherwise.
Phantom Units/Unit Appreciation Rights—These awards may be settled in units, cash or a combination thereof. Such
grants contain terms as determined by the Compensation Committee, including the period or terms over which
phantom units vest. If a grantee’s employment or service relationship terminates for any reason other than death, the
grantee’s phantom units or unit appreciation rights will be automatically forfeited unless, and to the extent, the
Compensation Committee or the terms of the award agreement provide otherwise. While phantom units require no
payment from the grantee, unit appreciation rights will have an exercise price that will not be less than the fair market
value of the units on the date of grant. At December 31, 2011, the Company had 36,784 phantom units issued and
outstanding. To date, the Company has not issued unit appreciation rights.
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under the Plan
As of December 31, 2011, approximately 1.4 million units were issuable under the Plan pursuant to outstanding award
or other agreements, and 5.2 million additional units were reserved for future issuance under the Plan.
Table of Contents
F-31
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Accounting for Unit-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes as expense, beginning at the grant date, the fair value of unit options and other equity-
based compensation issued to employees and nonemployee directors. The value of the portion of the award that is
ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service period using the straight-line method
in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. A summary of unit-based compensation expenses included
on the consolidated statements of operations is presented below:
General and administrative expenses
Lease operating expenses
Total unit-based compensation expenses
Income tax benefit
Year Ended December 31,
2010
2011
1,112
(in thousands)
   $21,131     $13,450    
342    
  
  
    
   $22,243     $13,792    
  
    
   $ 8,219     $ 5,096
2009
$14,743  
 
346  
   
 
$15,089  
   
 
$ 5,968
Restricted/Unrestricted Units
The fair value of unrestricted unit grants and restricted units issued is determined based on the fair market value of
the Company units on the date of grant. A summary of the status of the nonvested units as of December 31, 2011, is
presented below:
Nonvested units at December 31, 2010
Granted
Vested
Forfeited
Nonvested units at December 31, 2011
Number of
Nonvested
Units
1,451,556   
 1,110,502   
  (651,760)  
 
(50,636)  
  
   
 1,859,662
Weighted
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value  
$ 21.16  
$ 38.54  
$ 20.22  
$ 33.32
$ 31.54
The weighted average grant-date fair value of unrestricted unit grants and restricted units granted was $25.89 and
$16.11 during the years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively.
As of December 31, 2011, there was approximately $38 million of unrecognized compensation cost related to
nonvested restricted units. The cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of approximately
1.5 years. The total fair value of units that vested was approximately $13 million, $14 million and $11 million for the
years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively.
In January 2012, the Company granted 913,663 restricted units as part of its annual review of its employees, including
executives, compensation.
Table of Contents
F-32
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Changes in Unit Options and Unit Options Outstanding
The following provides information related to unit option activity for the year ended December 31, 2011:
Outstanding at December 31, 2010   
Exercised
  
  
Outstanding at December 31, 2011   
  
Exercisable at December 31, 2011
Number of
Units
Underlying
Options
1,720,393   
  (310,400)  
  
   
 1,409,993   
  
   
 1,282,526
Weighted
Average
Exercise Price
$
$
$
$
Per Unit
22.48    
23.99    
  
22.14    
  
22.76
Weighted
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value     
3.05    
$
3.83    
$
  
2.87    
  
3.11
$
$
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life in Years 
6.71
5.83
5.70
No unit options were granted during the years ended December 31, 2011, or December 31, 2010. The weighted
average grant-date fair value of options granted was $0.55 during the year ended December 31, 2009. The total
intrinsic value of options exercised was approximately $5 million, $2 million and $124,000, during the years ended
December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively. The Company received
approximately $7 million from the exercise of options during the year ended December 31, 2011.
As of December 31, 2011, total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested unit options was approximately
$4,000. The cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of approximately one month. In
addition, the exercisable unit options at December 31, 2011, have an aggregate intrinsic value of approximately $19
million and all outstanding unit options have an aggregate intrinsic value of approximately $22 million. The total fair
value of all options that vested during the years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31,
2009, was approximately $500,000, $1 million and $2 million, respectively. No options expired during the years ended
December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, or December 31, 2009.
The fair value of unit-based compensation for unit options was estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes
pricing model based on certain assumptions. The Company’s determination of the fair value of unit-based payment
awards is affected by the Company’s unit price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective
variables. The Company’s employee unit options have various restrictions including vesting provisions and
restrictions on transfers and hedging, among others, and often are expected to be exercised prior to their contractual
maturity.
Table of Contents
F-33
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Expected volatilities used in the estimation of fair value have been determined using available volatility data for the
Company as well as an average of volatility computations of other identified peer companies in the oil and natural gas
industry. Expected distributions are estimated based on the Company’s distribution rate at the date of grant. Historical
data of the Company and other identified peer companies is used to estimate expected term because, due to the
limited period of time its equity units have been publicly traded, the Company does not have sufficient historical
exercise data to compute a reasonable estimate. Forfeitures are estimated using historical Company data and are
revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from estimates. All employees granted awards
have been determined to have similar behaviors for purposes of determining the expected term used to estimate fair
value. The risk-free rate for periods within the expected term of the unit option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield
curve in effect at the time of grant. The fair values of the 2009 unit option grants were based upon the following
assumptions:
Expected volatility
Expected distributions
Risk-free rate
Expected term
2009
30.59%
15.80% – 16.79%  
1.24% – 1.91%
5 years
Although the fair value of unit option grants is determined in accordance with applicable accounting standards, using a
Black-Scholes pricing model, that value may not be indicative of the fair value observed in a willing buyer/willing seller
market transaction.
Nonemployee Grants
During the year ended December 31, 2007, the Company granted an aggregate 150,000 unit warrants to certain
individuals in connection with an acquisition transition services agreement. The unit warrants, all of which remain
outstanding, have an exercise price of $25.50 per unit warrant, are fully exercisable at December 31, 2011, and expire
10 years from the date of issuance.
Defined Contribution Plan
The Company sponsors a 401(k) defined contribution plan for eligible employees. Company contributions to the 401(k)
plan consisted of a discretionary matching contribution equal to 100% of the first 4% of eligible compensation
contributed by the employee on a before-tax basis for the year ending December 31, 2009. For the years ended
December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010, the Company contribution was equal to 100% of the first 6% of eligible
employee compensation. The Company contributed approximately $4 million, $3 million and $2 million during the
years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively, to the 401(k) plan’s
trustee account. The 401(k) plan funds are held in a trustee account on behalf of the plan participants.
Table of Contents
Note 6—Debt
F-34
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
The following summarizes debt outstanding:
Credit facility
11.75% senior notes due 2017
9.875% senior notes due 2018
6.50% senior notes, due 2019
8.625% senior notes due 2020
7.75% senior notes due 2021
Less current maturities
Interest
Rate(2)
December 31, 2010
Carrying
Fair
Value
Value(1)
(in millions, except percentages)
Interest
Rate(2) 
 
  —    
 12.73% 
 10.25% 
  —    
  9.00% 
  8.00%
December 31, 2011
Carrying
Fair
Value
Value(1)
$ 940    $ 940    
46    
 
  
16    
 
  
 
742    
  
  1,406    
  
  1,036    
  
  —      
  
   
    
      
  4,045    $4,186
41   
 
14   
 
 
750   
  1,300   
  1,000   
  —
2.57%   $ —      $ —      
288    
 12.73%  
 
250   
 
 
 10.25%  
279    
 
256   
  —      
  6.62%  
  —     
  9.00%  
  1,396    
  1,300   
  1,021    
  8.00%  
  1,000   
  —      
  —     
 
   
   
    
 
   
  2,806    $2,984
Unamortized discount
Total debt, net of discount
(51)  
 
  
      
   
   $ 3,994
(63)  
 
 
   
  $ 2,743
(1) The carrying value of the Credit Facility is estimated to be substantially the same as its fair value. Fair values of
the senior notes were estimated based on prices quoted from third-party financial institutions.
(2) Represents variable interest rate for the Credit Facility and effective interest rates for the senior notes.
Credit Facility
On May 2, 2011, the Company entered into a Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“Credit Facility”), which
provides for a revolving credit facility up to the lesser of: (i) the then-effective borrowing base and (ii) the maximum
commitment amount of $1.5 billion. In October 2011, as part of the semi-annual redetermination, a borrowing base of
$3.0 billion was approved by the lenders with the maximum commitment amount remaining unchanged at $1.5 billion.
The maturity date is April 2016.
During 2011, in connection with amendments to its Credit Facility, the Company incurred financing fees and expenses
of approximately $4 million, which will be amortized over the life of the Credit Facility. Such amortized expenses are
recorded in “interest expense, net of amounts capitalized” on the consolidated statements of operations. At
December 31, 2011, available borrowing capacity under the Credit Facility was $556 million, which includes a $4
million reduction in availability for outstanding letters of credit.
Redetermination of the borrowing base under the Credit Facility, based primarily on reserve reports that reflect
commodity prices at such time, occurs semi-annually, in April and October, as well as upon requested interim
redeterminations, by the lenders at their sole discretion. The Company also has the right to request one additional
borrowing base redetermination per year at its discretion, as well as the right to an additional redetermination each
year in connection with certain acquisitions. Significant declines in commodity prices may result in a decrease in the
borrowing base. The Company’s obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by mortgages on its and certain of
its material subsidiaries’ oil and natural gas properties and other personal property as well as a pledge of all ownership
interests in its direct and indirect material subsidiaries. The Company and its subsidiaries are required to maintain the
mortgages on properties representing at least 80% of the total value of its and its subsidiaries’ oil and natural gas
properties. Additionally, the obligations under the Credit Facility are guaranteed by all of the Company’s material
subsidiaries and are required to be guaranteed by any future material subsidiaries.
Table of Contents
F-35
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
At the Company’s election, interest on borrowings under the Credit Facility is determined by reference to either the
London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin between 1.75% and 2.75% per annum (depending
on the then-current level of borrowings under the Credit Facility) or the alternate base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable
margin between 0.75% and 1.75% per annum (depending on the then-current level of borrowings under the Credit
Facility). Interest is generally payable quarterly for loans bearing interest based on the ABR and at the end of the
applicable interest period for loans bearing interest at LIBOR. The Company is required to pay a commitment fee to
the lenders under the Credit Facility, which accrues at a rate per annum equal to 0.5% on the average daily unused
amount of the lesser of: (i) the maximum commitment amount of the lenders and (ii) the then-effective borrowing
base. The Company is in compliance with all financial and other covenants of the Credit Facility.
Senior Notes Due 2019
On May 13, 2011, the Company issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.50% senior notes due 2019
(the “2019 Senior Notes”) at a price of 99.232%. The 2019 Senior Notes were sold to a group of initial purchasers and
then resold to qualified institutional buyers, each in transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The Company received net proceeds of approximately
$729 million (after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount and offering expenses). The Company used a portion of
the net proceeds to repay all of the outstanding indebtedness under its Credit Facility, fund or partially fund
acquisitions and for general corporate purposes. In connection with the 2019 Senior Notes, the Company incurred
financing fees and expenses of approximately $15 million, which will be amortized over the life of the 2019 Senior
Notes. The discount on the 2019 Senior Notes, which totaled approximately $6 million, will also be amortized over the
life of the 2019 Senior Notes. Such amortized expenses are recorded in “interest expense, net of amounts capitalized”
on the consolidated statements of operations.
The 2019 Senior Notes were issued under an indenture dated May 13, 2011 (“2019 Indenture”), mature May 15, 2019,
and bear interest at 6.50%. Interest is payable semi-annually on May 15 and November 15, beginning November 15,
2011. The 2019 Senior Notes are general unsecured senior obligations of the Company and are effectively junior in
right of payment to any secured indebtedness of the Company to the extent of the collateral securing such
indebtedness. Each of the Company’s material subsidiaries has guaranteed the 2019 Senior Notes on a senior
unsecured basis. The 2019 Indenture provides that the Company may redeem: (i) on or prior to May 15, 2014, up to
35% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price of 106.50% of the principal
amount redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, with the net cash proceeds of one or more equity offerings;
(ii) prior to May 15, 2015, all or part of the 2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the principal amount
redeemed, plus a make-whole premium (as defined in the 2019 Indenture) and accrued and unpaid interest; and (iii) on
or after May 15, 2015, all or part of the 2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 103.250%, and decreasing
percentages thereafter, of the principal amount redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. The 2019 Indenture also
provides that, if a change of control (as defined in the 2019 Indenture) occurs, the holders have a right to require the
Company to repurchase all or part of the 2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 101%, plus accrued and
unpaid interest.
The 2019 Indenture contains covenants substantially similar to those under the Company’s 2010 Issued Senior Notes
and Original Senior Notes, as defined below, that, among other things, limit the Company’s ability to: (i) pay
distributions, purchase or redeem the Company’s units or redeem its subordinated debt; (ii) make investments;
(iii) incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain types of equity securities; (iv) create certain liens;
(v) sell assets; (vi) consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of the Company’s assets; (vii) enter into
agreements that restrict distributions or other payments from the Company’s restricted subsidiaries to the Company;
(viii) engage in transactions with affiliates; and (ix) create unrestricted subsidiaries. The Company is in compliance
with all financial and other covenants of the 2019 Senior Notes.
Table of Contents
F-36
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
In connection with the issuance and sale of the 2019 Senior Notes, the Company entered into a Registration Rights
Agreement (“2019 Registration Rights Agreement”) with the initial purchasers. Under the 2019 Registration Rights
Agreement, the Company agreed to use reasonable efforts to file with the SEC and cause to become effective a
registration statement relating to an offer to issue new notes having terms substantially identical to the 2019 Senior
Notes in exchange for outstanding 2019 Senior Notes within 400 days after the notes were issued. In certain
circumstances, the Company may be required to file a shelf registration statement to cover resales of the 2019 Senior
Notes. If the Company fails to satisfy these obligations, the Company may be required to pay additional interest to
holders of the 2019 Senior Notes under certain circumstances.
Senior Notes Due 2020 and Senior Notes Due 2021
On April 6, 2010, the Company issued $1.30 billion in aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior notes due 2020
(the “2020 Senior Notes”). On September 13, 2010, the Company issued $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of
7.75% senior notes due 2021 (the “2021 Senior Notes,” and together with the 2020 Senior Notes, the “2010 Issued
Senior Notes”). The indentures related to the 2010 Issued Senior Notes contain redemption provisions and covenants
that are substantially similar to those of the 2019 Senior Notes.
Senior Notes Due 2017 and Senior Notes Due 2018
The Company also has $41 million (originally $250 million) in aggregate principal amount of 11.75% senior notes due
2017 (the “2017 Senior Notes”) and $14 million (originally $256 million) in aggregate principal amount of 9.875% senior
notes due 2018 (the “2018 Senior Notes” and together with the 2017 Senior Notes, the “Original Senior Notes”). The
indentures related to the Original Senior Notes originally contained redemption provisions and covenants that were
substantially similar to those of the 2010 Issued Senior Notes; however, in connection with the tender offers described
below, the indentures were amended and most of the covenants and certain default provisions were eliminated.
Redemptions of Original Senior Notes
In March 2011, in accordance with the provisions of the indentures related to the 2017 Senior Notes and the 2018
Senior Notes, the Company redeemed 35%, or $87 million and $90 million, respectively, of each of its original
aggregate principal amount of the 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes. After the redemptions, $163 million and
$166 million, respectively, of the 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes remained outstanding.
Tender Offers for and Repurchase of Original Senior Notes
On February 28, 2011, the Company commenced cash tender offers (“Offers”) and related consent solicitations to
purchase any and all of its outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes. The Offers expired on March 25,
2011. Holders who validly tendered 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes on or before March 14, 2011, received
total consideration of $1,212.50 and $1,172.50, respectively, for each $1,000 principal amount of such notes accepted
for purchase. Total consideration included a consent payment of $30.00 per $1,000 principal amount of notes
accepted for purchase. Holders who validly tendered 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes after March 14, 2011,
but before March 25, 2011, received $1,182.50 and $1,142.50, respectively, for each $1,000 principal amount of such
notes accepted for purchase.
In March 2011, in connection with its Offers and related consent solicitations, the Company accepted and purchased:
1) $105 million of the aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 2017 Senior Notes (or 65% of the remaining
outstanding principal amount of its 2017 Senior Notes), and 2) $126 million of the aggregate principal amount of its
outstanding 2018 Senior Notes (or 76% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2018 Senior Notes).
Table of Contents
F-37
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
In conjunction with each tender offer, the Company received consents to amendments to the indentures of the 2017
Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes, which eliminated most of the covenants and certain default provisions
applicable to the series of notes issued under such indentures. The amendments became effective upon the
execution of the supplemental indentures to the indentures governing each of the 2017 Senior Notes and the 2018
Senior Notes.
In June 2011, the Company repurchased an additional portion of its remaining outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and
2018 Senior Notes for approximately $17 million (or 29% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2017
Senior Notes) and approximately $24 million (or 61% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its 2018 Senior
Notes), respectively. In December 2011, the Company also repurchased an additional portion of its remaining
outstanding 2018 Senior Notes for approximately $2 million (or 9% of the remaining outstanding principal amount of its
2018 Senior Notes). After giving effect to the tender offers and subsequent repurchases of the 2017 Senior Notes and
the 2018 Senior Notes, aggregate principal amounts of $41 million and $14 million, respectively, remain outstanding at
December 31, 2011.
In connection with the redemptions, cash tender offers and additional repurchases of a portion of the Original Senior
Notes, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $95 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011.
Note 7—Derivatives
Commodity Derivatives
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to minimize the variability in cash flow due to commodity price
movements. The Company has historically entered into derivative instruments such as swap contracts, put options
and collars to economically hedge its forecasted oil, natural gas and NGL sales. At December 31, 2011, the Company
had no outstanding collars. The Company did not designate any of these contracts as cash flow hedges; therefore,
the changes in fair value of these instruments are recorded in current earnings. See Note 8 for fair value disclosures
about oil and natural gas commodity derivatives.
Table of Contents
F-38
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
The following table summarizes open positions as of December 31, 2011, and represents, as of such date, derivatives
in place through December 31, 2016, on annual production volumes:
Natural gas positions:
Fixed price swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Puts:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Total:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Oil positions:
Fixed price swaps:(1)
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
2012
56,730   
$ 5.85   
 
  38,357   
$ 5.83   
 
  95,087   
$ 5.84
8,171
2013
64,367   
5.69   
$
 
  37,340   
5.85   
$
 
  101,707   
5.75   
$
2014
73,456   
5.69   
$
 
  30,660   
5.00   
$
 
  104,116   
5.49   
$
2015
82,490   
5.75   
$
 
  32,850   
5.00   
$
 
  115,340   
5.54   
$
9,033
9,034
9,581
2016
2,745  
$ 5.00
—    
$ —
2,745  
$ 5.00
—
Average price ($/Bbl)
Puts:
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Total:
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Natural gas basis differential positions:
PEPL basis swaps:(2)
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
Oil timing differential positions:
Trade month roll swaps:(3)
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Hedged differential ($/Bbl)
$ 97.37   
 
  2,196   
$100.00   
 
  10,367   
$ 97.93
37,735   
$ (0.89)
5,982   
$ 0.21
$ 98.05   
 
 
2,300   
$ 100.00   
 
  11,333   
$ 98.44
38,854   
$
(0.89)
6,315   
0.21
$
$ 95.39   
 
 
—     
$ —     
 
 
9,034   
$ 95.39
42,194   
$
(0.39)
6,315   
0.21
$
$ 98.25   
 
 
—     
$ —     
 
 
9,581   
$ 98.25
42,194   
$
(0.39)
840   
0.17
$
$ —    
  —    
$ —
—    
$ —
—    
$ —
—    
$ —
(1) As presented in the table above, the Company has certain outstanding fixed price oil swaps on 14,750 Bbls of
daily production which may be extended annually at a price of $100.00 per Bbl for each of the years ending
December 31, 2016, December 31, 2017, and December 31, 2018, if the counterparties determine that the strike
prices are in-the-money on a designated date in each respective preceding year. The extension for each year is
exercisable without respect to the other years.
(2) Settle on the Panhandle Eastern Pipeline (“PEPL”) spot price of natural gas to hedge basis differential associated
with natural gas production in the Mid-Continent Deep and Mid-Continent Shallow regions.
(3) The Company hedges the timing risk associated with the sales price of oil in the Mid-Continent Deep, Mid-
Continent Shallow and Permian Basin regions. In these regions, the Company generally sells oil for the delivery
month at a sales price based on the average NYMEX price of light crude oil during that month, plus an
adjustment calculated as a spread between the weighted average prices of the delivery month, the next month
and the following month during the period when the delivery month is prompt (the “trade month roll”).
Table of Contents
F-39
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
During the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company entered into commodity derivative contracts consisting of oil
and natural gas swaps for certain years through 2016 and oil trade month roll swaps for October 2011 through
December 2015. In September 2011, the Company canceled its oil and natural gas swaps for the year 2016 and used
the realized gains of approximately $27 million to increase prices on its existing oil and natural gas swaps for the year
2012. Also, in September 2011, the Company paid premiums of approximately $33 million to increase prices on its
existing oil puts for the years 2012 and 2013. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2011, the Company paid
premiums of approximately $52 million for put options and approximately $22 million to increase prices on its existing
oil puts for 2012 and 2013, respectively.
Settled derivatives on natural gas production for the year ended December 31, 2011, included volumes of 64,457
MMMBtu at an average contract price of $8.24. Settled derivatives on oil production for the year ended December 31,
2011, included volumes of 7,917 MBbls at an average contract price of $85.70. Settled derivatives on natural gas
production for the year ended December 31, 2010, included volumes of 57,160 MMMBtu at an average contract price
of $8.66. Settled derivatives on oil production for the year ended December 31, 2010, included volumes of 4,650
MBbls at an average contract price of $99.68. The natural gas derivatives are settled based on the closing NYMEX
future price of natural gas or the published PEPL spot price of natural gas on the settlement date, which occurs on the
third day preceding the production month. The oil derivatives are settled based on the month’s average daily NYMEX
price of light crude oil and settlement occurs on the final day of the production month.
Interest Rate Swaps
The Company may from time to time enter into interest rate swap agreements based on LIBOR to minimize the effect
of fluctuations in interest rates. If LIBOR is lower than the fixed rate in the contract, the Company is required to pay
the counterparty the difference, and conversely, the counterparty is required to pay the Company if LIBOR is higher
than the fixed rate in the contract. The Company does not designate interest rate swap agreements as cash flow
hedges; therefore, the changes in fair value of these instruments are recorded in current earnings.
In April 2010, the Company restructured its interest rate swap portfolio in conjunction with the repayment of all of the
outstanding indebtedness under its Credit Facility with net proceeds from the issuance of the 2020 Senior Notes (see
Note 6). In conjunction with the repayment of borrowings under its Credit Facility with proceeds from the issuance of
2020 Senior Notes, the Company canceled (before the contract settlement date) certain interest rate swap
agreements for 2010 through 2013, resulting in realized losses of approximately $74 million. In September 2010, the
Company canceled (before the contract settlement date) all of its remaining interest rate swap agreements in
conjunction with the repayment of all of the outstanding indebtedness under its Credit Facility with net proceeds from
the issuance of 2021 Senior Notes (see Note 6). The cancellation of the interest rate swap agreements in September
2010 resulted in a realized loss of approximately $50 million. At December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010, the
Company had no outstanding interest rate swap agreements.
Table of Contents
F-40
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Balance Sheet Presentation
The Company’s commodity derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate swap derivatives are presented on a net
basis in “derivative instruments” on the consolidated balance sheets. The following summarizes the fair value of
derivatives outstanding on a gross basis:
Assets:
Commodity derivatives
Liabilities:
Commodity derivatives
December 31,
2011
2010
(in thousands)
$880,175    
   
    
  
$320,835
$637,836
$398,902
By using derivative instruments to economically hedge exposures to changes in commodity prices and interest rates,
when applicable, the Company exposes itself to credit risk and market risk. Credit risk is the failure of the
counterparty to perform under the terms of the derivative contract. When the fair value of a derivative contract is
positive, the counterparty owes the Company, which creates credit risk. The Company’s counterparties are current
participants or affiliates of participants in its Credit Facility or were participants or affiliates of participants in its Credit
Facility at the time it originally entered into the derivatives. The Credit Facility is secured by the Company’s oil and
natural gas reserves; therefore, the Company is not required to post any collateral. The Company does not receive
collateral from its counterparties. The maximum amount of loss due to credit risk that the Company would incur if its
counterparties failed completely to perform according to the terms of the contracts, based on the gross fair value of
financial instruments, was approximately $880 million at December 31, 2011. The Company minimizes the credit risk
in derivative instruments by: (i) limiting its exposure to any single counterparty; (ii) entering into derivative instruments
only with counterparties that meet the Company’s minimum credit quality standard, or have a guarantee from an
affiliate that meets the Company’s minimum credit quality standard; and (iii) monitoring the creditworthiness of the
Company’s counterparties on an ongoing basis. In accordance with the Company’s standard practice, its commodity
derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate derivatives are subject to counterparty netting under agreements
governing such derivatives and therefore the risk of loss is somewhat mitigated.
Gains (Losses) on Derivatives
Gains and losses on derivatives, including realized and unrealized gains and losses, are reported on the consolidated
statements of operations in “gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives” and “losses on interest rate swaps.”
Realized gains (losses), excluding canceled derivatives, represent amounts related to the settlement of derivative
instruments, and for commodity derivatives, are aligned with the underlying production. Unrealized gains (losses)
represent the change in fair value of the derivative instruments and are noncash items.
Table of Contents
F-41
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
The following presents the Company’s reported gains and losses on derivative instruments:
Realized gains (losses):
Commodity derivatives
Interest rate swaps
Canceled derivatives
Unrealized gains (losses):
Commodity derivatives
Interest rate swaps
Total gains (losses):
Commodity derivatives
Interest rate swaps
2011
Year Ended December 31,
2010
(in thousands)
2009
$230,237    
 
—      
  26,752    
   
    
$256,989    
   
    
  
$192,951    
 
—      
   
    
$192,951    
   
    
  
$449,940    
—      
 
   
    
$449,940
$ 307,587   
 
(8,021)  
  (123,865)  
   
   
$ 175,701   
   
   
 
$(232,376)  
 
63,978   
   
   
$(168,398)  
   
   
 
$ 75,211   
(67,908)  
 
   
   
7,303   
$
$ 400,968  
(42,881) 
 
 
48,977  
   
 
$ 407,064
$(591,379) 
 
16,588  
   
 
$(574,791)
$(141,374) 
(26,353) 
 
   
 
$(167,727)
During the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company canceled (before the contract settlement date) its oil and
natural gas swaps for the year 2016 and used the realized gains of approximately $27 million to increase prices on its
existing oil and natural gas swaps for the year 2012. During the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company
canceled (before the contract settlement date) all of its interest rate swap agreements resulting in realized losses of
approximately $124 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2009, the Company canceled (before the contract settlement date) derivative
contracts on estimated future oil and natural gas production resulting in realized net gains of approximately $49
million. Of this amount, realized net gains of approximately $45 million, along with an incremental premium payment
of approximately $49 million, were used to reposition the Company’s commodity derivative portfolio in July 2009,
when the Company canceled oil and natural gas derivative contracts for years 2012 through 2014 to raise prices for oil
and natural gas derivative contracts in years 2010 and 2011.
Note 8—Fair Value Measurements on a Recurring Basis
The Company accounts for its commodity derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate derivatives at fair value
(see Note 7) on a recurring basis. The Company uses certain pricing models to determine the fair value of its
derivative financial instruments. Inputs to the pricing models include publicly available prices and forward price curves
generated from a compilation of data gathered from third parties. Company management validates the data provided
by third parties by understanding the pricing models used, obtaining market values from other pricing sources,
analyzing pricing data in certain situations and confirming that those securities trade in active markets. Assumed
credit risk adjustments, based on published credit ratings, public bond yield spreads and credit default swap spreads,
are applied to the Company’s commodity derivatives and, when applicable, its interest rate derivatives.
Table of Contents
Fair Value Hierarchy
F-42
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
In accordance with applicable accounting standards, the Company has categorized its financial instruments, based on
the priority of inputs to the valuation technique, into a three-level fair value hierarchy. The fair value hierarchy gives
the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority
to unobservable inputs (Level 3).
Financial assets and liabilities recorded on the consolidated balance sheets are categorized based on the inputs to
the valuation techniques as follows:
Level 1
Financial assets and liabilities for which values are based on unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or
liabilities in an active market that management has the ability to access.
Level 2
Level 3
Financial assets and liabilities for which values are based on quoted prices in markets that are not active or
model inputs that are observable either directly or indirectly for substantially the full term of the asset or
liability (commodity derivatives and interest rate swaps).
Financial assets and liabilities for which values are based on prices or valuation techniques that require
inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. These inputs reflect
management’s own assumptions about the assumptions a market participant would use in pricing the asset
or liability.
When the inputs used to measure fair value fall within different levels of the hierarchy in a liquid environment, the level
within which the fair value measurement is categorized is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair
value measurement in its entirety. The Company conducts a review of fair value hierarchy classifications on a
quarterly basis. Changes in the observability of valuation inputs may result in a reclassification for certain financial
assets or liabilities.
The following presents the fair value hierarchy for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
Assets:
Commodity derivatives
Liabilities:
Commodity derivatives
Fair Value Measurements on a Recurring Basis
Level 2
Netting(1)
December 31, 2011
(in thousands)
880,175
320,835
$
$
$
$
(303,272)
(303,272)
Total
$
$
576,903
17,563
(1) Represents counterparty netting under agreements governing such derivatives.
Table of Contents
F-43
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Note 9—Other Property and Equipment
Other property and equipment consists of the following:
Natural gas compression plant and pipeline
Buildings and leasehold improvements
Vehicles
Drilling and other equipment
Furniture and office equipment
Land
Less accumulated depreciation
Note 10—Asset Retirement Obligations
December 31,
2011
(in thousands)
2010
$ 96,624  
  10,874  
  10,127  
 
1,827  
  17,529  
 
2,922  
   
 
  139,903  
  (35,151) 
   
 
$104,752
$129,863   
  16,158   
  13,653   
 
3,645   
  29,972   
 
3,944   
   
   
  197,235   
  (48,024)  
   
   
$149,211
Asset retirement obligations associated with retiring tangible long-lived assets are recognized as a liability in the
period in which a legal obligation is incurred and becomes determinable and are included in “other noncurrent liabilities”
on the consolidated balance sheets. Accretion expense is included in “depreciation, depletion and amortization” on the
consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of additions to the asset retirement obligations is estimated
using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs to the
valuation include estimates of: (i) plug and abandon costs per well based on existing regulatory requirements;
(ii) remaining life per well; (iii) future inflation factors (2.0% for each of the years in the three-year period ended
December 31, 2011); and (iv) a credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate (average of 7.5%, 8.6% and 9.6% for the years
ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively).
The following presents a reconciliation of the Company’s asset retirement obligations:
Asset retirement obligations at beginning of year
Liabilities added from acquisitions
Liabilities added from drilling
Current year accretion expense
Settlements
Revision of estimates
Asset retirement obligations at end of year
December 31,
2011
(in thousands)
2010
$33,135  
  6,976  
 
309  
  2,694  
 
(169) 
  —    
   
 
$42,945
$42,945   
  19,853   
  1,277   
  4,140   
  (2,218)  
  5,145   
   
   
$71,142
Note 11—Commitments and Contingencies
The Company has been named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits and is involved in various other disputes
arising in the ordinary course of business, including claims from royalty owners related to disputed royalty payments
and royalty valuations. The Company has established reserves that management currently believes are
Table of Contents
F-44
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
adequate to provide for potential liabilities based upon its evaluation of these matters. For a certain statewide class
action royalty payment dispute where a reserve has not yet been established, the Company has denied that it has any
liability on the claims and has raised arguments and defenses that, if accepted by the court, will result in no loss to
the Company. Discovery in this dispute is ongoing and is not complete. As a result, the Company is unable to
estimate a possible loss, or range of possible loss, if any. The Company is not currently a party to any litigation or
pending claims that it believes would have a material adverse effect on its overall business, financial position, results
of operations or liquidity; however, cash flow could be significantly impacted in the reporting periods in which such
matters are resolved.
On September 15, 2008, and October 3, 2008, Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. (“Lehman Holdings”) and Lehman
Brothers Commodity Services Inc. (“Lehman Commodity Services”), respectively, filed voluntary petitions for
reorganization under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District
of New York. At December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010, the Company had a net receivable of approximately $7
million from Lehman Commodity Services related to canceled derivative contracts, which is included in “other current
assets” on the consolidated balance sheets. The value of the receivable was estimated based on market
expectations. In March 2011, the Company, Lehman Holdings and Lehman Commodity Services entered into
Termination Agreements under which the Company was granted general unsecured claims against Lehman Holdings
and Lehman Commodity Services in the amount of $51 million each, provided that the aggregate value of the
distributions to the Company on account of both such claims will not exceed $51 million (collectively, the “Company
Claim”). On December 6, 2011, a Chapter 11 Plan (“Plan”) was approved by the Bankruptcy Court. Initial distributions
under the Plan to creditors, including the Company, are expected to occur after January 31, 2012. Based on the
recovery estimates described in the approved disclosure statement relating to the Plan, the Company expects to
ultimately receive a substantial portion of the Company Claim.
Note 12—Earnings Per Unit
Basic earnings per unit is computed by dividing net earnings attributable to unitholders by the weighted average
number of units outstanding during each period. Diluted earnings per unit is computed by adjusting the average
number of units outstanding for the dilutive effect, if any, of unit equivalents. The Company uses the treasury stock
method to determine the dilutive effect.
Table of Contents
F-45
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
The following table provides a reconciliation of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted per unit
computations for income (loss) from continuing operations:
(in thousands)
Year ended December 31, 2011:
Income from continuing operations:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Income per unit:
Basic income per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted income per unit
Year ended December 31, 2010:
Loss from continuing operations:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Loss per unit:
Income (Loss)
(Numerator)
$
 
   
$
438,439   
(4,739)  
   
433,700   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$ (114,288)  
—     
 
   
   
$ (114,288)
Per Unit
Amount
$ 2.52  
  (0.01) 
   
 
$ 2.51
Units
(Denominator)    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
172,004    
725    
    
172,729
Loss per unit:
Basic loss per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted loss per unit
Year ended December 31, 2009:
Loss from continuing operations:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Loss per unit:
Basic loss per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted loss per unit
$ (295,841)  
—     
 
   
   
$ (295,841)
142,535    
—      
    
142,535    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
119,307    
—      
    
119,307
$ (0.80) 
  —    
   
 
$ (0.80)
$ (2.48) 
  —    
   
 
$ (2.48)
There were no anti-dilutive unit equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2011. Basic units outstanding excludes
the effect of weighted average anti-dilutive unit equivalents related to approximately 2 million unit options and warrants
for each of the years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009. All equivalent units were anti-dilutive for the
years ended December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively.
Note 13—Operating Leases
The Company leases office space and other property and equipment under lease agreements expiring on various
dates through 2019. The Company recognized expense under operating leases of approximately $5 million, $5 million,
and $4 million, for the years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, respectively.
Table of Contents
F-46
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
As of December 31, 2011, future minimum lease payments were as follows (in thousands):
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Thereafter
$ 5,652  
  4,769  
  4,598  
  4,455  
  2,950  
  9,053  
   
 
$31,477
Note 14—Income Taxes
The Company is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, with
the exception of the states of Texas and Michigan, with income tax liabilities and/or benefits of the Company passed
through to its unitholders. Limited liability companies are subject to state income taxes in Texas and Michigan and
certain of the Company’s subsidiaries are Subchapter C-corporations subject to federal and state income taxes. As
such, with the exception of the states of Texas and Michigan and certain subsidiaries, the Company is not a taxable
entity, it does not directly pay federal and state income taxes and recognition has not been given to federal and state
income taxes for the operations of the Company, except as set forth in the tables below.
The Company’s taxable income or loss, which may vary substantially from the net income or net loss reported in the
consolidated statements of operations, is includable in the federal and state income tax returns of each unitholder.
The aggregate difference in the basis of net assets for financial and tax reporting purposes cannot be readily
determined as the Company does not have access to information about each unitholder’s tax attributes.
Certain of the Company’s subsidiaries are Subchapter C-corporations subject to federal and state income taxes.
Income tax benefit (expense) from continuing operations consisted of the following:
Current taxes:
Federal
State
Deferred taxes:
Federal
State
Year Ended December 31,
2011
$(4,551)  
(605)  
 
 
  1,148   
  (1,458)  
   
   
$(5,466)
2010    
(in thousands)
 
$
(65)  
  (1,088)  
 
  (2,862)  
(226)  
 
   
   
$(4,241)
2009
$(1,063) 
 
(678)
5,307  
655  
 
   
 
$ 4,221
As of December 31, 2011, the Company’s taxable entities had approximately $8 million of net operating loss
carryforwards for federal income tax purposes which will begin expiring in 2031.
Table of Contents
F-47
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
Income tax benefit (expense) differed from amounts computed by applying the federal income tax rate of 35% to pre-
tax income (loss) from continuing operations as a result of the following:
Federal statutory rate
State, net of federal tax benefit
Loss excluded from nontaxable entities
Other items
Year Ended December 31,
2011  
 
  35.0%  
  0.5  
 
 (34.4)
2010  
 
  35.0%   
  (1.2) 
 
 (37.5)
2009  
  35.0% 
  —    
 (34.3)
Other items
Effective rate
0.1  
 
 
  
  1.2%
(0.1) 
 
 
  
  (3.8)%
0.7  
 
  
  1.4%
Significant components of the deferred tax assets and liabilities were as follows:
Deferred tax assets:
Net operating loss carryforwards
Unit-based compensation
Other
Valuation allowance
Total deferred tax assets
Deferred tax liabilities:
Other accruals
Property and equipment principally due to differences in
depreciation
Other
Total deferred tax liabilities
Net deferred tax assets
December 31,
2011
2010
(in thousands)
$
159   
  9,146   
  3,606   
  —     
   
   
  12,911   
   
   
 
  —
(8,226)  
  (1,646)  
   
   
  (9,872)  
   
   
$ 3,039
$
717  
  6,234  
  3,513  
 
(217) 
   
 
  10,247
(2,755)
(4,323) 
179  
 
   
 
  (6,899) 
   
 
$ 3,348
Net deferred tax assets and liabilities were classified in the consolidated balance sheets as follows:
Deferred tax assets
Deferred tax liabilities
Other current assets
Deferred tax assets
Deferred tax liabilities
Other noncurrent assets (liabilities)
December 31,
2011
(in thousands)
2010  
 
$ 5,265  
  (3,105) 
   
 
$ 2,160  
   
 
$ 4,982  
  (3,794) 
   
 
$ 1,188
$ 8,279   
(589)  
 
   
   
$ 7,690   
   
   
$ 4,632   
  (9,283)  
   
   
$(4,651)
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that
some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax
Table of Contents
F-48
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary
differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected
future taxable income and tax planning strategies in making this assessment. At December 31, 2011, based upon the
level of historical taxable income and projections for future taxable income over the periods in which the deferred tax
assets are deductible, management believes it is more likely than not that the Company will realize the benefits of
these deductible differences. The amount of deferred tax assets considered realizable could be reduced in the future if
estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced.
In accordance with the applicable accounting standard, the Company recognizes only the impact of income tax
positions that, based on their merits, are more likely than not to be sustained upon audit by a taxing authority. In
evaluating its current tax positions in order to identify any material uncertain tax positions, the Company developed a
policy in identifying uncertain tax positions that considers support for each tax position, industry standards, tax return
disclosures and schedules, and the significance of each position. It is the Company’s policy to recognize interest and
penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. The Company had no material uncertain
tax positions at December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2010.
Note 15—Supplemental Disclosures to the Consolidated Balance Sheets and Consolidated Statements of Cash
Flows
“Other accrued liabilities” reported on the consolidated balance sheets include the following:
Accrued compensation
Accrued interest
Other
December 31,
2011
(in thousands)
2010
$18,931  
  62,999  
 
509  
   
 
$82,439
$19,581    
  55,170    
  1,147    
   
    
$75,898
Supplemental disclosures to the consolidated statements of cash flows are presented below:
Cash payments for interest, net of amounts capitalized
Cash payments for income taxes
Noncash investing activities:
In connection with the acquisition of oil and natural gas properties,
liabilities were assumed as follow:
Fair value of assets acquired
Cash paid
Receivable from seller
Payables to sellers
Liabilities assumed
2011
Year Ended December 31,
2010
$
   
$
247,217   
   
487
$ 1,523,466   
  (1,500,193)  
3,557   
 
(4,847)  
 
   
   
$
21,983
(in thousands)
$
   
$
128,807   
   
1,797
$ 1,375,010   
  (1,351,033)  
9,976   
 
—     
 
   
   
$
33,953
2009
$ 73,861  
   
 
1,282  
$
$ 117,717  
  (115,285) 
636  
 
—    
 
   
 
$
3,068
Table of Contents
F-49
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
For purposes of the consolidated statements of cash flows, the Company considers all highly liquid short-term
investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Restricted cash of approximately
$4 million and $3 million is included in “other noncurrent assets” on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31,
2011, and December 31, 2010, respectively, and represents cash deposited by the Company into a separate account
and designated for asset retirement obligations in accordance with contractual agreements.
The Company manages its working capital and cash requirements to borrow only as needed from its Credit Facility. At
December 31, 2011, approximately $54 million was included in “accounts payable and accrued expenses” on the
consolidated balance sheet which represents reclassified net outstanding checks. There was no such balance at
December 31, 2010. The Company presents these net outstanding checks as cash flows from financing activities on
the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Note 16—Subsidiary Guarantors
The 2019 Senior Notes, the 2010 Issued Notes and the Original Senior Notes are guaranteed by all of the Company’s
material subsidiaries. The Company is a holding company and has no independent assets or operations of its own,
the guarantees under each series of notes are full and unconditional and joint and several, and any subsidiaries of the
Company other than the subsidiary guarantors are minor. There are no restrictions on the Company’s ability to obtain
cash dividends or other distributions of funds from the guarantor subsidiaries.
Table of Contents
F-50
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS DATA (Unaudited)
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with LINN’s historical audited financial
statements. The Company’s Appalachian Basin and Mid Atlantic operations are classified as discontinued operations
on the consolidated statements of operations for the period ended December 31, 2009 (see Note 2). Where applicable,
the following supplemental oil and natural gas data present continuing operations separately from discontinued
operations.
Costs Incurred in Oil and Natural Gas Property Acquisition, Exploration and Development Activities
Costs incurred in oil and natural gas property acquisition, exploration and development, whether capitalized or
expensed, are presented below:
Year Ended December 31,
Property acquisition costs:(1)
Proved
Unproved
Exploration costs
Development costs
Asset retirement costs
Total costs incurred
2011
2010
(in thousands)
$1,328,328     $1,290,826    
65,604    
  
74    
  
244,834    
  
748    
  
  
    
   $2,158,639     $1,602,086
188,409    
80    
639,395    
2,427
2009
$115,929  
 
947  
 
337  
  140,521  
 
371  
   
 
$258,105
(1) See Note 2 for details about the Company’s acquisitions.
Oil and Natural Gas Capitalized Costs
Aggregate capitalized costs related to oil, natural gas and NGL production activities with applicable accumulated
depletion and amortization are presented below:
Proved properties:
Leasehold acquisition
Development
Unproved properties
Less accumulated depletion and amortization
December 31,
2011
2010
(in thousands)
$ 6,040,239   
  1,484,486   
310,925   
 
   
   
  7,835,650   
  (1,033,617)  
   
   
$ 6,802,033
$4,695,704  
840,175  
 
128,624  
 
   
 
  5,664,503  
(719,035) 
 
   
 
$4,945,468
Table of Contents
F-51
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS DATA (Unaudited)—Continued
Results of Oil and Natural Gas Producing Activities
The results of operations for oil, natural gas and NGL producing activities (excluding corporate overhead and interest
costs) are presented below:
Revenues and other:
Year Ended December 31,
2011
2010
2009
(in thousands)
Revenues and other:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquid
sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas
derivatives
Production costs:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Severance and ad valorem taxes
Other costs:
Exploration costs
Depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Texas margin tax expense
Gains on sale of assets and other, net
Results of continuing operations
Results of discontinued operations
$1,162,037
$690,054
$ 408,219
449,940   
 
   
   
  1,611,977   
   
   
 
232,619   
28,358   
78,458   
   
339,435   
   
 
2,390   
 
320,096   
 
—     
 
1,599   
 
(1,001)  
 
   
   
323,084   
 
   
   
$ 949,458   
   
   
—     
$
75,211    
   
    
  765,265    
   
    
  
  158,382    
  19,594    
  45,114    
   
    
  223,090    
   
    
  
 
5,168    
  226,552    
  38,600    
657    
 
—      
 
   
    
  270,977    
   
    
$271,198    
   
    
$ —
(141,374) 
   
 
  266,845
132,647  
18,202  
 
 
28,687  
   
 
  179,536
7,169  
  191,314  
 
—    
490  
 
(25,710) 
 
   
 
  173,263  
   
 
$ (85,954) 
   
 
(238) 
$
There is no federal tax provision included in the results above because the Company’s subsidiaries subject to federal
tax do not own any of the Company’s oil and natural gas interests. Limited liability companies are subject to state
income taxes in Texas and Michigan (see Note 14). Discontinued operations for 2009 primarily represent activity
related to post-closing adjustments for the sale of properties in the Appalachian Basin in 2008 (see Note 2).
Table of Contents
F-52
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS DATA (Unaudited)—Continued
Proved Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Reserves
The proved reserves of oil, natural gas and NGL of the Company have been prepared by the independent engineering
firm, DeGolyer and MacNaughton. In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves at December 31, 2011,
December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009, were estimated using the average price during the 12-month period,
determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month, unless prices are defined by
contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions. An analysis of the change in
estimated quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL reserves, all of which are located within the U.S., is shown below:
Proved developed and undeveloped
reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Purchase of minerals in place
Extensions, discoveries and other additions
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved developed and undeveloped
reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Purchase of minerals in place
Extensions, discoveries and other additions
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Year Ended December 31, 2011
Natural Gas
Oil
NGL
(Bcf)
(MMBbls)
(MMBbls)
Total
(Bcfe)
1,233   
(71)  
337   
240   
(64)  
   
1,675
805   
998
428   
677
156.4   
(9.2)  
 
39.3   
 
 
10.3   
(7.8)  
 
  
   
  189.0
103.0   
  124.8
53.4   
64.2
70.9   
0.9   
1.0   
24.6   
(3.9)  
   
93.5
39.9   
47.8
31.0   
45.7
2,597  
  (121) 
  579  
  450  
  (135) 
  
 
 3,370
1,662  
 2,034
935  
 1,336
Year Ended December 31, 2010
Natural Gas
Oil
NGL
(Bcf)
(MMBbls)
(MMBbls)
Total
(Bcfe)
774   
22   
369   
118   
(50)  
   
1,233
549   
805
225   
428
102.1   
3.9   
 
49.1   
 
 
6.1   
(4.8)  
 
  
   
  156.4
77.9   
 
  103.0
24.2   
53.4
54.2   
5.2   
1.2   
13.3   
(3.0)  
   
70.9
33.9   
39.9
20.3   
31.0
1,712  
 
77  
  671  
  234  
(97) 
 
  
 
 2,597
1,220  
 1,662
492  
  935
F-53
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS DATA (Unaudited)—Continued
Table of Contents
Year Ended December 31, 2009
Proved developed and undeveloped
reserves:
  
Beginning of year
  
Revisions of previous estimates
  
Purchase of minerals in place
  
Extensions, discoveries and other additions   
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Natural Gas
Oil
NGL
(Bcf)
(MMBbls)
(MMBbls)
Total
(Bcfe)
851   
(69)  
7   
31   
(46)  
   
774
585   
549
266   
225
84.1   
 
10.9   
 
8.8   
 
1.6   
 
(3.3)  
 
  
   
  102.1
61.9   
77.9
22.2   
24.2
50.7   
4.0   
0.4   
1.5   
(2.4)  
   
54.2
29.6   
33.9
21.1   
20.3
1,660  
20  
 
62  
 
 
50  
(80) 
 
  
 
 1,712
1,134  
 1,220
526  
  492
The tables above include changes in estimated quantities of oil and NGL reserves shown in Mcf equivalents at a rate
of one barrel per six Mcf.
Proved reserves increased by approximately 773 Bcfe to approximately 3,370 Bcfe for the year ended December 31,
2011, from 2,597 Bcfe for the year ended December 31, 2010. The year ended December 31, 2011, includes 121 Bcfe
in negative revisions of previous estimates, due primarily to 153 Bcfe in negative revisions due to asset performance.
These negative revisions were partially offset by 32 Bcfe in positive revisions primarily due to higher oil prices.
Twelve acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2011, increased proved reserves by approximately 579 Bcfe.
In addition, extensions and discoveries, primarily from 292 productive wells drilled during the year, contributed
approximately 450 Bcfe to the increase in proved reserves.
Proved reserves increased by approximately 885 Bcfe to approximately 2,597 Bcfe for the year ended December 31,
2010, from 1,712 Bcfe for the year ended December 31, 2009. The year ended December 31, 2010, includes 77 Bcfe
in positive revisions of previous estimates, due primarily to higher oil and natural gas prices, which contributed
approximately 155 Bcfe. These positive revisions were partially offset by 78 Bcfe in negative revisions primarily due
to asset performance. Eleven acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2010, increased proved reserves by
approximately 671 Bcfe. In addition, extensions and discoveries, primarily from 138 productive wells drilled during the
year, contributed approximately 234 Bcfe to the increase in proved reserves.
Proved reserves increased by approximately 52 Bcfe to approximately 1,712 Bcfe for the year ended December 31,
2009. The year ended December 31, 2009, includes 20 Bcfe in positive revisions of previous estimates, due primarily
to higher asset performance, which contributed approximately 39 Bcfe, most significantly related to well reactivations
and waterflood optimization work in the Mid-Continent Shallow region. These positive revisions were partially offset by
19 Bcfe in negative revisions primarily due to decreases in natural gas prices. Two acquisitions during the year ended
December 31, 2009, increased proved reserves by approximately 62 Bcfe. In addition, extensions and discoveries,
primarily from 72 productive wells drilled during the year, contributed approximately 50 Bcfe to the increase in proved
reserves.
Table of Contents
F-54
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS DATA (Unaudited)—Continued
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows and Changes Therein Relating to Proved
Reserves
Information with respect to the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved reserves
is summarized below. Future cash inflows are computed by applying applicable prices relating to the Company’s
proved reserves to the year-end quantities of those reserves. Future production, development, site restoration and
abandonment costs are derived based on current costs assuming continuation of existing economic conditions. There
are no future income tax expenses because the Company is not subject to federal income taxes. Limited liability
companies are subject to state income taxes in Texas and Michigan; however, these amounts are not material (see
Note 14).
(1)
December 31,
2011
$ 29,319,369    $20,160,275    $10,093,876  
Future estimated revenues
  (4,200,091) 
Future estimated production costs
  
 
Future estimated development costs   
(816,577) 
   
 
  5,077,208
(9,464,319)  
(2,848,497)  
   
  17,006,553
(6,825,147)  
  (1,733,929)  
   
   
  11,601,199
(in thousands)
2010
2009
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated
timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted
future net cash flows
Representative NYMEX prices:(1)
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
(10,391,693)
(7,377,667)
(3,353,926)
$ 6,614,860    $ 4,223,532    $ 1,723,282  
      
 
  
   $
   $
4.12    $
95.84    $
4.38    $
79.29    $
3.87  
61.05
In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves at December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010, and December 31,
2009, were estimated using the average price during the 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average
of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month, unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements,
excluding escalations based upon future conditions. The price used to estimate reserves is held constant over
the life of the reserves.
The following summarizes the principal sources of change in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash
flows:
Sales and transfers of oil, natural gas and NGL produced during the
period
Changes in estimated future development costs
Net change in sales and transfer prices and production costs related to
future production
Purchase of minerals in place
Extensions, discoveries, and improved recovery
Previously estimated development costs incurred during the period
Net change due to revisions in quantity estimates
Accretion of discount
Changes in production rates and other
Year Ended December 31,
2011
2010
2009
(in thousands)
$ (822,602)  
27,236
$ (466,964)  
 
(56,001)
$(228,683) 
 
54,141
784,308   
  1,452,169   
 
552,704   
306,827   
 
(292,343)  
 
422,353   
 
 
(39,324)
886,438   
  1,277,134   
 
329,642   
42,947   
 
164,999   
 
172,328   
 
 
149,727
254,036  
  128,779  
 
25,888  
52,699  
 
 
23,672  
  142,437  
  (154,054)
Change—continuing operations
Change—continuing operations
$2,391,328
$2,500,250
$ 298,915
F-55
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS DATA (Unaudited)—Continued
Table of Contents
The data presented should not be viewed as representing the expected cash flow from, or current value of, existing
proved reserves since the computations are based on a large number of estimates and arbitrary assumptions.
Reserve quantities cannot be measured with precision and their estimation requires many judgmental determinations
and frequent revisions. The required projection of production and related expenditures over time requires further
estimates with respect to pipeline availability, rates of demand and governmental control. Actual future prices and
costs are likely to be substantially different from the current prices and costs utilized in the computation of reported
amounts. Any analysis or evaluation of the reported amounts should give specific recognition to the computational
methods utilized and the limitations inherent therein.
Table of Contents
F-56
LINN ENERGY, LLC
SUPPLEMENTAL QUARTERLY DATA (Unaudited)
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with LINN’s historical unaudited financial
statements.
Quarterly Financial Data
2011:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquid sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives
Total revenues and other
Total expenses(1)
Losses on sale of assets and other, net
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Quarters Ended
March 31
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
June 30      September 30     December 31
292,482     $ 326,458  
   $ 240,707    $302,390     $
   $(369,476)   $205,515     $
824,240     $ (210,339) 
   $(126,473)   $510,571     $ 1,119,483     $ 118,873  
   $ 165,625    $195,672     $
211,254     $ 240,353  
1,646  
977     $
   $
279     $
614    $
$(446,682)   $237,109     $
  
   $
  
   
   $
(2.75)   $
   
(2.75)   $
1.34     $
   
1.33     $
837,627     $ (189,615)
4.74     $
   
4.72     $
(1.09) 
 
(1.09)
(1)
Includes the following expenses: lease operating, transportation, marketing, general and administrative,
exploration, bad debt, depreciation, depletion and amortization and taxes, other than income taxes.
2010:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquid sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives
Total revenues and other
Total expenses(1)
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Quarters Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
$149,386   
$ 96,003   
$247,036   
$124,740   
$
(322)
$ 65,310   
 
0.50   
   
0.50
$
   
$
$153,195   
$123,791   
$278,404   
$135,980   
$
(52)
$ 59,786   
 
0.41   
   
0.40
$
   
$
177,306    
43,505    
222,361    
145,978    
6,073
4,143    
  
0.03    
    
0.03
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
   
$
December 31
$ 210,167  
$ (188,088) 
$
24,479  
$ 200,508  
$
837
$ (243,527)
$
   
$
(1.64) 
 
(1.64)
(1)
Includes the following expenses: lease operating, transportation, marketing, general and administrative,
exploration, bad debt, depreciation, depletion and amortization, impairment of long-lived assets and taxes, other
than income taxes.
Table of Contents
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable—trade, net
Derivative instruments
Other current assets
Total current assets
Noncurrent assets:
F-57
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
June 30,
2012
(Unaudited)
December 31,
2011
(in thousands,
$
except unit amounts)
1,883   
321,012   
489,530   
69,884   
   
882,309
$
1,114  
284,565  
255,063  
80,734  
 
621,476
Oil and natural gas properties (successful efforts method)
Oil and natural gas properties (successful efforts method)
Less accumulated depletion and amortization
Other property and equipment
Less accumulated depreciation
Derivative instruments
Other noncurrent assets
Total noncurrent assets
Total assets
LIABILITIES AND UNITHOLDERS’ CAPITAL
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable and accrued expenses
Derivative instruments
Other accrued liabilities
Total current liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities:
Credit facility
Senior notes, net
Derivative instruments
Other noncurrent liabilities
Total noncurrent liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Note 10)
Unitholders’ capital:
199,557,167 units and 177,364,558 units issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012,
and December 31, 2011, respectively
Accumulated income
Total liabilities and unitholders’ capital
9,995,748   
  (1,426,132)  
   
   
  8,569,616
427,902   
(58,696)  
   
369,206
924,317   
  
 
434,654   
  
   
   
  
  1,358,971   
  
   
   
  
  10,297,793   
  
  
   
   
   $11,180,102   
  
   
 
  
  
 
667,541   
   $
 
3,461   
  
108,841   
 
  
   
   
  
779,843   
 
  
   
   
  
  
 
  1,150,000   
  
  4,855,547   
  
 
250   
  
262,799   
 
  
   
   
  
  6,268,596
3,223,223   
  
908,440   
 
  
   
   
  
  4,131,663   
  
  
   
   
   $11,180,102
7,835,650  
  (1,033,617) 
   
 
  6,802,033
197,235  
(48,024) 
 
149,211
321,840  
 
105,577  
 
 
   
427,417  
 
   
 
  7,378,661  
   
 
$ 8,000,137
$
403,450  
14,060  
75,898  
 
493,408
940,000  
  3,053,657  
 
3,503  
80,659  
 
   
 
  4,077,819
2,751,354  
677,556  
 
   
 
  3,428,910  
   
 
$ 8,000,137
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
F-58
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(Unaudited)
Three Months Ended
June 30,
2012
2011
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2012
2011
Revenues and other:
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales
Gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives
Marketing revenues
Other revenues
Expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Transportation expenses
Marketing expenses
General and administrative expenses
Exploration costs
Bad debt expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Taxes, other than income taxes
Losses on sale of assets and other, net
Other income and (expenses):
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
Other, net
Income (loss) before income taxes
Income tax expense
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average units outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
Distributions declared per unit
(in thousands, except per unit amounts)
 
$ 347,227   
  439,647   
10,841   
 
 
2,882   
   
   
  800,597   
   
   
 
70,129   
 
21,815   
 
6,458   
 
41,185   
 
407   
 
 
(38)  
  143,506   
  146,499   
30,656   
 
 
36   
   
   
  460,653   
   
   
 
—     
 
(94,390)  
 
(7,956)  
 
   
   
  (102,346)  
   
   
  237,598   
(512)  
 
   
   
$ 237,086   
   
   
 
1.19   
   
1.19   
   
 
  197,507   
   
   
  198,160   
   
   
0.725   
$
$ 696,122   
441,678   
 
12,131   
 
 
4,756   
   
   
  1,154,687   
   
   
 
141,765   
32,377   
7,150   
84,506   
817   
(22)  
260,782   
146,499   
55,851   
1,514   
   
731,239   
   
 
—     
 
(171,909)  
 
(11,225)  
 
   
   
(183,134)  
 
   
   
240,314   
 
(9,430)  
 
   
   
$ 230,884   
   
   
 
1.17   
   
1.16   
   
 
195,382   
   
196,039   
   
1.415
$302,390   
  205,515   
1,509   
 
 
1,157   
   
   
  510,571   
   
   
 
  56,363   
 
6,476   
 
1,044   
  31,543   
550   
 
 
33   
  79,345   
 
—     
  20,318   
 
977   
   
   
  196,649   
   
   
 
 
(9,810)  
  (62,361)  
 
(2,972)  
   
   
  (75,143)  
   
   
  238,779   
(1,670)  
 
   
   
$237,109   
   
   
 
1.34   
   
1.33   
   
 
  175,035   
   
   
  175,797   
   
   
0.66   
$
$
   
$
$
   
$
$
$
   
$
$ 543,097  
  (163,961) 
2,682  
 
 
2,280  
   
 
  384,098
102,264  
12,331  
 
 
1,853  
62,103  
 
995  
 
 
(5) 
  145,711  
—    
 
36,045  
 
 
1,591  
   
 
  362,888
(94,372) 
  (125,825) 
 
(4,718) 
   
 
  (224,915) 
   
 
  (203,705) 
(5,868) 
 
   
 
$(209,573)
$
   
$
(1.25) 
 
(1.25)
169,104  
   
 
  169,104  
   
 
1.32  
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
F-59
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF UNITHOLDERS’ CAPITAL
(Unaudited)
Unitholders’
Accumulated
Unitholders’
Total
Units
Capital
Capital
(in thousands)
Income
$ 677,556     $3,428,910
December 31, 2011
Sale of units, net of underwriting discounts and expenses
of $30,007
Issuance of units
Distributions to unitholders
Unit-based compensation expenses
Excess tax benefit from unit-based compensation
Net income
June 30, 2012
177,365     $2,751,354
21,090    
1,102
731,455   
4,494   
(282,166)  
14,834   
3,252   
—     
  
   
 199,557     $3,223,223
—      
—      
—      
—      
—      
230,884
731,455  
 
4,494  
 
(282,166) 
 
14,834  
 
3,252  
 
230,884  
 
   
 
$ 908,440     $4,131,663
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-60
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Unaudited)
Cash flow from operating activities:
Six Months Ended
2012
June 30,
(in thousands)
2011
Cash flow from operating activities:
Net income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating
activities:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets
Unit-based compensation expenses
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Amortization and write-off of deferred financing fees and other
(Gains) losses on sale of assets and other, net
Deferred income tax
Mark-to-market on derivatives:
Total (gains) losses
Cash settlements
Premiums paid for derivatives
Changes in assets and liabilities:
Increase in accounts receivable – trade, net
(Increase) decrease in other assets
Increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses
Increase (decrease) in other liabilities
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
Cash flow from investing activities:
Acquisition of oil and natural gas properties
Development of oil and natural gas properties
Purchases of other property and equipment
Proceeds from sale of properties and equipment and other
Net cash used in investing activities
Cash flow from financing activities:
Proceeds from sale of units
Proceeds from borrowings
Repayments of debt
Distributions to unitholders
Financing fees, offering expenses and other, net
Excess tax benefit from unit-based compensation
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents:
Beginning
$
230,884
$ (209,573)
260,782   
146,499   
14,834   
—     
15,793   
111   
5,991   
 
(441,678)  
174,316   
(583,434)  
 
(14,372)  
(1,840)  
39,346   
30,339   
   
(122,429)  
   
 
  (1,762,933)  
(481,140)  
 
 
(22,433)  
575   
 
   
   
  (2,265,931)  
   
   
 
 
761,362   
  3,954,802   
  (1,945,000)  
(282,166)  
 
(103,121)  
 
 
3,252   
   
   
  2,389,129   
   
   
769   
 
 
1,114   
   
1,883
$
145,711  
—    
11,181  
94,372  
12,413  
(161) 
2,790
163,961  
104,512  
—
(82,202) 
2,333  
74,348  
(15,923) 
 
303,762
(847,780) 
 
(225,889) 
 
(18,657) 
 
10,590  
 
   
 
  (1,081,736)
648,971  
  1,359,240  
  (1,064,679) 
(222,391) 
 
(111,987) 
 
 
2,587  
   
 
611,741  
 
   
 
(166,233)
$
236,001  
 
69,768
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
Ending
F-61
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
Note 1—Basis of Presentation
Nature of Business
Linn Energy, LLC (“LINN Energy” or the “Company”) is an independent oil and natural gas company. LINN Energy’s
mission is to acquire, develop and maximize cash flow from a growing portfolio of long-life oil and natural gas assets.
The Company’s properties are located in the United States (“U.S.”), in the Mid-Continent, the Hugoton Basin, the
Permian Basin, Michigan, Illinois, the Williston/Powder River Basin, California and east Texas. Effective January 1,
2012, the Company realigned its existing regions and in May 2012 added the East Texas region and now has seven
operating regions in the U.S.: Mid-Continent, which includes properties in Oklahoma, Louisiana and the eastern portion
of the Texas Panhandle (including the Granite Wash and Cleveland horizontal plays); Hugoton Basin, which includes
properties located primarily in Kansas and the Shallow Texas Panhandle; Permian Basin, which includes areas in
west Texas and southeast New Mexico; Michigan/Illinois, which includes the Antrim Shale formation in the northern
part of Michigan and oil properties in southern Illinois; Williston/Powder River Basin, which includes the Bakken
formation in North Dakota and the Powder River Basin in Wyoming; California, which includes the Brea Olinda Field of
the Los Angeles Basin; and East Texas, which includes properties located in east Texas. The realignment had no
effect on the Company’s operations.
Principles of Consolidation and Reporting
The condensed consolidated financial statements at June 30, 2012, and for the three months and six months ended
June 30, 2012, and June 30, 2011, are unaudited, but in the opinion of management include all adjustments
(consisting of normal recurring adjustments) necessary for a fair presentation of the results for the interim periods.
Certain information and note disclosures normally included in annual financial statements prepared in accordance with
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) have been condensed or omitted under Securities and
Exchange Commission (“SEC”) rules and regulations; as such, this report should be read in conjunction with the
financial statements and notes in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011.
The results reported in these unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements should not necessarily be taken
as indicative of results that may be expected for the entire year.
The condensed consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned
subsidiaries. All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated upon consolidation.
Investments in noncontrolled entities over which the Company exercises significant influence are accounted for under
the equity method.
The condensed consolidated financial statements for previous periods include certain reclassifications that were made
to conform to current presentation. Such reclassifications have no impact on previously reported net income (loss) or
unitholders’ capital.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires
management of the Company to make estimates and assumptions about future events. These estimates and the
underlying assumptions affect the amount of assets and liabilities reported, disclosures about contingent assets and
liabilities, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses. The estimates that are particularly significant to the
financial statements include estimates of the Company’s reserves of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids (“NGL”),
future cash flows from oil and natural gas properties, depreciation, depletion
Table of Contents
F-62
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
and amortization, asset retirement obligations, certain revenues and operating expenses, fair values of commodity
derivatives and fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. As fair value is a market-based measurement,
it is determined based on the assumptions that market participants would use. These estimates and assumptions are
based on management’s best estimates and judgment. Management evaluates its estimates and assumptions on an
ongoing basis using historical experience and other factors, including the current economic environment, which
management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Such estimates and assumptions are adjusted
when facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual
results could differ from these estimates. Any changes in estimates resulting from continuing changes in the
economic environment will be reflected in the financial statements in future periods.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In December 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an Accounting Standards Update
(“ASU”) that requires an entity to disclose information about offsetting and related arrangements to enable users of its
financial statements to understand the effect of those arrangements on its financial position. The ASU requires
disclosure of both gross information and net information about both instruments and transactions eligible for offset in
the statement of financial position and instruments and transactions subject to an agreement similar to a master
netting arrangement. The ASU will be applied retrospectively and is effective for periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2013. The Company is currently evaluating the impact, if any, of the adoption of this ASU on its
consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In May 2011, the FASB issued an ASU that further addresses fair value measurement accounting and related
disclosure requirements. The ASU clarifies the FASB’s intent regarding the application of existing fair value
measurement and disclosure requirements, changes the fair value measurement requirements for certain financial
instruments, and sets forth additional disclosure requirements for other fair value measurements. The ASU is to be
applied prospectively and is effective for periods beginning after December 15, 2011. The Company adopted the ASU
effective January 1, 2012. The adoption of the requirements of the ASU, which expanded disclosures, had no effect
on the Company’s results of operations or financial position.
Note 2—Acquisitions
Acquisitions—2012
On May 1, 2012, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in east
Texas. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the condensed consolidated financial
statements since the acquisition date. The Company paid approximately $168 million in total consideration for these
properties. The transaction was financed primarily with borrowings under the Company’s Credit Facility, as defined in
Note 6.
On April 3, 2012, the Company entered into a joint-venture agreement (“Agreement”) with an affiliate of Anadarko
Petroleum Corporation (“Anadarko”) whereby the Company will participate as a partner in the CO2 enhanced oil
recovery development of the Salt Creek field, located in the Powder River Basin of Wyoming. Anadarko assigned the
Company 23% of its interest in the field in exchange for future funding of $400 million of Anadarko’s development
costs. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the condensed consolidated financial
statements since the Agreement date. The Company assigned approximately $392 million to the net assets acquired
as of the Agreement date, which reflects an imputed discount of approximately $8 million on the future funding of this
transaction. As of June 30, 2012, the Company has paid approximately $54 million towards the future funding
commitment.
F-63
Table of Contents
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
On March 30, 2012, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in the
Hugoton Basin in Kansas from BP America Production Company (“BP”). The results of operations of these properties
have been included in the condensed consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date. The Company paid
approximately $1.17 billion in total consideration for these properties. The transaction was financed primarily with
proceeds from the March 2012 debt offering, as described below.
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, the Company completed other smaller acquisitions of oil and natural gas
properties located in its various operating regions. The results of operations of these properties have been included in
the condensed consolidated financial statements since the acquisition dates. The Company, in the aggregate, paid
approximately $67 million in total consideration for these properties.
These acquisitions were accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting. Accordingly, the Company
conducted assessments of net assets acquired and recognized amounts for identifiable assets acquired and liabilities
assumed at their estimated acquisition date fair values, while transaction and integration costs associated with the
acquisitions were expensed as incurred. The initial accounting for the business combinations is not complete and
adjustments to provisional amounts, or recognition of additional assets acquired or liabilities assumed, may occur as
more detailed analyses are completed and additional information is obtained about the facts and circumstances that
existed as of the acquisition dates.
The following presents the values assigned to the net assets acquired as of the acquisition dates (in thousands):
Assets:
Current
Noncurrent
Oil and natural gas properties
Total assets acquired
Liabilities:
Current
Asset retirement obligations
Noncurrent
Total liabilities assumed
Net assets acquired
7,358  
$
 
208,423  
  1,625,246  
   
 
$1,841,027
$ 208,139  
34,096  
 
 
196,600  
   
 
$ 438,835  
   
 
$1,402,192
Current assets include receivables and inventory and noncurrent assets include other property and equipment. Current
liabilities include payables, ad valorem taxes payable and environmental liabilities. Current liabilities and noncurrent
liabilities, as of the Agreement date, consist of payables of approximately $195 million and $197 million, respectively,
related to the future funding commitment associated with the Anadarko transaction discussed above. As of June 30,
2012, the Company has paid approximately $54 million towards this commitment.
The fair value measurements of assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on inputs that are not observable
in the market and therefore represent Level 3 inputs. The fair values of oil and natural gas properties and asset
retirement obligations were measured using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted
amount. Significant inputs to the valuation of oil and natural gas properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future
operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity prices; (iv) estimated future
Table of Contents
F-64
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
cash flows; and (v) a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. These inputs require significant judgments
and estimates by the Company’s management at the time of the valuation and are the most sensitive and subject to
change.
The revenues and expenses related to certain properties acquired from BP, Plains Exploration & Production Company
(“Plains”), Panther Energy Company, LLC and Red Willow Mid-Continent, LLC (collectively referred to as “Panther”),
SandRidge Exploration and Production, LLC (“SandRidge”) and an affiliate of Concho Resources Inc. (“Concho”) are
included in the condensed consolidated results of operations of the Company as of March 30, 2012, December 15,
2011, June 1, 2011, April 1, 2011, and March 31, 2011, respectively. The following unaudited pro forma financial
information presents a summary of the Company’s condensed consolidated results of operations for the six months
ended June 30, 2012, and three months and six months ended June 30, 2011, assuming the acquisition from BP had
been completed as of January 1, 2011, and the acquisitions from Plains, Panther, SandRidge and Concho had been
completed as of January 1, 2010, including adjustments to reflect the values assigned to the net assets acquired. The
pro forma financial information is not necessarily indicative of the results of operations if the acquisitions had been
effective as of these dates.
Total revenues and other
Total operating expenses
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per unit:
Basic
Diluted
Three Months
Ended
June 30,
2011
2011
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2012
(in thousands, except
per unit amounts)
$ 647,633    
$ 268,273    
$ 276,393
$1,211,569    
$ 779,199    
$ 220,419
$ 640,027  
$ 514,965  
$(159,406)
$
   
$
1.56    
    
1.56
$
   
$
1.11    
    
1.11
$
   
$
(0.94) 
 
(0.94)
Acquisition—Pending
On June 21, 2012, the Company entered into a definitive purchase and sale agreement to acquire certain oil and
natural gas properties located in the Green River Basin area of southwest Wyoming from BP for a contract price of
approximately $1.03 billion. The Company paid a deposit of approximately $308 million in June 2012, which is
reported in “other noncurrent assets” on the condensed consolidated balance sheet at June 30, 2012. The Company
anticipates the acquisition will close on or before July 31, 2012, subject to closing conditions, and will be financed
with borrowings under its Credit Facility, as defined in Note 6.
Acquisition—2011
On June 1, 2011, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties in the Cleveland
play, located in the Texas Panhandle, from Panther. The results of operations of these properties have been included
in the condensed consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date. The Company paid approximately $224
million in total consideration for these properties. The transaction was financed primarily with proceeds from the
Company’s May 2011 debt offering.
On May 2, 2011 and May 11, 2011, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties
located in the Williston Basin. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the
Table of Contents
F-65
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
condensed consolidated financial statements since the acquisition dates. The Company paid approximately $153
million in total consideration for these acquisitions. The transactions were financed initially with borrowings under the
Company’s Credit Facility.
On April 1, 2011 and April 5, 2011, the Company completed two acquisitions of certain oil and natural gas properties
located in the Permian Basin, including properties from SandRidge. The results of operations of these properties have
been included in the condensed consolidated financial statements since the acquisition dates. The Company paid
approximately $239 million in total consideration for these acquisitions. The transactions were financed initially with
borrowings under the Company’s Credit Facility.
On March 31, 2011, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties in the Williston
Basin from Concho. The results of operations of these properties have been included in the condensed consolidated
financial statements since the acquisition date. The Company paid $194 million in cash and recorded a receivable
from Concho of $2 million, resulting in total consideration for the acquisition of approximately $192 million. The
transaction was financed primarily with proceeds from the Company’s March 2011 public offering of units, as
described below.
Note 3—Unitholders’ Capital
Equity Distribution Agreement
In August 2011, the Company entered into an equity distribution agreement, pursuant to which it may from time to
time issue and sell units representing limited liability company interests having an aggregate offering price of up to
$500 million. Sales of units, if any, will be made through a sales agent by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions, in
block transactions, or as otherwise agreed with the agent. The Company expects to use the net proceeds from any
sale of the units for general corporate purposes, which may include, among other things, capital expenditures,
acquisitions and the repayment of debt.
In January 2012, the Company, under its equity distribution agreement, issued and sold 1,539,651 units representing
limited liability company interests at an average unit price of $38.02 for proceeds of approximately $57 million (net of
approximately $2 million in commissions and professional service expenses). The Company used the net proceeds
for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of a portion of the indebtedness outstanding under its Credit
Facility. At June 30, 2012, units equaling approximately $411 million in aggregate offering price remained available to
be issued and sold under the agreement.
Public Offering of Units
In January 2012, the Company sold 19,550,000 units representing limited liability company interests at $35.95 per unit
($34.512 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $674 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $28 million). The Company used the net proceeds from the sale of
these units to repay a portion of the outstanding indebtedness under its Credit Facility.
In March 2011, the Company sold 16,726,067 units representing limited liability company interests at $38.80 per unit
($37.248 per unit, net of underwriting discount) for net proceeds of approximately $623 million (after underwriting
discount and offering expenses of approximately $26 million). The Company used a portion of the net proceeds from
the sale of these units to fund the March 2011 redemptions of a portion of the outstanding 2017 Senior Notes and
2018 Senior Notes, and to fund the cash tender offers and related expenses
Table of Contents
F-66
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
for a portion of the remaining 2017 Senior Notes and 2018 Senior Notes (see Note 6). The Company used the
remaining net proceeds from the sale of units to finance a portion of the March 31, 2011, acquisition in the
Williston/Powder River Basin region.
Distributions
Under the Company’s limited liability company agreement, the Company’s unitholders are entitled to receive a
quarterly distribution of available cash to the extent there is sufficient cash from operations after establishment of
cash reserves and payment of fees and expenses. Distributions paid by the Company during the six months ended
June 30, 2012, are presented on the condensed consolidated statement of unitholders’ capital. On April 24, 2012, the
Company’s Board of Directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash distribution from $0.69 per unit to $0.725 per
unit with respect to the first quarter of 2012, representing an increase of 5%. On July 24, 2012, the Company’s Board
of Directors declared a cash distribution of $0.725 per unit with respect to the second quarter of 2012. The distribution,
totaling approximately $145 million, will be paid on August 14, 2012, to unitholders of record as of the close of
business on August 7, 2012.
Note 4—Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Oil and Natural Gas Capitalized Costs
Aggregate capitalized costs related to oil, natural gas and NGL production activities with applicable accumulated
depletion and amortization are presented below:
Proved properties:
June 30,
2012
December 31,
2011
(in thousands)
Proved properties:
Leasehold acquisition
Development
Unproved properties
Less accumulated depletion and amortization
$ 7,460,077   
  2,019,012   
 
516,659   
   
   
  9,995,748   
  (1,426,132)  
   
   
$ 8,569,616
$ 6,040,239
1,484,486  
 
310,925  
   
 
  7,835,650  
  (1,033,617) 
   
 
$ 6,802,033
Impairment of Proved Properties
The Company evaluates the impairment of its proved oil and natural gas properties on a field-by-field basis whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The carrying values of
proved properties are reduced to fair value when the expected undiscounted future cash flows are less than net book
value. The fair values of proved properties are measured using valuation techniques consistent with the income
approach, converting future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair
values of proved properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future
commodity prices; and (iv) a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. These inputs require significant
judgments and estimates by the Company’s management at the time of the valuation and are the most sensitive and
subject to change.
Based on the analysis described above, for the three months and six months ended June 30, 2012, the Company
recorded a noncash impairment charge, before and after tax, of approximately $146 million associated with proved oil
and natural gas properties related to lower commodity prices. The carrying values of the impaired
Table of Contents
F-67
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
proved properties were reduced to fair value, estimated using inputs characteristic of a Level 3 fair-value
measurement. The charge is included in “impairment of long-lived assets” on the condensed consolidated statements
of operations. The Company recorded no impairment charge of proved oil and natural gas properties for the three
months or six months ended June 30, 2011.
Note 5—Unit-Based Compensation
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, the Company granted an aggregate 953,668 restricted units to
employees, primarily as part of its annual review of employee compensation, with an aggregate fair value of
approximately $35 million. The restricted units vest over three years. A summary of unit-based compensation
expenses included on the condensed consolidated statements of operations is presented below:
General and administrative expenses
Three Months Ended
2012
June 30,
2011
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2011
2012
(in thousands)
General and administrative expenses
Lease operating expenses
Total unit-based compensation expenses
Income tax benefit
Note 6—Debt
The following summarizes debt outstanding:
Credit facility(2)
11.75% senior notes due 2017
9.875% senior notes due 2018
6.50% senior notes due May 2019
6.25% senior notes due November 2019
8.625% senior notes due 2020
7.75% senior notes due 2021
Less current maturities
Unamortized discount
Total debt, net of discount
$ 6,289    
374    
 
   
    
$ 6,663    
   
    
$ 2,462
$ 5,290    
253    
 
   
    
$ 5,543    
   
    
$ 2,408
$13,911    
923    
 
   
    
$14,834    
   
    
$ 5,481
$10,694  
487  
 
   
 
$11,181  
   
 
$ 4,132
June 30, 2012
December 31, 2011
Fair
Value(1) 
 
$ 940  
 
46  
16  
 
 
742  
  —    
  1,406  
  1,036  
  —    
   
 
$4,186
Carrying
Value
$ 1,150   
 
41   
14   
 
 
750   
  1,800   
  1,300   
  1,000   
  —     
   
   
  6,055   
 
 
(49)  
   
   
$ 6,006
Fair
Carrying
Value(1)
Value    
(in millions, except percentages)
$ 940   
 
41   
14   
 
 
750   
  —     
  1,300   
  1,000   
  —     
   
   
  4,045   
 
 
(51)  
   
   
$ 3,994
$1,150    
 
45    
15    
 
 
738    
  1,753    
  1,401    
  1,043    
  —      
   
    
$6,145
(1) The carrying value of the Credit Facility is estimated to be substantially the same as its fair value. Fair values of
the senior notes were estimated based on prices quoted from third-party financial institutions, which are
characteristic of Level 2 fair value measurement inputs.
(2) Variable interest rates of 2.02% and 2.57% at June 30, 2012, and December 31, 2011, respectively.
Table of Contents
F-68
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
Credit Facility
The Company’s Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“Credit Facility”) provides for a revolving credit facility
up to the lesser of: (i) the then-effective borrowing base and (ii) the maximum commitment amount. In October 2011,
as part of the semi-annual redetermination, a borrowing base of $3.0 billion was approved by the lenders with a
maximum commitment amount of $1.5 billion. In February 2012, lenders approved an increase in the maximum
commitment amount to $2.0 billion. In May 2012, the Company entered into an amendment to its Credit Facility to
increase the borrowing base to $3.5 billion and extend the maturity date from April 2016 to April 2017.
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, in connection with amendments to its Credit Facility, the Company
incurred financing fees and expenses of approximately $5 million, which will be amortized over the life of the Credit
Facility. Such amortized expenses are recorded in “interest expense, net of amounts capitalized” on the condensed
consolidated statements of operations.
At June 30, 2012, available borrowing capacity under the Credit Facility was approximately $646 million, which
includes a $4 million reduction in availability for outstanding letters of credit and a $200 million reduction in availability
related to a restriction on swap agreements outstanding associated with the pending acquisition (see Note 2). The
$200 million reduction in availability under the Credit Facility will no longer apply once the pending acquisition has
closed.
In July 2012, the Company entered into an amendment to its Credit Facility to increase the maximum commitment
amount from $2.0 billion to $3.0 billion.
Redetermination of the borrowing base under the Credit Facility, based primarily on reserve reports that reflect
commodity prices at such time, occurs semi-annually, in April and October, as well as upon requested interim
redeterminations, by the lenders at their sole discretion. The Company also has the right to request one additional
borrowing base redetermination per year at its discretion, as well as the right to an additional redetermination each
year in connection with certain acquisitions. Significant declines in commodity prices may result in a decrease in the
borrowing base. The Company’s obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by mortgages on its and certain of
its material subsidiaries’ oil and natural gas properties and other personal property as well as a pledge of all ownership
interests in its direct and indirect material subsidiaries. The Company is required to maintain either: 1) mortgages on
properties representing at least 80% of the total value of oil and natural gas properties included on the most recent
reserve report, or 2) a Collateral Coverage Ratio of at least 2.5 to 1. Collateral Coverage Ratio is defined as ratio of
the present value of future cash flows from proved reserves from the currently mortgaged properties to the lesser of:
(i) the then-effective borrowing base and (ii) the maximum commitment amount. Additionally, the obligations under the
Credit Facility are guaranteed by all of the Company’s material subsidiaries and are required to be guaranteed by any
future material subsidiaries.
At the Company’s election, interest on borrowings under the Credit Facility is determined by reference to either the
London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin between 1.5% and 2.5% per annum (depending on
the then-current level of borrowings under the Credit Facility) or the alternate base rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable
margin between 0.5% and 1.5% per annum (depending on the then-current level of borrowings under the Credit
Facility). Interest is generally payable quarterly for loans bearing interest based on the ABR and at the end of the
applicable interest period for loans bearing interest at LIBOR. The Company is required to pay a commitment fee to
the lenders under the Credit Facility, which accrues at a rate per annum between 0.375% and 0.5% on the average
daily unused amount of the lesser of: (i) the maximum commitment amount of the lenders and (ii) the then-effective
borrowing base. The Company is in compliance with all financial and other covenants of the Credit Facility.
Table of Contents
F-69
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
Senior Notes Due November 2019
On March 2, 2012, the Company issued $1.8 billion in aggregate principal amount of 6.25% senior notes due
November 2019 (“November 2019 Senior Notes”) at a price of 99.989%. The November 2019 Senior Notes were sold
to a group of initial purchasers and then resold to qualified institutional buyers, each in transactions exempt from the
registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The Company received net
proceeds of approximately $1.77 billion (after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount of $198,000 and offering
expenses of approximately $29 million). The Company used the net proceeds to fund the BP acquisition (see Note 2).
The remaining proceeds were used to repay indebtedness under the Company’s Credit Facility and for general
corporate purposes. The financing fees and expenses of approximately $29 million incurred in connection with the
November 2019 Senior Notes will be amortized over the life of the notes. Such amortized financing fees and
expenses are recorded in “interest expense, net of amounts capitalized” on the condensed consolidated statements of
operations.
The November 2019 Senior Notes were issued under an indenture dated March 2, 2012 (“November 2019 Indenture”),
mature November 1, 2019, and bear interest at 6.25%. Interest is payable semi-annually on May 1 and November 1,
beginning November 1, 2012. The November 2019 Senior Notes are general unsecured senior obligations of the
Company and are effectively junior in right of payment to any secured indebtedness of the Company to the extent of
the collateral securing such indebtedness. Each of the Company’s material subsidiaries has guaranteed the
November 2019 Senior Notes on a senior unsecured basis. The November 2019 Indenture provides that the Company
may redeem: (i) on or prior to November 1, 2015, up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the November 2019
Senior Notes at a redemption price of 106.25% of the principal amount redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest,
with the net cash proceeds of one or more equity offerings; (ii) prior to November 1, 2015, all or part of the November
2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the principal amount redeemed, plus a make-whole premium (as
defined in the November 2019 Indenture) and accrued and unpaid interest; and (iii) on or after November 1, 2015, all or
part of the November 2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 103.125%, and decreasing percentages
thereafter, of the principal amount redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. The November 2019 Indenture also
provides that, if a change of control (as defined in the November 2019 Indenture) occurs, the holders have a right to
require the Company to repurchase all or part of the November 2019 Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to
101%, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The November 2019 Indenture contains covenants substantially similar to those under the Company’s May 2019
Senior Notes, 2010 Issued Senior Notes and Original Senior Notes, as defined below, that, among other things, limit
the Company’s ability to: (i) pay distributions on, purchase or redeem the Company’s units or redeem its subordinated
debt; (ii) make investments; (iii) incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain types of equity securities;
(iv) create certain liens; (v) sell assets; (vi) consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of the Company’s
assets; (vii) enter into agreements that restrict distributions or other payments from the Company’s restricted
subsidiaries to the Company; (viii) engage in transactions with affiliates; and (ix) create unrestricted subsidiaries. The
Company is in compliance with all financial and other covenants of the November 2019 Senior Notes.
In connection with the issuance and sale of the November 2019 Senior Notes, the Company entered into a
Registration Rights Agreement (“November 2019 Registration Rights Agreement”) with the initial purchasers. Under the
November 2019 Registration Rights Agreement, the Company agreed to use its reasonable efforts to file with the SEC
and cause to become effective a registration statement relating to an offer to issue new notes having terms
substantially identical to the November 2019 Senior Notes in exchange for outstanding November 2019 Senior Notes
within 400 days after the notes were issued. In certain circumstances, the Company may be
Table of Contents
F-70
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
required to file a shelf registration statement to cover resales of the November 2019 Senior Notes. If the Company
fails to satisfy these obligations, the Company may be required to pay additional interest to holders of the November
2019 Senior Notes under certain circumstances.
Senior Notes Due May 2019
On May 13, 2011, the Company issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.50% senior notes due 2019
(the “May 2019 Senior Notes”). The indentures related to the May 2019 Senior Notes contain redemption provisions
and covenants that are substantially similar to those of the November 2019 Senior Notes. On May 8, 2012, the
Company filed a registration statement on Form S-4 to register exchange notes that are also substantially similar to
the November 2019 Senior Notes. As of July 26, 2012, the registration statement has not been declared effective.
The deadline for registration has passed and the Company will be required to pay additional interest which is expected
to be less than $500,000.
Senior Notes Due 2020 and Senior Notes Due 2021
The Company has $1.3 billion in aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior notes due 2020 (the “2020 Senior
Notes”) and $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 7.75% senior notes due 2021 (the “2021 Senior Notes,” and
together with the 2020 Senior Notes, the “2010 Issued Senior Notes”). The indentures related to the 2010 Issued
Senior Notes contain redemption provisions and covenants that are substantially similar to those of the November
2019 Senior Notes. However, in 2011, the Company caused the trustee to remove the restrictive legends from each of
the 2010 Issued Senior Notes making them freely tradable (other than with respect to persons that are affiliates of the
Company), thereby terminating the Company’s obligations under each of the registration rights agreements entered
into in connection with the issuance of the 2010 Issued Senior Notes.
Senior Notes Due 2017 and Senior Notes Due 2018
The Company also has $41 million (originally $250 million) in aggregate principal amount of 11.75% senior notes due
2017 (the “2017 Senior Notes”) and $14 million (originally $256 million) in aggregate principal amount of 9.875% senior
notes due 2018 (the “2018 Senior Notes” and together with the 2017 Senior Notes, the “Original Senior Notes”). The
indentures related to the Original Senior Notes initially contained redemption provisions and covenants that were
substantially similar to those of the November 2019 Senior Notes; however, in conjunction with the tender offers in
2011, the indentures were amended and most of the covenants and certain default provisions were eliminated. The
amendments became effective upon the execution of the supplemental indentures to the indentures governing the
Original Senior Notes.
In March 2011 and June 2011, in accordance with the indentures related to the Original Senior Notes, the Company
redeemed and also repurchased through cash tender offers, a portion of the Original Senior Notes. In connection with
the redemptions and cash tender offers of a portion of the Original Senior Notes, the Company recorded a loss on
extinguishment of debt of approximately $10 million and $94 million for the three months and six months ended
June 30, 2011, respectively.
Note 7—Derivatives
Commodity Derivatives
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to minimize the variability in cash flow due to commodity price
movements. The Company has historically entered into derivative instruments such as swap contracts, put options
and collars to economically hedge its forecasted oil, natural gas and NGL sales. The Company did not designate any
Table of Contents
F-71
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
of these contracts as cash flow hedges; therefore, the changes in fair value of these instruments are recorded in
current earnings. See Note 8 for fair value disclosures about oil and natural gas commodity derivatives.
The following table summarizes derivative positions for the periods indicated as of June 30, 2012:
Natural gas positions:
Fixed price swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Puts:(1)
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Total:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Average price ($/MMBtu)
Oil positions:
Fixed price swaps:(2)
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Puts:
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Total:
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Average price ($/Bbl)
Natural gas basis differential
positions:(3)
Panhandle basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
NWPL—Rockies basis swaps:
Hedge volume (MMMBtu)
Hedge differential ($/MMBtu)
MichCon basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
Houston Ship Channel basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
Permian basis swaps:
Hedged volume (MMMBtu)
Hedged differential ($/MMBtu)
Oil timing differential positions:
Trade month roll swaps:(4)
Hedged volume (MBbls)
Hedged differential ($/Bbl)
July 1 –
December 31,
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
$
2012
43,910
2013
87,290
2014
97,401
2015
118,041
2016
121,841
5.16    $
5.22    $
5.25    $
5.19    $
4.20    $
2017
120,122  
4.26
38,894
86,198
79,628
71,854
76,269
5.41    $
5.37    $
5.00    $
5.00    $
5.00    $
66,886  
4.88
82,804
173,488
177,029
189,895
198,110
5.28    $
5.29    $
5.14    $
5.12    $
4.51    $
187,008  
4.48
4,730   
4,755  
96.72    $ 94.97    $ 92.92    $ 96.23    $ 90.56    $ 89.02
11,871
11,903
11,599
11,464
1,251   
384  
99.32    $ 97.86    $ 91.30    $ 90.00    $ 90.00    $ 90.00
3,105
3,960
3,426
3,271
5,139  
5,981   
97.26    $ 95.57    $ 92.52    $ 94.81    $ 90.44    $ 89.10
14,976
15,863
15,025
14,735
37,535
77,800
79,388
87,162
19,764
(0.55)   $
(0.56)   $
(0.33)   $
(0.33)   $
—    
(0.31)   $ —
14,122
34,785
36,026
38,362
39,199
(0.20)   $
(0.20)   $
(0.20)   $
(0.20)   $
—    
(0.20)   $ —
4,894   
0.12    $
3,146   
 
(0.10)   $
2,282   
 
(0.19)   $
3,284   
 
0.21    $
9,600   
0.10    $
5,731   
 
(0.10)   $
4,636   
 
(0.20)   $
6,944   
 
0.22    $
9,490   
0.08    $
5,256   
 
(0.10)   $
4,891   
 
(0.21)   $
7,254   
 
0.22    $
—    
9,344   
0.06    $ —      $ —
—
4,891   
 
(0.10)   $
4,575   
—    
(0.10)   $ —
5,074   
—    
(0.21)   $ —      $ —
—
7,251   
 
0.24    $
7,446   
 
0.25    $
6,486  
0.25
Table of Contents
F-72
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
(1)
(2)
Includes certain outstanding natural gas puts of approximately 5,329 MMMBtu for the period July 1, 2012,
through December 31, 2012, 10,570 MMMBtu for each of the years ending December 31, 2013, December 31,
2014, and December 31, 2015, and 10,599 MMMBtu for the year ending December 31, 2016, used to hedge
revenues associated with NGL production.
Includes certain outstanding fixed price oil swaps of approximately 5,384 MBbls which may be extended annually
at a price of $100.00 per Bbl for each of the years ending December 31, 2017, and December 31, 2018, and
$90.00 per Bbl for the year ending December 31, 2019, if the counterparties determine that the strike prices are
in-the-money on a designated date in each respective preceding year. The extension for each year is exercisable
without respect to the other years.
(3) Settle on the respective pricing index to hedge basis differential associated with natural gas production.
(4) The Company hedges the timing risk associated with the sales price of oil in the Mid-Continent, Hugoton Basin
and Permian Basin regions. In these regions, the Company generally sells oil for the delivery month at a sales
price based on the average NYMEX price of light crude oil during that month, plus an adjustment calculated as a
spread between the weighted average prices of the delivery month, the next month and the following month
during the period when the delivery month is prompt (the “trade month roll”).
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, the Company entered into commodity derivative contracts consisting of
oil and natural gas swaps and puts for 2012 through 2017, and paid premiums for put options of approximately $583
million. Also during the six months ended June 30, 2012, the Company entered into natural gas basis swaps for 2012
through 2016 and trade month roll swaps for 2012 through 2017.
Settled derivatives on natural gas production for the three months and six months ended June 30, 2012, included
volumes of 34,438 MMMBtu and 58,080 MMMBtu, respectively, at average contract prices of $5.45 per MMBtu and
$5.61 per MMBtu. Settled derivatives on oil production for the three months and six months ended June 30, 2012,
included volumes of 2,731 MBbls and 5,308 MBbls, respectively, at average contract prices of $98.08 and $98.01 per
Bbl. Settled derivatives on natural gas production for the three months and six months ended June 30, 2011, included
volumes of 16,106 MMMBtu and 32,178 MMMBtu, respectively, at average contract prices of $8.24 per MMBtu and
$8.25 per MMBtu. Settled derivatives on oil production for the three months and six months ended June 30, 2011,
included volumes of 1,839 MBbls and 3,671 MBbls, respectively, at an average contract price of $84.08 per Bbl. The
natural gas derivatives are settled based on the closing price of NYMEX natural gas on the last trading day for the
delivery month, which occurs on the third business day preceding the delivery month, or the relevant index prices of
natural gas published in Inside FERC’s Gas Market Report on the first business day of the delivery month. The oil
derivatives are settled based on the average closing price of NYMEX light crude oil for each day of the delivery
month.
Balance Sheet Presentation
The Company’s commodity derivatives are presented on a net basis in “derivative instruments” on the condensed
consolidated balance sheets. The following summarizes the fair value of derivatives outstanding on a gross basis:
Assets:
June 30,
2012
December 31,
2011
(in thousands)
Assets:
Commodity derivatives
Liabilities:
Commodity derivatives
$1,730,071    
   
    
  
$ 319,935
$
$
880,175
320,835
Table of Contents
F-73
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
By using derivative instruments to economically hedge exposures to changes in commodity prices, the Company
exposes itself to credit risk and market risk. Credit risk is the failure of the counterparty to perform under the terms of
the derivative contract. When the fair value of a derivative contract is positive, the counterparty owes the Company,
which creates credit risk. The Company’s counterparties are current participants or affiliates of participants in its
Credit Facility or were participants or affiliates of participants in its Credit Facility at the time it originally entered into
the derivatives. The Credit Facility is secured by the Company’s oil and natural gas reserves; therefore, the Company
is not required to post any collateral. The Company does not receive collateral from its counterparties. The maximum
amount of loss due to credit risk that the Company would incur if its counterparties failed completely to perform
according to the terms of the contracts, based on the gross fair value of financial instruments, was approximately
$1.7 billion at June 30, 2012. The Company minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by: (i) limiting its
exposure to any single counterparty; (ii) entering into derivative instruments only with counterparties that meet the
Company’s minimum credit quality standard, or have a guarantee from an affiliate that meets the Company’s
minimum credit quality standard; and (iii) monitoring the creditworthiness of the Company’s counterparties on an
ongoing basis. In accordance with the Company’s standard practice, its commodity derivatives are subject to
counterparty netting under agreements governing such derivatives and therefore the risk of loss is somewhat
mitigated.
Gains (Losses) on Derivatives
Gains and losses on derivatives, including realized and unrealized gains and losses, are reported on the condensed
consolidated statements of operations in “gains (losses) on oil and natural gas derivatives.” Realized gains (losses),
excluding canceled derivatives, represent amounts related to the settlement of derivative instruments and are aligned
with the underlying production. Unrealized gains (losses) represent the change in fair value of the derivative
instruments and are noncash items.
The following presents the Company’s reported gains and losses on derivative instruments:
Realized gains:
Commodity derivatives
Recovery of bankruptcy claim (see Note 10)
Unrealized gains (losses):
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2011
June 30,
2012
2011
2012
(in thousands)
$117,740     $ 42,081     $172,995     $ 97,890  
—    
  
 
      
97,890
—
18,277
18,277
136,017
42,081
191,272
Unrealized gains (losses):
Commodity derivatives
Total gains (losses):
Total
163,434
303,630
$439,647     $205,515     $441,678     $(163,961)
250,406
(261,851)
Note 8—Fair Value Measurements on a Recurring Basis
The Company accounts for its commodity derivatives at fair value (see Note 7) on a recurring basis. The Company
uses certain pricing models to determine the fair value of its derivative financial instruments. Inputs to the pricing
models include publicly available prices and forward price curves generated from a compilation of data gathered from
third parties. Company management validates the data provided by third parties by
Table of Contents
F-74
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
understanding the pricing models used, obtaining market values from other pricing sources, analyzing pricing data in
certain situations and confirming that those securities trade in active markets. Assumed credit risk adjustments,
based on published credit ratings, public bond yield spreads and credit default swap spreads, are applied to the
Company’s commodity derivatives.
The following presents the fair value hierarchy for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
Assets:
Commodity derivatives
Liabilities:
Commodity derivatives
Level 2
June 30, 2012
Netting(1)    
(in thousands)
$1,730,071     $(316,224)   $1,413,847  
  
   $ 319,935     $(316,224)   $
3,711
Total
(1) Represents counterparty netting under agreements governing such derivatives.
Note 9—Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations associated with retiring tangible long-lived assets are recognized as a liability in the
period in which a legal obligation is incurred and becomes determinable and are included in “other noncurrent liabilities”
on the condensed consolidated balance sheets. Accretion expense is included in “depreciation, depletion and
amortization” on the condensed consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of additions to the asset
retirement obligations is estimated using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted
amount. Significant inputs to the valuation include estimates of: (i) plug and abandon costs per well based on existing
regulatory requirements; (ii) remaining life per well; (iii) future inflation factors (2% for the six months ended June 30,
2012); and (iv) a credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate (average of 7.36% for the six months ended June 30, 2012).
These inputs require significant judgments and estimates by the Company’s management at the time of the valuation
and are the most sensitive and subject to change.
The following presents a reconciliation of the asset retirement obligations (in thousands):
Asset retirement obligations at December 31, 2011
Liabilities added from acquisitions
Liabilities added from drilling
Current year accretion expense
Settlements
Revision of estimates
Asset retirement obligations at June 30, 2012
$ 71,142  
  34,096  
 
574  
3,373  
 
 
(1,506) 
942  
 
   
 
$108,621
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies
The Company has been named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits, including claims from royalty owners related
to disputed royalty payments and royalty valuations. The Company has established reserves that
Table of Contents
F-75
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
management currently believes are adequate to provide for potential liabilities based upon its evaluation of these
matters. For a certain statewide class action royalty payment dispute where a reserve has not yet been established,
the Company has denied that it has any liability on the claims and has raised arguments and defenses that, if
accepted by the court, will result in no loss to the Company. Discovery related to class certification has concluded.
Briefing and the hearing on class certification have been deferred by court order pending the Tenth Circuit Court of
Appeals’ resolution of interlocutory appeals of two unrelated class certification orders. As a result, the Company is
unable to estimate a possible loss, or range of possible loss, if any. In addition, the Company is involved in various
other disputes arising in the ordinary course of business. The Company is not currently a party to any litigation or
pending claims that it believes would have a material adverse effect on its overall business, financial position, results
of operations or liquidity; however, cash flow could be significantly impacted in the reporting periods in which such
matters are resolved.
In 2008, Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. (“Lehman Holdings”) and Lehman Brothers Commodity Services Inc.
(“Lehman Commodity Services”) (together “Lehman”), filed voluntary petitions for reorganization under Chapter 11 of
the U.S. Bankruptcy Code with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York. In March 2011, the
Company and Lehman entered into Termination Agreements under which the Company was granted general
unsecured claims against Lehman in the amount of $51 million (the “Company Claim”). In December 2011, a
Chapter 11 Plan (“Plan”) was approved by the Bankruptcy Court. Based on the recovery estimates described in the
approved disclosure statement relating to the Plan, the Company expects to ultimately receive a substantial portion of
the Company Claim. On April 19, 2012, an initial distribution under the Plan of approximately $25 million was received
by the Company resulting in a gain of approximately $18 million which is included in gains (losses) on oil and natural
gas derivatives on the condensed consolidated statement of operations.
Note 11—Earnings Per Unit
Basic earnings per unit is computed by dividing net earnings attributable to unitholders by the weighted average
number of units outstanding during each period. Diluted earnings per unit is computed by adjusting the average
number of units outstanding for the dilutive effect, if any, of unit equivalents. The Company uses the treasury stock
method to determine the dilutive effect.
Table of Contents
F-76
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
The following table provides a reconciliation of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted per unit
computations for net income (loss):
Three months ended June 30, 2012:
Net income:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Net income per unit:
Basic net income per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted net income per unit
Three months ended June 30, 2011:
Net income:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Net income per unit:
Basic net income per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted net income per unit
Six months ended June 30, 2012:
Net Income
(Loss)
(Numerator)
$ 237,086   
 
(2,232)  
   
   
$ 234,854   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$ 237,109   
(2,475)  
 
   
   
$ 234,634
Units
(in thousands)
(Denominator)    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
197,507    
653    
    
198,160    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
175,035    
762    
    
175,797
Per Unit
Amount
$ 1.19  
  —    
   
 
$ 1.19
$ 1.34  
  (0.01) 
   
 
$ 1.33
Six months ended June 30, 2012:
Net income:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Net income per unit:
Basic net income per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted net income per unit
Six months ended June 30, 2011:
Net loss:
Allocated to units
Allocated to unvested restricted units
Net loss per unit:
Basic net loss per unit
Dilutive effect of unit equivalents
Diluted net loss per unit
$ 230,884   
 
(2,735)  
   
   
$ 228,149   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$(209,573)  
(2,439)  
 
   
   
$(212,012)
195,382    
657    
    
196,039    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
169,104    
—      
    
169,104
$ 1.17  
  (0.01) 
   
 
$ 1.16
$ (1.25) 
  —    
   
 
$ (1.25)
Table of Contents
F-77
LINN ENERGY, LLC
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
There were no anti-dilutive unit equivalents for the three months or six months ended June 30, 2012, or the three
months ended June 30, 2011. Basic units outstanding excludes the effect of weighted average anti-dilutive unit
equivalents related to approximately 2 million unit options and warrants for the six months ended June 30, 2011. All
equivalent units were anti-dilutive for the six months ended June 30, 2011.
Note 12—Income Taxes
The Company is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, with
the exception of the state of Texas, with income tax liabilities and/or benefits of the Company passed through to
unitholders. Limited liability companies are subject to Texas margin tax. Limited liability companies were also subject
to state income taxes in the state of Michigan during the three months and six months ended June 30, 2012. In
addition, certain of the Company’s subsidiaries are Subchapter C-corporations subject to federal and state income
taxes. As such, with the exception of the state of Texas and certain subsidiaries, the Company is not a taxable
entity, it does not directly pay federal and state income taxes and recognition has not been given to federal and state
income taxes for the operations of the Company. Amounts recognized for income taxes are reported in “income tax
expense” on the condensed consolidated statements of operations.
Note 13—Supplemental Disclosures to the Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets and Condensed
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
“Other accrued liabilities” reported on the condensed consolidated balance sheets include the following:
Accrued compensation
Accrued interest
Other
June 30,
2012
(in thousands)
$ 17,068    
  91,351    
422    
 
   
    
$108,841
$
 
 
   
$
December 31,
2011
19,581  
55,170  
1,147  
 
75,898
Supplemental disclosures to the condensed consolidated statements of cash flows are presented below:
Cash payments for interest, net of amounts capitalized
Cash payments for income taxes
Noncash investing activities:
In connection with the acquisition of oil and natural gas properties, liabilities were
assumed as follows:
Fair value of assets acquired
Cash paid, net of cash acquired
Receivables from sellers
Payables to sellers
Liabilities assumed
Table of Contents
F-78
LINN ENERGY, LLC
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2012
(in thousands)
$
   
$
128,617   
   
306
$ 1,841,027   
  (1,455,433)  
 
772   
(422)  
 
   
   
385,944   
$
2011
$ 124,173  
   
 
476  
$
$ 850,313  
  (847,780) 
 
5,855  
(5,241) 
 
   
 
3,147  
$
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—Continued
(Unaudited)
Included in “acquisition of oil and natural gas properties” on the condensed consolidated statement of cash flows for
the six months ended June 30, 2012, is a deposit paid by the Company of approximately $308 million for the pending
acquisition (see Note 2).
For purposes of the condensed consolidated statements of cash flows, the Company considers all highly liquid short-
term investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Restricted cash of
approximately $4 million is included in “other noncurrent assets” on the condensed consolidated balance sheets at
June 30, 2012, and December 31, 2011, and represents cash deposited by the Company into a separate account and
designated for asset retirement obligations in accordance with contractual agreements.
The Company manages its working capital and cash requirements to borrow only as needed from its Credit Facility. At
June 30, 2012, and December 31, 2011, approximately $13 million and $54 million, respectively, were included in
“accounts payable and accrued expenses” on the condensed consolidated balance sheets which represents
reclassified net outstanding checks. The Company presents these net outstanding checks as cash flows from
financing activities on the condensed consolidated statements of cash flows.
Note 14—Subsidiary Guarantors
The November 2019 Senior Notes, the May 2019 Senior Notes, the 2010 Issued Notes and the Original Senior Notes
are guaranteed by all of the Company’s material subsidiaries. The Company is a holding company and has no
independent assets or operations of its own, the guarantees under each series of notes are full and unconditional and
joint and several, and any subsidiaries of the Company other than the subsidiary guarantors are minor. There are no
restrictions on the Company’s ability to obtain cash dividends or other distributions of funds from the guarantor
subsidiaries.
Table of Contents
F-79
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
To the Board of Directors and Unitholders
Linn Energy, LLC
We have audited the accompanying Statement of Revenues and Direct Operating Expenses of the Assets acquired
from BP America Production Company (“BP”) for the year ended December 31, 2011. This financial statement is the
responsibility of Linn Energy, LLC management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statement
based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statement is free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statement. An audit also includes assessing the basis of accounting used
and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial
statement. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
The accompanying financial statement was prepared for the purpose of complying with the rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission as described in Note 1. The presentation is not intended to be a complete
financial statement presentation of the properties described above.
In our opinion, the financial statement referred to above presents fairly, in all material respects, the revenues and
direct operating expenses, as described in Note 1, of the assets acquired from BP for the year ended December 31,
2011, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
/s/ ERNST & YOUNG LLP
Houston, Texas
April 30, 2012
Table of Contents
F-80
LINN ENERGY, LLC
STATEMENTS OF REVENUES AND DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES OF THE
ASSETS ACQUIRED FROM BP AMERICA PRODUCTION COMPANY
Year Ended December 31, 2011, and
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012, and March 31, 2011
(in thousands)
Revenues—oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales
Direct operating expenses
Third party natural gas purchases
Excess of revenues over direct operating expenses and third party
natural gas purchases
Three Months Ended
(unaudited)
March 31,
2012
$ 56,882    
  25,124    
  6,188
March 31,
2011
$ 64,544    
  26,520    
  7,611
$ 25,570
$ 30,413
Year Ended
December 31,
(audited)
2011
290,240  
103,490  
37,675
149,075
$
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the Statements of Revenues and Direct Operating Expenses.
Table of Contents
F-81
LINN ENERGY, LLC
ASSETS ACQUIRED FROM BP AMERICA PRODUCTION COMPANY
NOTES TO STATEMENTS OF REVENUES AND DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES
Year Ended December 31, 2011, and
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012, and March 31, 2011
Note 1—Basis of Presentation
On February 27, 2012, the Company entered into a definitive purchase and sale agreement to acquire certain oil and
natural gas properties (“Properties”) located primarily in the Hugoton Basin of Southwestern Kansas from BP America
Production Company (“BP”). The acquisition closed March 30, 2012, for total consideration of approximately $1.17
billion, and was financed primarily with proceeds from a private offering by the Company of 6.25% senior notes due
November 2019 which were issued March 2, 2012.
The accompanying statements of revenues and direct operating expenses were prepared from the historical
accounting records of BP. These statements are not intended to be a complete presentation of the results of
operations of the Properties acquired from BP. The statements do not include general and administrative expense,
effects of derivative transactions, interest income or expense, depreciation, depletion and amortization, any provision
for income tax expenses and other income and expense items not directly associated with revenues from the
Properties. Historical financial statements reflecting financial position, results of operations and cash flows required
by United States of America generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) are not presented as such information
is not readily available and not meaningful to the Properties. Accordingly, the accompanying statements of revenues
and direct operating expenses are presented in lieu of the financial statements required under Rule 3-05 of Securities
and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Regulation S-X.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates
and assumptions are based on management’s best estimates and judgment. Management evaluates its estimates
and assumptions on an ongoing basis using historical experience and other factors, including the current economic
environment, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Such estimates and
assumptions are adjusted when facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be
determined with precision, actual results could differ from these estimates. Any changes in estimates resulting from
continuous changes in the economic environment will be reflected in the financial statements in future periods.
Revenues representative of the ownership interest in the Properties acquired from BP are presented on a gross basis
on the statements of revenues and direct operating expenses. Sales of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids (“NGL”)
are recognized when the product has been delivered to a custody transfer point, persuasive evidence of a sales
arrangement exists, the rights and responsibility of ownership pass to the purchaser upon delivery, collection of
revenue from the sale is reasonably assured, and the sales price is fixed or determinable.
The statements of revenues and direct operating expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2012, and
March 31, 2011, are unaudited, but in the opinion of management include all adjustments (consisting of normal
recurring adjustments) necessary for a fair presentation of the results of the interim periods.
Note 2—Commitments and Contingencies
Pursuant to the terms of the purchase and sale agreement between BP and LINN Energy, certain claims, litigation
and liabilities arising in connection with ownership of the acquired Properties prior to the effective date are retained by
BP. Notwithstanding this indemnification, LINN Energy is not aware of any legal, environmental or other commitments
or contingencies that would have a material effect on the statements of revenues and direct operating expenses.
Table of Contents
F-82
LINN ENERGY, LLC
ASSETS ACQUIRED FROM BP AMERICA PRODUCTION COMPANY
NOTES TO STATEMENTS OF REVENUES AND DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES—Continued
Year Ended December 31, 2011, and
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012, and March 31, 2011
Note 3—Subsequent Events
Management has evaluated subsequent events through April 30, 2012, the date the statements of revenues and direct
operating expenses were available to be issued, and has concluded no events need to be reported during this period.
Note 4—Supplemental Oil and Natural Gas Reserve Information (Unaudited)
Estimated Quantities of Proved Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
Estimated quantities of proved oil, natural gas and NGL reserves at December 31, 2011, and changes in the reserves
during the year, are shown below. These reserve estimates have been prepared in compliance with SEC regulations
using the average price during the 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-
month price for each month.
Proved developed and undeveloped
reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Production
End of year
Proved developed reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
Natural Gas
Oil and
NGL
(MMcf)
(MBbls)
Total
(MMcfe)
471,795   
7,839   
 
(29,211)  
 
  
   
  450,423   
   
  
 
  471,795   
  450,423   
 
—     
—
46,672   
 
811   
  (3,122)  
  
   
 44,361   
   
  
 
 46,672   
 44,361   
 
  —     
  —
751,824  
  12,705  
  (47,942) 
  
 
 716,587
751,824  
 716,587
—    
  —
Table of Contents
F-83
LINN ENERGY, LLC
ASSETS ACQUIRED FROM BP AMERICA PRODUCTION COMPANY
NOTES TO STATEMENTS OF REVENUES AND DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES—Continued
Year Ended December 31, 2011, and
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012, and March 31, 2011
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
Information with respect to the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved reserves
is summarized below. Future cash inflows are computed by applying applicable prices relating to the Properties’
proved reserves to the year-end quantities of those reserves. Future production, development, site restoration and
abandonment costs are derived based on current costs assuming continuation of existing economic conditions. There
are no future income tax expenses because the Company is not subject to federal income taxes.
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows
Future estimated revenues
Future estimated production costs
Future estimated development costs
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
Representative NYMEX prices:(1)
Natural gas (MMBtu)
Oil (Bbl)
December 31,
2011
(in thousands) 
$ 3,892,894  
  (1,740,911) 
 
(34,753) 
   
 
  2,117,230  
  (1,138,761) 
   
 
978,469  
$
$
$
4.12  
95.84
(1)
In accordance with SEC regulations, reserves at December 31, 2011, were estimated using the average price
during the 12-month period, determined as an unweighted average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each
month, unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future
conditions. The price used to estimate reserves is held constant over the life of the reserves.
The following summarizes the principal sources of change in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash
flows during the year ended December 31, 2011 (in thousands):
Sales of oil and natural gas produced during the period
Changes in estimated future development costs
Net change in sales prices and production costs related to
future production
Net change due to revisions in quantity estimates
Accretion of discount
Changes in production rates and other
$(149,075) 
(59)
94,698  
 
19,811  
  106,219  
  (155,318) 
   
 
$ (83,724)
The data presented should not be viewed as representing the expected cash flow from, or current value of, existing
proved reserves since the computations are based on a large number of estimates and arbitrary assumptions.
Reserve quantities cannot be measured with precision and their estimation requires many
Table of Contents
F-84
judgmental determinations and frequent revisions. The required projection of production and related expenditures over
time requires further estimates with respect to pipeline availability, rates of demand and governmental control. Actual
future prices and costs are likely to be substantially different from current prices and costs utilized in the computation
of reported amounts. Any analysis or evaluation of the reported amounts should give specific recognition to the
computational methods utilized and the limitations inherent therein.
Table of Contents
F-85
Appendix A—Glossary of Terms
As commonly used in the oil and natural gas industry and as used in this registration statement, the following terms
have the following meanings:
Basin. A large area with a relatively thick accumulation of sedimentary rocks.
Bbl. One stock tank barrel or 42 U.S. gallons liquid volume.
Bcf. One billion cubic feet.
Bcfe. One billion cubic feet equivalent, determined using a ratio of six Mcf of natural gas to one Bbl of oil, condensate
or natural gas liquids.
Btu. One British thermal unit, which is the heat required to raise the temperature of a one-pound mass of water from
58.5 degrees to 59.5 degrees Fahrenheit.
Development well. A well drilled within the proved area of a reservoir to the depth of a stratigraphic horizon known to
be productive.
Dry hole or well. A well found to be incapable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such that proceeds
from the sale of such production would exceed production expenses and taxes.
Field. An area consisting of a single reservoir or multiple reservoirs all grouped on or related to the same individual
geological structural feature and/or stratigraphic condition.
Formation. A stratum of rock that is recognizable from adjacent strata consisting mainly of a certain type of rock or
combination of rock types with thickness that may range from less than two feet to hundreds of feet.
Gross acres or gross wells. The total acres or wells, as the case may be, in which a working interest is owned.
MBbls. One thousand barrels of oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
MBbls/d. MBbls per day.
Mcf. One thousand cubic feet.
Mcfe. One thousand cubic feet equivalent, determined using the ratio of six Mcf of natural gas to one Bbl of oil,
condensate or natural gas liquids.
MMBbls. One million barrels of oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
MMBoe. One million barrels of oil equivalent, determined using a ratio of one Bbl of oil, condensate or natural gas
liquids to six Mcf.
MMBtu. One million British thermal units.
MMcf. One million cubic feet.
MMcf/d. MMcf per day.
MMcfe. One million cubic feet equivalent, determined using a ratio of six Mcf of natural gas to one Bbl of oil,
condensate or natural gas liquids.
A-1
Table of Contents
MMcfe/d. MMcfe per day.
MMMBtu. One billion British thermal units.
Net acres or net wells. The sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross acres or gross wells, as the case
may be.
NGL. Natural gas liquids, which are the hydrocarbon liquids contained within natural gas.
Productive well. A well that is found to be capable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such that
proceeds from the sale of such production exceeds production expenses and taxes.
Proved developed reserves. Reserves that can be expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing
equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor compared to the
cost of a new well. Additional reserves expected to be obtained through the application of fluid injection or other
improved recovery techniques for supplementing the natural forces and mechanisms of primary recovery are included
in “proved developed reserves” only after testing by a pilot project or after the operation of an installed program has
confirmed through production response that increased recovery will be achieved.
Proved reserves. Reserves that by analysis of geoscience and engineering data can be estimated with reasonable
certainty to be economically producible from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing
economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations prior to the time at which contracts providing
the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain. The project to extract the
hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator must be reasonably certain that it will commence the project
within a reasonable time.
Proved undeveloped drilling location. A site on which a development well can be drilled consistent with spacing rules
for purposes of recovering proved undeveloped reserves.
Proved undeveloped reserves or PUDs. Reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled
acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion. Reserves on undrilled
acreage are limited to those directly offsetting development spacing areas that are reasonably certain of production
when drilled, unless evidence using reliable technology exists that establishes reasonable certainty of economic
producibility at greater distances. Undrilled locations can be classified as having undeveloped reserves only if a
development plan has been adopted indicating that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the
specific circumstances justify a longer time. Estimates for proved undeveloped reserves are not attributed to any
acreage for which an application of fluid injection or other improved recovery technique is contemplated, unless such
techniques have been proved effective by actual projects in the same reservoir or an analogous reservoir, or by other
evidence using reliable technology establishing reasonable certainty.
Recompletion. The completion for production of an existing wellbore in another formation from that which the well has
been previously completed.
Reservoir. A porous and permeable underground formation containing a natural accumulation of economically
productive natural gas and/or oil that is confined by impermeable rock or water barriers and is individual and separate
from other reserves.
Royalty interest. An interest that entitles the owner of such interest to a share of the mineral production from a
property or to a share of the proceeds there from. It does not contain the rights and obligations of operating the
property and normally does not bear any of the costs of exploration, development and operation of the property.
Spacing. The number of wells which conservation laws allow to be drilled on a given area of land.
A-2
Table of Contents
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows. The present value of estimated future net revenues to be
generated from the production of proved reserves, determined in accordance with the regulations of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, without giving effect to non-property related expenses such as general and administrative
expenses, debt service, future income tax expenses or depreciation, depletion and amortization; discounted using an
annual discount rate of 10%.
Tcfe. One trillion cubic feet equivalent, determined using the ratio of six Mcf of natural gas to one Bbl of oil,
condensate or natural gas liquids.
Undeveloped acreage. Lease acreage on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit
the production of commercial quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL regardless of whether such acreage contains
proved reserves.
Unproved reserves. Reserves that are considered less certain to be recovered than proved reserves. Unproved
reserves may be further sub-classified to denote progressively increasing uncertainty of recoverability and include
probable reserves and possible reserves.
Working interest. The operating interest that gives the owner the right to drill, produce and conduct operating activities
on the property and a share of production.
Workover. Maintenance on a producing well to restore or increase production.
Zone. A stratigraphic interval containing one or more reservoirs.
Table of Contents
A-3
Linn Co, LLC
Common Shares
Representing Limited Liability Company Interests
Prospectus
, 2012
Barclays
Through and including                     , 2012 (the 25th day after the date of this prospectus), all dealers effecting
transactions in these securities, whether or not participating in this offering, may be required to deliver a
prospectus. This is in addition to a dealer’s obligation to deliver a prospectus when acting as an underwriter
and with respect to an unsold allotment or subscription.
Table of Contents
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 13. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
Set forth below are the expenses (other than underwriting discounts and the structuring fee) expected to be incurred
by the registrants and paid by LINN in connection with the issuance and distribution of the securities registered
hereby. With the exception of the SEC registration fee, the FINRA filing fee and the NASDAQ listing fee, the amounts
set forth below are estimates.
SEC registration fee
FINRA filing fee
NASDAQ listing fee
Printing and engraving expenses
Fees and expenses of legal counsel
Accounting fees and expenses
Transfer agent and registrar fees
Miscellaneous
Total
$114,600  
$ 75,500  
 
*  
*  
 
*  
 
*  
 
 
*  
 
   
*
* To be filed by amendment.
Item 14.
Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Our limited liability company agreement provide that we will generally indemnify officers and members of our board of
directors to the fullest extent permitted by the law against all losses, claims, damages or similar events. Our limited
liability company agreement is attached as an exhibit hereto. Subject to any terms, conditions or restrictions set forth
in our limited liability company agreement, Section 18-108 of the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act empowers a
Delaware limited liability company to indemnify and hold harmless any member or manager or other person from and
against all claims and demands whatsoever. We have also entered into individual indemnity agreements with each of
our executive officers and directors which supplement the indemnification provisions in our limited liability company
agreement.
Item 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
LinnCo’s initial voting share was sold to Linn Energy, LLC for $1,000 on April 30, 2012. Such sale was completed
without registration under the Securities Act in reliance upon the exemption provided by Section 4(2) of the Securities
Act.
Item 16. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
The following documents are filed as exhibits to this registration statement:
Number  
  
  1.1*    —  
—
  2.1
—
2.2
Description
Form of Underwriting Agreement
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of June 21, 2012, between BP America Production
Company and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 26, 2012)
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of February 27, 2012, between BP America Production
Company and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to
Quarterly Report on form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2012)
II-1
Description
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of March 9, 2012, between Southwestern Energy
Production Company and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
2.2 to Quarterly Report on form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2012)
Certificate of Formation of Linn Co, LLC
Certificate of Formation of Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (now Linn Energy, LLC) (incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-125501) filed by
Linn Energy, LLC on June 3, 2005)
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Formation of Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (now Linn
Energy, LLC) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to Registration Statement on Form
S-1 (File No. 333-125501) filed by Linn Energy, LLC on June 3, 2005)
Form of Limited Liability Company Agreement of Linn Co, LLC
Third Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Linn Energy, LLC dated
September 3, 2010 (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on September 7, 2010)
Form of specimen unit certificate for the units of Linn Energy, LLC (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2005,
filed on May 31, 2006)
Table of Contents
Number 
  2.3
3.1**  
  3.2
3.3
3.4*  
  3.5
4.1
—
—  
—
—
—  
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
Table of Contents
Number  
  4.10
4.11
4.12
—
—
—
4.13
—
Indenture, dated as of June 27, 2008, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 30,
2008)
Indenture, dated May 18, 2009, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U. S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 18,
2009)
Indenture, dated as of April 6, 2010, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 9,
2010)
Indenture, dated as of September 13, 2010, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp.,
the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
September 13, 2010)
Indenture, dated May 13, 2011, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 16,
2011)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 2, 2010, to Indenture, dated as of June 27, 2008,
between Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein
and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 29, 2010)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 2, 2010, to Indenture, dated as of May 18, 2009,
between Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein
and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 29, 2010)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 2, 2010, to Indenture, dated as of April 6, 2010,
between Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein
and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 29, 2010)
II-2
Description
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 16, 2011, to the Indenture, dated as of May 18,
2009, by and among Linn Energy LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Guarantors party thereto and
U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2011)
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 16, 2011, to the Indenture dated as of June 27,
2008, by and among Linn Energy LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Guarantors party thereto and
U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2011)
Registration Rights Agreement, dated May 13, 2011, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance
Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and the representatives of the Initial Purchasers
named therein (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed
on May 16, 2011)
Indenture, dated March 2, 2012, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U. S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
March 2, 2012)
4.14
—
5.1*    —  
  8.1*    —  
10.1*    —  
10.2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
Registration Rights Agreement, dated March 2, 2012, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy
Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and the representatives of the Initial
Purchasers named therein (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 2, 2012)
Opinion of Baker Botts L.L.P. as to the legality of the securities being registered
Opinion of Baker Botts L.L.P. relating to tax matters
Form of Omnibus Agreement
Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by
reference to Annex A to the Proxy Statement for 2008 Annual Meeting, filed on April 21, 2008)
Amendment No. 1 to Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, dated
February 4, 2009, (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amendment No. 2 to Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, dated
July 19, 2010, (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
filed on July 29, 2010)
Form of Executive Unit Option Agreement pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated
Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Form of Executive Restricted Unit Agreement pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC Amended and
Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4
to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Form of Phantom Unit Grant Agreement for Independent Directors pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC
Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 9, 2006)
Form of Director Restricted Unit Grant Agreement pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC Amended and
Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6
to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
II-3
Description
Table of Contents
Number  
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
—
—
—
—
—
Retirement Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2011, by and among Linn Operating, Inc., Linn
Energy, LLC and Michael C. Linn (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on December 1, 2011)
Third Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective as of December 17, 2008,
between Linn Operating, Inc. and Kolja Rockov (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective as of December 17, 2008, between
Linn Operating, Inc. and Mark E. Ellis (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amendment No. 1, dated effective as of January 1, 2010, to Amended and Restated Employment
Agreement, dated effective as of December 17, 2008, between Linn Operating, Inc. and Mark E.
Ellis (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2009, filed on February 25, 2010)
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective December 17, 2008, between Linn
Operating, Inc. and Charlene A. Ripley (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.10 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
10.14
— Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective December 17, 2008, between Linn
Operating, Inc. and Arden L. Walker, Jr. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amendment No. 1, dated April 26, 2011, to First Amended and Restated Employment Agreement,
dated December 17, 2008, between Linn Operating, Inc. and Arden L. Walker, Jr. (incorporated
herein by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2011, filed on
April 28, 2011)
Second Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated December 17, 2008, between Linn
Operating, Inc. and David B. Rottino (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.12 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and George A.
Alcorn (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Joseph P.
McCoy (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Terrence S.
Jacobs (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.17 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Jeffrey C.
Swoveland (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.18 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Michael C. Linn
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.19 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Mark E. Ellis
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.22
Table of Contents
Number  
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.26
10.27
—
—
—
—
—
10.28
—
II-4
Description
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Kolja Rockov
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.21 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Charlene A.
Ripley (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and David B.
Rottino (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Arden L.
Walker, Jr. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.24 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of May 2, 2011, among Linn Energy, LLC
as Borrower, BNP Paribas, as Administrative Agent, and the Lenders and agents Party
thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on
July 28, 2011)
First Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated February 29, 2012,
among Linn Energy, LLC, BNP Paribas, as administrative agent, and the other agents and lenders
party thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 1.2 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
March 2, 2012)
Second Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated May 10, 2012, among
Linn Energy, LLC, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, and the other
agents and lenders party thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on May 15, 2012)
Third Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated July 25, 2012, among
Linn Energy, LLC, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, and the other
agents and lenders party thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 26, 2012)
Fifth Amended and Restated Guaranty and Pledge Agreement, dated as of May 2, 2011, made by
Linn Energy, LLC and each of the other Obligors in favor of BNP Paribas, as Administrative Agent
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 28,
2011)
Linn Energy, LLC Change of Control Protection Plan, dated as of April 25, 2009, (incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on May 7, 2009)
Salt Creek EOR Participation Agreement, dated April 3, 2012, by and between Howell Petroleum
Corporation and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to
Quarterly Report on form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2012)
List of Subsidiaries of Linn Energy, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 21.1 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, filed on February 23, 2012)
Consent of KPMG LLP
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP
Consent of DeGolyer & MacNaughton
Consent of Baker Botts L.L.P. (contained in Exhibit 5.1)
Consent of Baker Botts L.L.P. (contained in Exhibit 8.1)
Powers of Attorney (contained on the signature page to this Registration Statement)
II-5
Description
10.29
10.30
10.31
10.32
10.33
21.1
—
—
—
—
—
—
23.1    —  
23.2    —  
23.3    —  
23.4*    —  
23.5*    —  
24.1    —
Table of Contents
—
Number  
99.1
99.2   
99.3
2011 Report of DeGolyer & MacNaughton (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011 filed on February 23, 2012)
—   2012 Report of DeGolyer & MacNaughton (Hugoton Acquisition)
—   2012 Report of DeGolyer & MacNaughton (East Texas Acquisition)
To be filed by amendment
*
** Previously filed
Item 17. Undertakings.
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to provide to the underwriters at the closing specified in the underwriting
agreement certificates in such denominations and registered in such names as required by the underwriters to permit
prompt delivery to each purchaser.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers and
controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised
that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as
expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against
such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or
controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such
director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the
opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction
the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be
governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that:
(1) For purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act, the information omitted from the form of
prospectus filed as part of this registration statement in reliance upon Rule 430A and contained in a form of
prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(1) or (4) or 497(h) under the Securities Act shall be
deemed to be part of this registration statement as of the time it was declared effective.
(2) For the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each post-effective amendment that
contains a form of prospectus shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide
offering thereof.
The undersigned registrant undertakes to send to each shareholder, at least on an annual basis, a detailed statement
of any transactions with Linn Energy, LLC or any of its affiliates, and of fees, commissions, compensation and other
benefits paid, or accrued to Linn Energy, LLC or any of its affiliates for the fiscal year completed, showing the amount
paid or accrued to each recipient and the services performed.
The registrant undertakes to provide to the shareholders the financial statements required by Form 10-K for the first
full fiscal year of operations of the registrant.
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to provide to the underwriter at the closing specified in the underwriting
agreements certificates in such denominations and registered in such names as required by the underwriter to permit
prompt delivery to each purchaser.
Table of Contents
II-6
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of
Houston, State of Texas, on August 2, 2012.
LINN CO, LLC
By:
*
Name: Kolja Rockov
Title: Executive Vice President and Chief
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been signed
by the following persons in the capacities and the dates indicated.
Financial Officer
Title
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer; Director
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
Senior Vice President and Chief
Accounting Officer
Independent Director
Independent Director
Independent Director
II-7
Title
Director
Independent Director
Independent Director
Date
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
Date
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
Name
*
Mark E. Ellis
*
Kolja Rockov
*
David B. Rottino
*
George A. Alcorn
*
David D. Dunlap
*
Terrence S. Jacobs
Table of Contents
Name
*
Michael C. Linn
*
Joseph P. McCoy
*
Jeffrey C. Swoveland
*By:
/s/    Candice Wells
Candice Wells
Attorney-in-Fact
Table of Contents
II-8
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of
Houston, State of Texas, on August 2, 2012.
LINN ENERGY, LLC
By:
*
Name: Kolja Rockov
Title: Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been signed
by the following persons in the capacities and the dates indicated.
Name
*
Mark E. Ellis
*
Kolja Rockov
*
David B. Rottino
*
George A. Alcorn
*
David D. Dunlap
*
Terrence S. Jacobs
Title
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer; Director
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
Senior Vice President of Finance,
Business Development and Chief
Accounting Officer
Independent Director
Independent Director
Independent Director
II-9
Date
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
Table of Contents
Name
Title
Date
Name
*
Michael C. Linn
*
Joseph P. McCoy
*
Jeffrey C. Swoveland
Title
Director
Independent Director
Independent Director
Date
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
August 2, 2012
*By:
/s/    Candice Wells
Candice Wells
Attorney-in-Fact
Table of Contents
II-10
EXHIBIT LIST
The following documents are filed as exhibits to this registration statement:
Number 
  1.1*  
  2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1**  
  3.2
3.3
3.4*  
  3.5
—  
—
—
—
—  
—
—
—  
—
—
Description
Form of Underwriting Agreement
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of June 21, 2012, between BP America Production
Company and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 26, 2012)
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of February 27, 2012, between BP America Production
Company and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to
Quarterly Report on form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2012)
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of March 9, 2012, between Southwestern Energy
Production Company and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
2.2 to Quarterly Report on form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2012)
Certificate of Formation of Linn Co, LLC
Certificate of Formation of Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (now Linn Energy, LLC) (incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-125501) filed by
Linn Energy, LLC on June 3, 2005)
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Formation of Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (now Linn
Energy, LLC) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to Registration Statement on Form
S-1 (File No. 333-125501) filed by Linn Energy, LLC on June 3, 2005)
Form of Limited Liability Company Agreement of Linn Co, LLC
Third Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Linn Energy, LLC dated
September 3, 2010 (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on September 7, 2010)
—
—
—
—
—
—
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
Table of Contents
Number  
  4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
—
—
—
—
—
—
Form of specimen unit certificate for the units of Linn Energy, LLC (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2005,
filed on May 31, 2006)
Indenture, dated as of June 27, 2008, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 30,
2008)
Indenture, dated May 18, 2009, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U. S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 18,
2009)
Indenture, dated as of April 6, 2010, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 9,
2010)
Indenture, dated as of September 13, 2010, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp.,
the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
September 13, 2010)
Indenture, dated May 13, 2011, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 16,
2011)
II-11
Description
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 2, 2010, to Indenture, dated as of June 27, 2008,
between Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein
and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 29, 2010)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 2, 2010, to Indenture, dated as of May 18, 2009,
between Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein
and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 29, 2010)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 2, 2010, to Indenture, dated as of April 6, 2010,
between Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein
and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 29, 2010)
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 16, 2011, to the Indenture, dated as of May 18,
2009, by and among Linn Energy LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Guarantors party thereto and
U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2011)
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 16, 2011, to the Indenture dated as of June 27,
2008, by and among Linn Energy LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the Guarantors party thereto and
U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2011)
Registration Rights Agreement, dated May 13, 2011, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance
Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and the representatives of the Initial Purchasers
named therein (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed
on May 16, 2011)
4.13
—
—
4.14
5.1*    —  
  8.1*    —  
10.1*    —  
—
10.2
—
—
—
10.3
10.4
10.5
Indenture, dated March 2, 2012, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy Finance Corp., the
Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and U. S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
March 2, 2012)
Registration Rights Agreement, dated March 2, 2012, among Linn Energy, LLC, Linn Energy
Finance Corp., the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein and the representatives of the Initial
Purchasers named therein (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 2, 2012)
Opinion of Baker Botts L.L.P. as to the legality of the securities being registered
Opinion of Baker Botts L.L.P. relating to tax matters
Form of Omnibus Agreement
Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by
reference to Annex A to the Proxy Statement for 2008 Annual Meeting, filed on April 21, 2008)
Amendment No. 1 to Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, dated
February 4, 2009, (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amendment No. 2 to Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, dated
July 19, 2010, (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
filed on July 29, 2010)
Form of Executive Unit Option Agreement pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC Amended and Restated
Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
II-12
Description
Table of Contents
Number  
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Form of Executive Restricted Unit Agreement pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC Amended and
Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Form of Phantom Unit Grant Agreement for Independent Directors pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC
Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 9, 2006)
Form of Director Restricted Unit Grant Agreement pursuant to the Linn Energy, LLC Amended and
Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Retirement Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2011, by and among Linn Operating, Inc., Linn
Energy, LLC and Michael C. Linn (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Current Report on Form
8-K filed on December 1, 2011)
Third Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective as of December 17, 2008,
between Linn Operating, Inc. and Kolja Rockov (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective as of December 17, 2008, between
Linn Operating, Inc. and Mark E. Ellis (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amendment No. 1, dated effective as of January 1, 2010, to Amended and Restated Employment
Agreement, dated effective as of December 17, 2008, between Linn Operating, Inc. and Mark E. Ellis
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2009, filed on February 25, 2010)
10.13
— Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective December 17, 2008, between Linn
Operating, Inc. and Charlene A. Ripley (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.10 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated effective December 17, 2008, between Linn
Operating, Inc. and Arden L. Walker, Jr. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Amendment No. 1, dated April 26, 2011, to First Amended and Restated Employment Agreement,
dated December 17, 2008, between Linn Operating, Inc. and Arden L. Walker, Jr. (incorporated herein
by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2011, filed on April 28,
2011)
Second Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated December 17, 2008, between Linn
Operating, Inc. and David B. Rottino (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.12 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and George A. Alcorn
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Joseph P. McCoy
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Terrence S.
Jacobs (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.17 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
—
—
—
—
—
—
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
II-13
Description
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Jeffrey C.
Swoveland (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.18 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Michael C. Linn
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.19 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Mark E. Ellis
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Kolja Rockov
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.21 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Charlene A.
Ripley (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and David B.
Rottino (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Indemnity Agreement, dated as of February 4, 2009, between Linn Energy, LLC and Arden L.
Walker, Jr. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.24 to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008, filed on February 26, 2009)
Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of May 2, 2011, among Linn Energy, LLC
as Borrower, BNP Paribas, as Administrative Agent, and the Lenders and agents Party
thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on
July 28, 2011)
Table of Contents
Number  
10.20
10.21
10.22
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.26
10.27
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
10.28
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
10.29
10.30
10.31
10.32
10.33
21.1
First Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated February 29, 2012,
among Linn Energy, LLC, BNP Paribas, as administrative agent, and the other agents and lenders
party thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 1.2 to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
March 2, 2012)
Second Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated May 10, 2012, among
Linn Energy, LLC, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, and the other
agents and lenders party thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on May 15, 2012)
Third Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated July 25, 2012, among
Linn Energy, LLC, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, and the other
agents and lenders party thereto (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 26, 2012)
Fifth Amended and Restated Guaranty and Pledge Agreement, dated as of May 2, 2011, made by
Linn Energy, LLC and each of the other Obligors in favor of BNP Paribas, as Administrative Agent
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on July 28,
2011)
Linn Energy, LLC Change of Control Protection Plan, dated as of April 25, 2009, (incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on May 7, 2009)
Salt Creek EOR Participation Agreement, dated April 3, 2012, by and between Howell Petroleum
Corporation and Linn Energy Holdings, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to
Quarterly Report on form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2012)
List of Subsidiaries of Linn Energy, LLC (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 21.1 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, filed on February 23, 2012)
II-14
Description
Consent of KPMG LLP
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP
Consent of DeGolyer & MacNaughton
Consent of Baker Botts L.L.P. (contained in Exhibit 5.1)
Consent of Baker Botts L.L.P. (contained in Exhibit 8.1)
Powers of Attorney (contained on the signature page to this Registration Statement)
2011 Report of DeGolyer & MacNaughton (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011 filed on February 23, 2012)
2012 Report of DeGolyer & MacNaughton (Hugoton Acquisition)
2012 Report of DeGolyer & MacNaughton (East Texas Acquisition)
Table of Contents
Number  
  
23.1    —  
23.2    —  
23.3    —  
23.4*    —  
23.5*    —  
24.1    —  
—
99.1
99.2    —  
99.3    —
To be filed by amendment
*
** Previously filed
II-15