
.
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
123  SAMPLES  STREET
SAMPLETOWN  SS  X9X 9X9
9th Floor, 100 University Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1
www.computershare.com
Security Class
COMMON SHARES
Holder Account Number
C1234567890
X X X
Form of Proxy - Annual General Meeting to be held on May 4, 2010
This Form of Proxy is solicited by and on behalf of Management.
Notes to proxy
1. Every holder has the right to appoint some other person or company of their choice, who need not be a holder, to attend and act on their behalf at the meeting or any
adjournment or postponement thereof. If you wish to appoint a person or company other than the persons whose names are printed herein, please insert the name of
your chosen proxyholder in the space provided (see reverse).
2. If the securities are registered in the name of more than one owner (for example, joint ownership, trustees, executors, etc.), then all those registered should sign this proxy. If you are
voting on behalf of a corporation or another individual you must sign this proxy with signing capacity stated, and you may be required to provide documentation evidencing your
power to sign this proxy.
3. This proxy should be signed in the exact manner as the name(s) appear(s) on the proxy.
4. If this proxy is not dated, it will be deemed to bear the date on which it is mailed by Management to the holder.
5. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted as directed by the holder, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, this proxy will be
voted as recommended by Management.
6. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted in favour or withheld from voting each of the matters described herein, as applicable, in accordance with the instructions of the
holder, on any ballot that may be called for and, if the holder has specified a choice with respect to any matter to be acted on, the securities will be voted accordingly.
7. This proxy confers discretionary authority in respect of amendments or variations to matters identified in the Notice of Meeting or other matters that may properly come before the
meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
8. This proxy should be read in conjunction with the accompanying documentation provided by Management.
Proxies submitted must be received by 10:30 am, Mountain Time, on Friday, April 30, 2010.
Fold
Fold
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
.
.
.
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
To Receive Documents Electronically
• Call the number listed BELOW from a touch tone
telephone.
1-866-732-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
• Go to the following web site:
www.investorvote.com
• You can enroll to receive future securityholder
communications electronically by visiting
www.computershare.com/eDelivery and clicking 
on "eDelivery Signup".
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this proxy.
Voting by mail may be the only method for securities held in the name of a corporation or securities being voted on behalf of another individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet are the only methods by which a holder may appoint a person as proxyholder other than the Management nominees named on the reverse of this proxy.
Instead of mailing this proxy, you may choose one of the two voting methods outlined above to vote this proxy.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER 123456789012345
00PP6A
CPUQC01.E.INT/000001/i1234
.
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
Appointment of Proxyholder
I/We, being holder(s) of Suncor Energy Inc. hereby appoint:
John T. Ferguson, or failing him, Richard L. George
C1234567890
XXX
123
OR
Print the name of the person you are
appointing if this person is someone
other than the Management Nominees
listed herein.
as my/our proxyholder with full power of substitution and to attend, act and to vote for and on behalf of the shareholder in accordance with the following direction (or if no
directions have been given, as the proxyholder sees fit) and all other matters that may properly come before the Annual General Meeting of Suncor Energy Inc. to be held at the
Telus Convention Center, Calgary, Alberta on May 4, 2010 at 10:30 a.m. and at any adjournment thereof.
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
1. Election of Directors - The election of the following nominees as directors of Suncor Energy Inc. until the close of the next annual general meeting.
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
01. Mel E. Benson
04. John T. Ferguson
07. Paul Haseldonckx
10. Brian F. MacNeill
13. James W. Simpson
02. Brian A. Canfield
05. W. Douglas Ford
08. John R. Huff
11. Maureen McCaw
14. Eira Thomas
03. Dominic D’Alessandro
06. Richard L. George
09. Jacques Lamarre
12. Michael W. O’Brien
2. Appointment of Auditors – Re-appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditor of Suncor Energy Inc. for the ensuing year and authorize
the directors to fix their remuneration as such.
For
Withhold
Fold
Fold
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be completed for your
instructions to be executed.
I/We authorize you to act in accordance with my/our instructions set out above. 
I/We hereby revoke any proxy previously given with respect to the Meeting. 
If no voting instructions are indicated above, this Proxy will be voted as
recommended by Management.
Signature(s)
Date
DD / MM / YY
.
Interim Financial Statements – Mark this box if you would 
like to receive interim financial statements and accompanying
Management’s Discussion and Analysis by mail.
Annual Report – Mark this box if you would NOT like to receive
the Annual Financial Statements and accompanying Management’s
Discussion and Analysis by mail.
If you are not mailing back your proxy, you may register online to receive the above financial report(s) by mail at www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
0 3 0 7 0 6
A R 2
S U N Q
00PP7A