
EX-4 4 es4-5.htm Exhibit 4.5
U.S. Borax Inc.
401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan
for Represented Employees
Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2014
Any statements regarding tax matters made herein, including any attachments, cannot be relied
upon by any person to avoid tax penalties and are not intended to be used or referred to in any
marketing or promotional materials. To the extent this communication contains a tax statement or
tax advice, Holland & Hart LLP does not and will not impose any limitation on disclosure of the
tax treatment or tax structure of any transactions to which such tax statement or tax advice
relates.
Prepared by
Phone (303) 295-8000  Fax (303) 295-8261  www.hollandhart.com
555 17th Street  Suite 3200  Denver, Colorado 80202-3979  Mailing Address P.O.  Box 8749  Denver, Colorado 80201-8749
Aspen Billings Boise Boulder Carson City Cheyenne Colorado Springs Denver Denver Tech Center Jackson Hole Las Vegas Reno Salt Lake City
Santa Fe Washington, D.C.
U.S. Borax Inc.
401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan
for Represented Employees
Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2014
Table of Contents
Article 1.  Definitions
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
1.11
1.12
1.13
1.14
1.15
1.16
1.17
1.18
1.19
1.20
1.21
1.22
1.23
1.24
1.25
1.26
1.27
Accounts
Actual Deferral Percentage or ADP
Actual Deferral Ratio
Adjustment Factor
Administrative Committee
Affiliated Employer
After-Tax Account
After-Tax Contributions
Annual Dollar Limit
Before-Tax Account
Before-Tax Contributions
Beneficiary
Board of Directors
Boron Hourly Employee
Boron Hourly Participant
Break-in-Service
Catch-Up Contribution
Catch-Up Eligible Participant
Code
Company
Company Matching Contributions
Company Matching Contribution Account
Compensation
Disability
Early Retirement Age
Effective Date
Eligible Employee
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
1.27
1.28
1.29
1.30
1.31
1.32
1.33
1.34
1.35
1.36
1.37
1.38
1.39
1.40
Eligible Employee
Employee
Employment Commencement Date
ERISA
Fund
Highly Compensated Employee
Hour of Service
Income
Investment Committee
Leased Employee
Leave of Absence
Non-Highly Compensated Employee
Normal Retirement Age
Participant
5
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    i
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.50
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
1.56
1.57
1.58
1.59
1.60
1.61
Plan
Plan Administrator
Plan Year
Prior Plan
Reemployment Commencement Date
Retirement Contributions
Retirement Contributions Account
Rollover Account
Rollover Contributions
Sponsor
Spousal Consent
Spouse
Statutory Compensation
Trustee
Union
Union Representative
Valuation Date
Vested Portion
Wilmington Hourly Employee
Wilmington Hourly Participant
Year of Service
Article 2.  Eligibility and Participation
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
11
Eligibility
Participation
Transferred Participants
Termination of Participation
Participation after Reemployment
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
Article 2.  Eligibility and Participation
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 3.  Contributions
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
Participant’s Contributions
Change or Suspension in After-Tax and Before-Tax Contributions
Company Matching Contributions
Retirement Contributions
Timing of Contributions
Actual Deferral Percentage Test
Additional Discrimination Provisions
Maximum Annual Additions
Rollovers
Makeup Contributions Related to Period of Uniformed Services
Duty
Return of Contributions
Catch-Up Contributions After Attainment of Age 50
3.11
3.12
Article 4.  Investment of Contributions
4.1
4.2
4.3
Funds
Investment of Participant’s Accounts
Responsibility for Investments
11
11
11
12
12
12
 
14
14
15
15
16
16
16
18
20
24
25
26
26
 
28
28
28
29
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    ii
Change of Election
Transfer of Accounts Among Funds
Exercise of Voting and other Stock Rights
4.4
4.5
4.6
Article 5.  Valuation of Accounts
5.1
5.2
5.3
Valuation of the Funds
Account Adjustments
Statement of Accounts
Article 6.  Vested Portion of Accounts
29
29
29
 
31
31
31
31
32
Article 6.  Vested Portion of Accounts
6.1
After-Tax Accounts, Before-Tax Accounts, Company Matching
Contribution Accounts and Rollover Accounts
Retirement Contribution Accounts
Forfeiture
Application of Forfeitures
Restoration of Forfeitures
Consideration of Before-Tax Contributions
After-Tax Contributions
Rollovers
Hardship Withdrawal
Timing and Procedures and Form of Payment
Participant Loans
Company Matching Contributions
Article 7.  In-Service Withdrawals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 8.  Distribution of Accounts Upon Termination of Employment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 9.  Administration of Plan
Eligibility
Forms of Distribution
Distribution Upon Retirement or Termination
Distribution Upon Disability
Distribution Upon Death or Presumed Death
Method of Payment
Small Benefits
Proof of Death and Right of Beneficiary or Other Person
Failure to Locate Recipient
Required Minimum Distributions
Qualified Reservist Distributions
401(k) Distribution Limitations
Named Fiduciary and Administrator
Appointment of Committees
Duties of Plan Administrator
Establishment of Rules
Prudent Conduct
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
8.8
8.9
8.10
8.11
8.12
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
32
32
32
32
32
32
33
 
34
34
34
34
35
35
37
 
38
38
38
38
39
39
39
39
40
40
40
41
42
 
43
43
43
43
44
44
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    iii
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
9.10
Service in More than One Fiduciary Capacity
Limitation of Liability
Indemnification
Expenses of Administration
Claims Procedures
44
44
44
45
45
9.10
9.11
10.1
10.2
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
11.8
Claims Procedures
Plan Correction
MasterTrust Agreement
Exclusive Benefit Rule
Article 10.  Management of the Funds
 
 
 
Article 11.  General Provisions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 12.  Amendment, Merger and Termination
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
Nonalienation
Conditions of Employment Not Affected by the Plan
Facility of Payment
Information
Eligible Rollover Distributions
Construction
Electronic Transmission of Notices to Participants
Military Service
Amendment of the Plan
Merger or Consolidation
Acquisitions and Additional Participating Companies
Termination of the Plan
45
47
 
49
49
49
 
50
50
50
51
51
51
53
53
53
 
55
55
55
55
56
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    iv
U.S. Borax Inc.
401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan
for Represented Employees
Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2014
PREAMBLE
This document restates the provisions of the U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement
Contribution Plan for Represented Hourly Employees (restated as the U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k)
Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees (Amended and Restated
Effective January 1, 2014)) (the “Plan”) and incorporates all amendments that were adopted prior
to this restatement.  Benefits and service granted in accordance with the Plan which was in effect
immediately prior to January 1, 2014 (the “Prior Plan”) shall be preserved and continued under
this document.
Unless otherwise noted, operation of the Plan prior to January 1, 2014 shall be governed by the
terms of the Prior Plan, and operation of the Plan subsequent to December 31, 2013 shall be
governed by the terms of this document.
It is intended that this document includes all provisions necessary for the Plan to continue to be
qualified under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by legislation
adopted subsequent to the last restatement of the Plan.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    1
Article 1.
Definitions
1.1        Accounts means a Participant’s After-Tax Account,
Before-Tax Account, Company Matching Contribution
Account, Rollover Account, Retirement Contributions
Account.
1.2        Actual Deferral Percentage or ADP means, with
respect to a specified group of Eligible Employees, the
average of the Actual Deferral Ratios for that group of
Eligible Employees.  An Actual Deferral Percentage shall be
separately calculated each Plan Year for (a) the group of
Eligible Employees who are Highly Compensated
Employees, and (b) the group of Eligible Employees who
are Non-Highly Compensated Employees.
1.3        Actual Deferral Ratio means, with respect to an
Eligible Employee, the ratio of:
(a)        The amount of Before-Tax Contributions made on behalf of the
Eligible Employee pursuant to Section 3.1 for that Plan Year (including
Before-Tax Contributions returned to a Highly Compensated Employee
pursuant to Section 3.1(c) and Before-Tax Contributions returned to any
Eligible Employee pursuant to Section 3.1(d)), if any.
(b)        The Eligible Employee’s Statutory Compensation for that Plan Year,
provided that upon direction of the Company, Statutory Compensation for
a Plan Year shall only be counted if received during the period the Eligible
Employee is, or is eligible to become, a Participant.
An Eligible Employee’s Actual Deferral Ratio shall be rounded to the nearest one one-hundredth
of one percent of the Eligible Employee’s Statutory Compensation. For purposes of determining
the Actual Deferral Ratio for a Plan Year, Before-Tax Contributions may be taken into account for
a Plan Year only if they (i) relate to compensation that either would have been received by the
Employee in the Plan Year but for the deferral election or are attributable to services performed
by the Employee in the Plan Year and would have been received by the Employee within 2½
months after the close of the Plan Year but for the deferral election, or (ii) are allocated to the
Employee as of a date within that Plan Year and the allocation is not contingent on the
participation or performance of service after such date, and (iii) are actually paid to the Trustees
no later than 12 months after the end of the Plan Year to which the contributions relate.
1.4        Adjustment Factor means the cost-of-living
adjustment factor prescribed by the Secretary of the
Treasury under Code Section 415(d) applied to such items
and in such manner as the Secretary shall provide.
1.5        Administrative Committee means the Rio Tinto
America Benefits Governance Committee.
1.6        Affiliated Employer means any company not
participating in the Plan which is a member of a controlled
group of corporations (determined under Code Section
414(b)) which also includes the Company as a member, or
any trade or business under common control (as defined in
Code Section 414(c)) with the Company, or a member of an
affiliated service
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    2
group (as defined in Code Section 414(m)) which includes the Company, and any other
entity required to be aggregated with the Company pursuant to regulations under Code
Section 414(o).  Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purposes of Section 3.7, the
definition in Code Sections 414(b) and 414(c) shall be modified as provided in Code
Section 415(h).
1.7        After-Tax Account means a Participant’s account
into which shall be credited After-Tax Contributions and
investment income and losses thereon.
1.8        After-Tax Contributions means any amounts
contributed by the Participant on an after-tax basis to the
Plan pursuant to Section 3.1.
1.9        Annual Dollar Limit means, with respect to a Plan
Year, dollar limitation contained in Code Section 401(a)(17)
in effect as of the beginning of that Plan Year.
1.10      Before-Tax Account means a Participant’s account
into which shall be credited Before-Tax Contributions and
investment income and losses thereon.
1.11      Before-Tax Contributions means any amounts
contributed by the Participant on a before-tax basis, to (a)
the Plan pursuant to Section 3.1, and (b) the Prior Plan. 
Except as otherwise permitted by law, Before-Tax
Contributions made pursuant to a deferral election cannot
precede the earlier of the performance of services relating
to the contributions or when the Compensation that is
subject to the election would be currently available to the
Employee in the absence of an election to defer.
1.12      Beneficiary means any person, persons, entity or
entities named by a Participant by written designation filed
with the Company to receive benefits payable in the event
of the Participant’s death, provided that if the Participant is
married and designates someone other than his spouse as
the Beneficiary, he obtains written notarized Spousal
Consent.  If no Beneficiary designation is in effect at the
Participant’s death, of if no person, persons or entity so
designated survives the Participant, the Participant’s
surviving spouse, if any, shall be deemed to be the
Beneficiary; otherwise the Beneficiary shall be the
Participant’s estate.  In the event the Participant’s
Beneficiary dies prior to receiving distribution of the
Participant’s Account, the Beneficiary will be the
Beneficiary’s estate.
1.13      Board of Directors means the Board of Directors of
the Rio Tinto America Inc.
1.14      Boron Hourly Employee means a Boron
represented hourly Employee of the Company.
1.15      Boron Hourly Participant means a Boron
represented hourly Employee of the Company.
1.16      Break-in-Service means a Plan Year in which an
Employee completes fewer than 501 Hours of Service. 
Solely for the purpose of determining when a Break-in-
Service occurs, an Employee shall be credited with up to
501 Hours of Service during a period of absence by reason
of:
(a)        The Employee’s pregnancy;
(b)        The birth of a child of the Employee;
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    3
(c)        Placement of a child with the Employee in connection with the
Employee’s adoption of such child; or
(d)        Caring for such child for a period beginning immediately following
such birth or placement.
Hours of Service credited by reason of the above period of absence shall be credited in
the Plan Year in which the absence occurs if those Hours of Service are needed to prevent
a Break-in-Service in that year; otherwise, they shall be credited in the immediately
following Plan Year.
Such Hours of Service shall be equal to the normal number of Hours of Service that would
have been credited to the Employee but for the above period of absence; however, in no
event shall more than 501 Hours of Service be credited.
1.17      Catch-Up Contribution means the contributions
made by the Company in accordance with the provisions of
Section 3.12 pursuant to an election by a Participant to
reduce cash compensation otherwise currently payable to
the Participant by an equal amount.
1.18      Catch-Up Eligible Participant means for any Plan
Year, a Participant who is eligible to make Before-Tax
Contributions under Section 3.1 and who has attained age
50 or is expected to attain age 50 before the close of such
Plan Year.
1.19      Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended from time to time.
1.20      Company means U.S. Borax, Inc.
1.21      Company Matching Contributions means
contributions made by the Company on behalf of
Participants pursuant to Section 3.3.
1.22      Company Matching Contribution Account means a
Participant’s account into which shall be credited Company
Matching Contributions and investment earning and losses
thereon.
1.23      Compensation means total earnings (including
overtime), exclusive of bonuses and extraordinary items
such as tool allowances, imputed earnings for life
insurance over $50,000, gifts and awards or extraordinary
payments paid to an Employee during a Plan Year for
services rendered to the Company, and including Before-
Tax Contributions made to the Plan pursuant to Section 3.1
and before-tax contributions made to any other 401(k) plan
maintained by the Company or to a cafeteria plan described
in Code Section 125.  If the Company and a Participant
enter into an arbitration agreement and the arbitration
agreement so provides, Compensation will include back
pay.  Compensation shall not, for Plan purposes, exceed
the Annual Dollar Limit.
Effective for Plan Years commencing on or after July 1, 2007, “Compensation” recognized
in any Plan Year shall be limited to Compensation described in the preceding provisions
of this Section paid in such Plan Year or within 2½ months after the end of such Plan Year;
provided, however, that amounts received following severance from employment may be
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    4
taken into account during the 2½ month-period only if they would have been paid to the
Participant if the Participant had continued in employment.
1.24      Disability means, for purposes of the Plan, (a) an
Employee’s eligibility for disability benefits under Social
Security, or (b) an injury or illness which has lasted for at
least two years and which prevents the Participant from
working at any occupation.  Disability also includes a
Disability as defined under the U.S. Borax Inc. Retirement
Plan for Represented Hourly Employees but does not
include periods of short-term disability.
1.25      Early Retirement Age means age 55.
1.26      Effective Date of the amendment and restatement
means January 1, 2014; however, certain provisions of the
Plan are effective at earlier or later dates as required by the
Code or in Treasury Regulations or by an administrative
change or Plan amendment.   The Plan was originally
effective January 1, 1990.
1.27      Eligible Employee means a Boron Hourly Employee
or Wilmington Hourly Employee of the Company who is
covered by a collective bargaining agreement between the
Company and the Union but shall exclude any Leased
Employee.  An Eligible Employee shall also include a
Union Representative.
For purposes of this definition of “Eligible Employee,” and notwithstanding any other
provisions of the Plan to the contrary, individuals who are not classified by the Company,
in its discretion, as employees under Code Section 3121(d) (including but not limited to,
individuals classified by the Company as independent contractors and non-employee
consultants) and individuals who are classified by the Company, in its discretion, as
employees of any entity other than the Company or an Affiliated Employer do not meet the
definition of Eligible Employee and are ineligible for benefits under the Plan, even if the
classification by the Company is determined to be erroneous, or is retroactively revised. 
In the event the classification of an individual who is excluded from the definition of
Eligible Employee under the preceding sentence is determined to be erroneous or is
retroactively revised, the individual shall nonetheless continue to be excluded from the
definition of Eligible Employee and shall be ineligible for benefits for all periods prior to the
date the Company determines its classification of the individual is erroneous or should be
revised.  The foregoing sets forth a clarification of the intention of the Company regarding
participation in the Plan for any Plan Year, including Plan Years prior to the amendment of
this definition of “Eligible Employee.”
With respect to the component of the Plan providing for Retirement Contributions, the
phrase “Eligible Employee” shall include only the following:
(a)        Any Employee who is hired or rehired as, or who otherwise
becomes a Boron Hourly Employee after May 17, 2010.
(b)        Effective as of January 1, 2011, any Boron Hourly Employee who (i)
was a participant in the U.S. Borax Inc. Retirement Plan for Boron Hourly
Employees (the “Boron Hourly DB Plan”) and (ii) made an irrevocable
election during the period
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    5
from October 18, 2010 through December 15, 2010 (in the manner prescribed by the
Administrative Committee) to receive Retirement Contributions hereunder in lieu of
continuing to accrue benefits under the Boron Hourly DB Plan or any successor plan
thereto.
(c)        Any Employee who is hired or rehired as, or who otherwise
becomes, a Wilmington Hourly Employee after June 17, 2011.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any active Employee accruing benefits under the U.S.
Borax Inc. Retirement Plan for Represented Hourly Employees shall not be an “Eligible
Employee” with respect to the component of the Plan providing for Retirement
Contributions.
1.28      Employee means any person receiving
compensation for services rendered to the Company or an
Affiliated Employer whose compensation is subject to
income tax withholding and/or for whom Social Security
contributions are made by the Company or an Affiliated
Employer, including any Leased Employee but excluding
any person who serves solely as a non-employee director
or independent contractor.
1.29      Employment Commencement Date means the first
date as of which an Employee is credited with an Hour of
Service with the Company or an Affiliated Employer.
1.30      ERISA means the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974, as amended from time to time.
1.31      Fund means the means the fund consisting of
After-Tax Contributions, Before-Tax Contributions,
Company Matching Contributions, Retirement
Contributions, rollovers and all investment earnings and
losses thereon.  The Fund shall be comprised of numerous
different investment options.  The Investment Committee
may change or add investment options to the Plan from
time to time.
1.32      Highly Compensated Employee or HCE means any
Employee or former Employee of the Company or an
Affiliated Employer (whether or not eligible for participation
in the Plan) as follows:
(a)        A highly compensated active Employee includes any Employee
who (1) was a 5% owner (as defined in Code Section 416(i)(1)) of the
Company or an Affiliated Employer at any time during the current or
preceding year, or (2) for the preceding year, had Compensation from the
Company or an Affiliated Employer in excess of $80,000 (as adjusted
pursuant to Code Section 414(q)).
(b)        A former Employee will be treated as a Highly Compensated
Employee if:  (1) such Employee was a Highly Compensated Employee
when such Employee separated from service, or (2) such Employee was a
Highly Compensated Employee at any time after attaining age 55.
(c)        For purposes of this Section 1.32 , Compensation means
compensation within the meaning of Code Section 415(c)(3).  The
determination will be made without regard to Code Sections 125, 132(f),
402(g)(3), and 457, and in the case of Employer
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    6
contributions made pursuant to a salary reduction agreement, without regard to Code
Section 403(b).
(d)        The determination of who is a Highly Compensated Employee,
including the determinations of the number and identity of Employees in
the top paid group, will be made in accordance with Code Section 414(q)
and applicable Regulations.
1.33      Hour of Service means:
(a)        Each hour for which an Employee is paid or entitled to be paid for
the performance of duties for the Company or an Affiliated Employer;
(b)        Each hour for which an Employee is paid or entitled to be paid by
the Company or an Affiliated Employer, whether or not the employment
relationship has terminated, on account of a period during which no duties
were performed due to vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity (including
disability), layoff, jury duty, military duty or Leave of Absence, but not
more than 501 hours for any single continuous period; and
(c)        Each hour for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation of
damages, is either awarded or agreed to by the Company or an Affiliated
Employer, excluding any hour credited under subsections (a) or (b) above,
which shall be credited to the computation period or periods to which the
award, agreement or payment pertains rather than to the computation
period in which the award, agreement or payment is made.
No hours shall be credited on account of any period during which the Employee performs
no duties and receives payment solely for the purpose of complying with unemployment
compensation, workers’ compensation or disability insurance laws.  Hours of Service are
also not required to be credited for a payment which solely reimburses an Employee for
medical or medically related expenses incurred by the Employee.  The Hours of Service
credited shall be determined as required by Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 2530.200b-2(b) and (c).
1.34      Income means the amount of income to be returned
with any excess deferrals or excess contributions under
Section 3.1 or Section 3.6 as determined in accordance
with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the
Treasury under the provisions of Code Sections 402(g) and
401(k).
1.35      Investment Committee means the Rio Tinto America
Savings Plan Investment Committee.
1.36      Leased Employee means any person (other than a
person described in Code Section 414(n)(5) who is not
otherwise an Employee of the Company or an Affiliated
Employer and who provides services to the Company or an
Affiliated Employer (the “Recipient”)) if:
(a)       Such services are provided pursuant to an agreement between the
Recipient and a “leasing organization”;
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    7
(b)       Such person has performed such services for the Recipient (or the
Recipient and an Affiliated Employer) on a substantially full-time basis for
a period of at least one year; and
(c)       Such services are performed under primary direction or control by
the Recipient.
1.37      Leave of Absence means an absence authorized by
the Company under its standard personnel practices as
applied in a uniform and nondiscriminatory manner to all
persons similarly situated, including, without limitation, an
absence for the birth, adoption or placement of a child, to
care for a spouse or an immediate family member with a
serious illness or for the Employee’s own illness pursuant
to the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 and its
regulations.
1.38      Non-Highly Compensated Employee or NHCE
means an Employee of the Company or an Affiliated
Employer who is not a Highly Compensated Employee.
1.39      Normal Retirement Age means age 65.
1.40      Participant means any person included for
participation in the Plan as provided in Article 2 and any
person who continues to have rights or continued rights
under the Plan.
1.41      Plan means the U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings &
Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees,
as set forth in this document, as amended from time to
time.  Prior to May 17, 2010, the Plan was known as the U.S.
Borax Inc. 401(k) Plan for Hourly Employees.
1.42      Plan Administrator means the Administrative
Committee as provided for in Article 9.
1.43      Plan Year means a 12-month period beginning each
January 1 and ending each December 31.
1.44      Prior Plan means this Plan which was in effect
immediately prior to January 1, 2014 and any plan that was
a predecessor to the Prior Plan.
1.45      Reemployment Commencement Date means the
date an Employee is first credited with an Hour of Service
following a break in service.
1.46      Retirement Contributions means Company non-
elective contributions made pursuant to Section 3.4.
1.47      Retirement Contributions Account means a
Participant’s Account hereunder which shall be credited
with any Retirement Contributions made on behalf of the
Participant, and any investment income and losses
thereon.
1.48      Rollover Account means a Participant’s before-tax
and after-tax account into which shall be credited rollovers
made to the Plan pursuant to Section 3.9 and investment
income and losses thereon.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    8
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1.49      Rollover Contributions means a Participant’s
rollover contributions made pursuant to Section 3.9.
1.50      Sponsor means U.S. Borax, Inc.
1.51      Spousal Consent means written notarized consent
given by a Participant’s Spouse to the Participant’s
election specifying a form of benefit, as well as designating
the Participant’s Beneficiary.  The specified form or
designated Beneficiary shall not be changed unless further
Spousal Consent is given or unless the Spouse expressly
waives the right to consent to any future changes.  Spousal
Consent shall be applicable only to the particular Spouse
who provides such consent.
1.52      Spouse means an individual who is legally married
to a Participant as recognized under federal tax law.
1.53      Statutory Compensation means:
(a)        for the purposes of Section 1.32 (definition of Highly Compensated
Employee), compensation as defined under Section 1.414(s)-1(c)(2) of the
Income Tax Regulations, plus amounts contributed on a before-tax basis
in accordance with Code Sections 125, 402(e)(3), 402(h), or 403(b) (and
effective January 1, 2001 Code Section 132(f)).  “Statutory Compensation”
recognized for any Plan Year shall be limited to compensation described
in the preceding sentence paid for such Plan Year or within 2½ months
after the end of such Plan Year; provided, however, that amounts received
following severance from employment may be taken into account during
the 2½ month-period only if it would have been paid to the Participant if
the Participant had continued in employment; and
(b)        for the purposes of Sections 1.3 (definition of Actual Deferral Ratio),
and 3.6 (Actual Deferral Percentage Test), compensation as defined under
Sections 1.414(s)-1(c)(2) or 1.414(s)-1(c)(3) of the Income Tax Regulations. 
As permitted under such regulations, compensation under this
Section 1.53(b) may or may not include amounts contributed on a before-
tax basis in accordance with Code Sections 125, 132(f), 402(e)(3), 402(h),
or 403(b).  However, in no event may compensation under this
Section 1.53 exceed the Annual Dollar Limit for the Plan Year.
(c)        Effective for Plan Years and “limitation years” beginning on and
after January 1, 2003, amounts under a plan described in Code Section
125 include any amounts not available to a Participant in cash in lieu of
group health coverage because the Participant is unable to certify that he
or she has other health coverage. An amount will be treated as an amount
under Code Section 125 only if the Company does not request or collect
information regarding the Participant’s other health coverage as part of the
enrollment process for the health plan.
1.54      Trustee means the trustee that holds the funds of
the Plan, as provided in Article 10.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    9
1.55      Union means for Boron Hourly Employees, the
Local 30-International Longshoremen’s and
Warehousemen’s Union, and for Wilmington Hourly
Employees, the Local 20A- International Longshoremen’s
and Warehousemen’s Union.
1.56      Union Representative means the Union President
and Secretary of Local 30-International Longshoremen’s
and Warehousemen’s Union.
1.57      Valuation Date means the date or dates in each
calendar month on which any valuation is made. 
Procedures shall be established for determining Valuation
Dates, which shall apply for allocations, withdrawals,
distributions or other relevant purposes.  Valuation Dates
need not be the same for all purposes.
1.58      Vested Portion means the portion of the Accounts
in which the Participant has a nonforfeitable interest, as
provided in Article 6.
1.59      Wilmington Hourly Employee means a Wilmington
represented hourly Employee of the Company.
1.60      Wilmington Hourly Participant means a Participant
who is a Wilmington Hourly Employee.
1.61      Year of Service means a 12-month period
(measured initially from the Employee’s Employee
Commencement Date or, if applicable, Reemployment
Commencement Date, to the first anniversary of such date,
and thereafter to each successive anniversary date) during
which an Employee earns at least 1,000 Hours of Service.
The following rules shall apply in determining a Participant’s Years of Service, if the
Participant is reemployed by the Company or an Affiliated Employer after one or more
Breaks-in-Service.
(a)        In the case of a Participant who is reemployed before the
occurrence of 5 consecutive Breaks-in-Service, both pre-break and post-
break Years of Service will count in vesting the Participant’s Account.
(b)        In the case of Participant who is re-employed after the occurrence
of 5 or more consecutive Breaks-in-Service, his or her pre-break Years of
Service will not be counted in determining unless he or she had a
nonforfeitable interest in his or her Account prior to the Break-in-Service.
*  *  *  *  End of Article 1  *  *  *  *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    10
Article 2.
Eligibility and Participation
2.1       Eligibility.
(a)        Each Eligible Employee who shall have been included in the Prior
Plan and each former Employee who maintained an Account balance in
the Prior Plan on the Effective Date shall automatically became a
Participant in the Plan.
(b)        Each other Employee shall become eligible to participate in the
Plan as follows:
(1)        With respect to the component of the Plan providing for After-Tax Contributions,
Before-Tax Contributions and Company Matching Contributions, on the later of –
(A)       his Employment Commencement Date if he is a Wilmington Hourly Employee; or
(B)       the first day of the month after his Employment Commencement Date if he is a Boron Hourly
Employee; or
(C)       for all other Employees, the date he becomes an Eligible Employee.
(2)        With respect to the component of the Plan providing for Retirement Contributions –
(A)       the first day of the pay period following 60 days after the Employee’s Employment Commencement
Date as a Boron Hourly Employee; or
(B)       January 1, 2011 if the Employee is described in Section 1.27(b) or
(C)       the first day of the pay period following 60 days after the Employee’s Employment Commencement
Date as a Wilmington Hourly Employee.
(c)        If an Employee is rehired, he shall be eligible to participate (or re-
enroll) in the Plan on (i) his Reemployment Commencement Date, or (ii) the
date he becomes an Eligible Employee, whichever occurs later.
2.2       Participation.
(a)        An Eligible Employee shall become a Participant in the component
of the Plan described in Section 2.1(b)(1) as of the date after he satisfies
the requirements of Section 2.1(b)(1) and after the date he files an
enrollment form with the Company authorizing the Company to make
After-Tax Contributions and/or Before-Tax Contributions on his behalf
through payroll deductions.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    11
(b)        An Eligible Employee shall become a Participant in the component
of the Plan described in Section 2.1(b)(2) (providing for Retirement
Contributions) -
(1)        as of the date coinciding with or next following  the date the Employee satisfied the
requirements of Section 2.1(b)(2)(A), or
(2)        as of January 1, 2011 if the Employee is described in Section 1.27(b), or
(3)        as of the date coinciding with or next following  the date the Employee satisfied the
requirements of Section 2.1(b)(2)(C),
provided, in each case, the Employee is still an Eligible Employee as of such date.
2.3       Transferred Participants.
(a)        A Participant who remains in the employ of the Company or an
Affiliated Employer but who ceases to be an Eligible Employee shall
continue to be an inactive Participant in the Plan but shall not be eligible to
make After-Tax Contributions, Before-Tax Contributions or Rollover
Contributions or be credited with an allocation of Company Matching
Contributions or Retirement Contributions while his employment status is
other than that of an Eligible Employee.
(b)        An Employee who transfers from salaried status or an Affiliated
Employer and becomes an Eligible Employee shall become eligible to
participate in the Plan on (i) the date he transfers from non-covered
employment, or (ii) the date he becomes an Eligible Employee, whichever
occurs later.  An Eligible Employee under this subsection (b) shall become
eligible to participate in the Plan with respect to Retirement Contributions
60 days following the date the Employee becomes an Eligible Employee.
(c)        A Participant who transfers to an Affiliated Employer who is
participating in the RTAI 401(k) Savings Plan & Investment Partnership
Plan shall, in the discretion of the Administrative Committee, have the
value of his Accounts transferred directly to such plan in a plan-to-plan
transfer.  In the event of such transfer, the Participant shall have no further
rights to benefits under the Plan.
2.4       Termination of Participation.
An Eligible Employee’s participation in the Plan shall terminate on the date he terminates
employment with the Company or an Affiliated Employer unless the Participant is entitled
to benefits under the Plan, in which event his participation shall terminate when all those
benefits have been distributed to him.
2.5       Participation after Reemployment.
A Participant who has terminated from employment will again become a Participant with
respect to After-Tax Contributions and Before-Tax Contributions on his or her
Reemployment Commencement Date, and with respect to Retirement Contributions if the
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    12
Participant has not incurred 5 consecutive Breaks-in-Service as of his Reemployment
Commencement Date.  If the Participant incurs 5 consecutive Breaks-in-Service prior to
his Reemployment Commencement Date, he must satisfy Section 2.1(b)(2) order to be
eligible for Retirement Contributions.
* * * * End of Article 2 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    13
Article 3.
Contributions
3.1       Participant’s Contributions.
(a)        Contribution Limits.
(1)        A Boron Hourly Participant shall be permitted to contribute to the Plan not less than
1% or more than 30% of his Compensation in whole percentages on either (A) an after-tax
basis (“After-Tax Contributions”) or (B) a before-tax basis (“Before-Tax Contributions”), or
(C) a combination of both.
(2)        A Wilmington Hourly Participant shall be permitted to contribute to the Plan not less
than 1% or more than 30% of his Compensation in whole percentages as either (A) After-
Tax Contributions or (B) Before-Tax Contributions, or (C) a combination of both.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection (a),
contributions of less than 1% of Compensation may be processed if a
Participant is reaching any of the limitations described in the preceding
provisions of this subsection, but in no event shall such limitations be
exceeded, except as otherwise permitted under Section 3.1(e) (relating to
age-50 catch-up contributions).
A Participant who is no longer an Eligible Employee must re-enroll in the
Plan and make a new election under this Section 3.1 after becoming an
Eligible Employee.
(b)        Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall a Participant’s
Before-Tax Contributions in a calendar year exceed the dollar limitation
contained in Code Section 402(g) in effect for such calendar year.  If a
Participant’s Before-Tax Contributions in a calendar year reach that dollar
limitation, his election of Before-Tax Contributions for the remainder of the
calendar year shall be changed to After-Tax Contributions.  As of the first
payroll period of the following calendar year, the Participant’s election of
Before-Tax Contributions shall again become effective in accordance with
his previous election.
(c)        If the sum of the Participant’s Before-Tax Contributions and before-
tax contributions to any other qualified defined contribution plan
maintained by the Company or an Affiliated Employer exceeds the dollar
limitation described in Section 3.1(b), the excess (“excess deferrals”) over
such dollar limitation, together with Income thereon, shall be returned to
the Participant no later than the April 15 following the end of the calendar
year in which the excess deferrals were made, and the Participant shall be
deemed to have elected to receive such return of his excess deferrals.
(d)        If a Participant makes before-tax contributions under another
employer’s qualified defined contribution plan or simplified employee
pension plan for any calendar year and those contributions, when added
to his Before-Tax Contributions under the Plan, exceed the dollar limitation
described in Section 3.1(b) for that calendar year, the
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    14
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
Participant may determine that such excess deferrals shall apply to the Plan.  In that event
the excess deferrals, together with Income thereon, shall be returned to the Participant no
later than the April 15 following the end of the calendar year in which the excess deferrals
were made.  However, the Plan shall not return such excess deferrals unless the
Participant notifies the Company in writing, by March 1 of that following calendar year of
the amount of excess deferrals allocated to the Plan.
(e)        All Employees who are eligible to make contributions under Section
3.1(a) and who have or will have attained age 50 before the close of the
Plan Year shall be eligible to make catch-up contributions in accordance
with, and subject to the limitations of, Code Section 414(v).  A Participant’s
authorization to make a Catch-Up Contribution shall remain in effect until
revoked or changed by the Participant.  Such catch-up contributions shall
not be taken into account for purposes of the provisions of the Plan
implementing the required limitations of Code Sections 402(g) and 415. 
The Plan shall not be treated as failing to satisfy the provisions of the Plan
implementing the requirements of Code Section 401(k)(3), 401(k)(11),
401(k)(12), 410(b) or 416, as applicable, by reason of the making of such
catch-up contributions.
(f)        Participant After-Tax Contributions and Before-Tax Contributions
shall be made according to rules prescribed by the Administrative
Committee as soon as administratively practicable only after the
Participant has authorized the deduction of such contributions from his
Compensation.  Such authorization shall remain in effect until revoked or
changed by the Participant.  The Participant may change such
authorization in accordance with Section 3.2.  A Participant who is no
longer an Eligible Employee must re-enroll in the Plan and make a new
election under this Section 3.1 after becoming an Eligible Employee.
3.2       Change or Suspension in After-Tax and Before-Tax
Contributions.  A Participant may change the rate of his
After-Tax or Before-Tax Contributions by providing notice
in accordance with procedures established by the
Administrative Committee.  Such change shall be effective
as soon as administratively practicable following such
notification.  To be effective, any authorization, change of
authorization, or notice of revocation must be submitted in
accordance with procedures established by the
Administrative Committee according to such restrictions
and requirements as the Administrative Committee
prescribes.  The Participant may resume making After-Tax
or Before-Tax Contributions at anytime by providing notice
accordance with procedures established by the
Administrative Committee.  There shall be no make-up of
contributions that could have been made during any period
of suspension.
3.3       Company Matching Contributions.  The Company
shall contribute to the Plan on behalf of each Participant
who is covered under a collective bargaining agreement
providing for matching contributions an amount equal to:
(a)        For a Boron Hourly Participant, 30% of the Participant’s After-Tax
Contributions and/or Before-Tax Contributions which, when combined, are
not in excess of 5% of the Participant’s Compensation per payroll period;
provided, however, that in no
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    15
event shall Company Matching Contributions under this Section 3.3(a) exceed 1.5% of the
Participant’s Compensation per payroll period.
(b)        For a Wilmington Hourly Participant, 35% of the Participant’s After-
Tax Contributions and/or Before-Tax Contributions which, when
combined, are not in excess of 5% of the Participant’s Compensation per
payroll period; provided, however, that in no event shall Company
Matching Contributions under this Section 3.3(b) exceed 1.75% of the
Participant’s Compensation per payroll period.
3.4       Retirement Contributions.  This Section shall apply
to Boron Hourly and Wilmington Hourly Employees.
(a)        The Company shall make Retirement Contributions on behalf of
each Participant in this component of the Plan equal to 4% of the
Participant’s Adjusted Compensation as defined below.  For purposes of
the preceding sentence, the phrase “Adjusted Compensation” shall mean
base wages, excluding overtime, shift differentials, any extraordinary
items such as tool allowances or any expense reimbursements,
ratification bonuses, gifts and awards paid to or on behalf of the
Participant, and severance paid after termination of employment. 
“Adjusted Compensation” shall be recognized under this Section 3.4 with
respect to a Participant only during the period the Employee is a
Participant in this component of the Plan.  Retirement Contributions made
on behalf a Participant shall be allocated to the Participant’s Retirement
Contributions Account.  If the Company and a Participant enter into an
arbitration agreement and the arbitration agreement so provides, Adjusted
Compensation will also include back pay.
(b)        Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 3.4, when
a Participant incurs a Disability, no Retirement Contributions shall be
made under this Section on behalf of the Participant for the period of such
Disability, which shall be deemed to commence as of the injury date giving
rise to the Disability and end if and when the Participant returns to active
service as an Eligible Employee.  No Retirement Contributions shall be
made under this Section on behalf of the Participant for the period the
Participant is receiving state disability income and/or is on long-term
disability under the Company’s long-term disability policy.
3.5       Timing of Contributions.  Contributions made in
accordance with Sections 3.1, 3.3 and 3.4 shall be
forwarded to the Trustee as soon as practicable after the
end of each payroll period but in no event later than the
due dates specified in applicable Department of Labor
regulations.
3.6       Actual Deferral Percentage Test.
(a)        The “Primary Test”.  The Actual Deferral Percentage for Highly
Compensated Employees who are Participants or eligible to become
Participants shall not exceed the Actual Deferral Percentage for the
preceding Plan Year for all Non-Highly Compensated Employees who are
Participants or eligible to become Participants multiplied by 1.25.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    16
(b)        The “Alternative Test”.  If the Actual Deferral Percentage for Highly
Compensated Employees who are Participants or eligible to become
Participants does not meet the test described in Section 3.6(a), the
following “alternative test” shall be applied: the Actual Deferral
Percentage for Highly Compensated Employees who are Participants or
eligible to become Participants shall not exceed the lesser of:
(1)        The Actual Deferral Percentage for the preceding Plan Year for all Non-Highly
Compensated Employees who are Participants or eligible to become Participants plus two
percentage points; or
(2)        The Actual Deferral Percentage for the preceding Plan Year for all Non-Highly
Compensated Employees who are Participants or eligible to become Participants
multiplied by 2.0.
(c)        Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section 3.6(a) and
3.6(b), the Company may elect to use the Actual Deferred Percentage for
Non-Highly Compensated Employees for the current Plan Year rather than
the preceding Plan Year provided that such election must be evidenced by
a Plan amendment and once made may not be changed except as
provided by the Secretary of the Treasury.
(d)        If the Company determines that the limitations described in this
Section 3.6 have been exceeded in any Plan Year, the Company shall
determine the amount of “Excess Contributions” for each Participant who
is a Highly Compensated Employee in the following manner:
(1)        The Actual Deferral Ratio of the Highly Compensated Employee with the highest
Actual Deferral Ratio shall be reduced to the extent necessary to meet the Actual Deferral
Percentage Test or to cause such ratio to equal the Actual Deferral Ratio of the Highly
Compensated Employee with the next highest ratio. This process will be repeated until the
Actual Deferral Percentage Test is passed. Each ratio shall be rounded to the nearest one
one‑hundredth of one percent of the Participant’s Statutory Compensation. The amount of
Before-Tax Contributions made by each Highly Compensated Employee in excess of the
amount permitted under his or her revised Actual Deferral Ratio shall be added together.
This total dollar amount of Excess Contributions shall then be allocated to some or all
Highly Compensated Employees in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (ii)
below.
(2)        The Before-Tax Contributions of the Highly Compensated Employee with the
highest dollar amount of Before-Tax Contribution shall be reduced by the lesser of (A) the
amount required to cause that to equal the dollar amount of the Before-Tax Contribution of
the Highly Compensated Employee with the next highest dollar amount of Before-Tax
Contributions, or (B) an amount equal to the total Excess Contributions. This procedure is
repeated until all Excess Contributions are allocated. The amount of Excess Contributions
allocated to a Highly Compensated Employee, together with Income thereon,
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    17
shall be distributed to him in accordance with the provisions of  Section 3.6(e).
(e)        If, at the end of the Plan Year, a Participant or class of Participants
has Excess Contributions (determined in accordance with Section 3.6(d)),
the amount of Excess Contributions allocated to a Highly Compensated
Employee shall be distributed to him as follows:
The Excess Contributions, together with Income thereon, allocated to a Participant shall
be paid to the Participant before the close of the Plan Year following the Plan Year in which
the Excess Contributions were made, and to the extent practicable, within 2 ½ months of
the close of the Plan Year in which the Excess Contributions were made.  However, any
Excess Contributions for any Plan Year shall be reduced by any Before-Tax Contributions
previously returned to the Participant under Section 3.1 for that Plan Year. In the event any
Before-Tax Contributions returned under this Section 3.6 were matched by Company
Matching Contributions, such corresponding Company Matching Contributions with
Income thereon shall be forfeited and used to reduce future Company Matching
Contributions.
The Plan will not calculate and distribute allocable Income for the gap period (i.e., the
period after the close of the Plan Year in which the excess contribution or excess
aggregate contribution occurred and prior to the distribution).
(f)        The Company may implement rules limiting Before-Tax
Contributions that may be made on behalf of any Participant or class of
Participants so that the provisions of this Section 3.6 are satisfied.
(g)        The Actual Deferral Ratio of any Participant who is a Highly
Compensated Employee for the Plan Year and who is eligible to have
elective contributions (as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.401(k)-6) (and
qualified non-elective contributions and/or qualified matching
contributions, if treated as elective contributions for purposes of the ADP
test) allocated to such Participant’s accounts under 2 or more cash or
deferred arrangements described in Code Section 401(k) that are
maintained by the same employer shall be determined as if such elective
contributions (and, if applicable, such qualified non-elective contributions
and/or qualified matching contributions) were made under a single
arrangement.  If an HCE participates in 2 or more cash or deferred
arrangements of the employer that have different Plan Years, then all
elective contributions made during the Plan Year being tested under all
such cash or deferred arrangements shall be aggregated, without regard
to the plan years of the other plans.  Notwithstanding the foregoing,
certain plans shall be treated as separate if mandatorily disaggregated
under the Treasury Regulations promulgated under Code Section 401(k).
3.7       Additional Discrimination Provisions.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    18
(a)        The Administrative Committee may authorize that qualified
nonelective contributions (as described under Section 1.401(k)‑6) of the
Income Tax Regulations) shall be made for a Plan Year and shall be
allocated in such amounts and to such Participants who are Non-Highly
Compensated Employees as the Administrative Committee determines. 
The Company shall establish such separate accounts as may be
necessary.  Qualified nonelective contributions shall be 100%
nonforfeitable when made and shall not be available for withdrawal under
Article 7.  Qualified nonelective contributions made for the Plan Year may
be used to satisfy the tests described in Section 3.6, subject to the
limitations set forth below.  Except as otherwise provided below, qualified
nonelective contribution may be taken into account in determining the
Actual Deferral Ratio of the Nonhighly‑Compensated Employees for the
preceding Plan Year under Section 3.6 provided the contributions are
credited to Participants Accounts no later than the last day of the
preceding Plan Year and are contributed to the Plan no later than the last
day of the Plan Year being tested.
(b)        Qualified non-elective contributions cannot be taken into account
in determining the Actual Deferral Ratio for a Plan Year for a Non-Highly
Compensated Employee (NHCE) to the extent such contributions exceed
the product of that NHCE’s Statutory Compensation and the greater of 5%
or 2 times the Plan’s representative contribution rate.  For purposes of this
Section:
(1)        The Plan’s “representative contribution rate” is the lowest “applicable contribution
rate” of any eligible NHCE among a group of eligible NHCEs that consists of half of all
eligible NHCEs for the Plan Year (or, if greater, the lowest “applicable contribution rate” of
any eligible NHCE who is in the group of all eligible NHCEs for the Plan Year and who is
employed by the Employer on the last day of the Plan year), and
(2)        The “applicable contribution rate” for an eligible NHCE is the sum of the Qualified
Matching Contributions (as defined in Regulation Section 1.401(k)-6) taken into account in
determining the Actual Deferral Ratio for the eligible NHCE for the Plan Year and the
Qualified Non-Elective Contributions made for the eligible NHCE for the Plan Year, divided
by the eligible NHCE’s Statutory Compensation for the same period.
(c)        Qualified non-elective contributions cannot be taken into account
to determine an Actual Deferral Ratio to the extent such contributions are
taken into account for purposes of satisfying any other ADP test, any ACP
test, or the requirements of Treasury Regulation Sections 1.401(k)-3,
1.401(m)-3 or 1.401(k)-4.
(d)        If any Highly Compensated Employee is a participant of another
qualified plan of the Company or an Affiliated Employer, other than an
employee stock ownership plan described in Code Section 4975(e)(7),
under which deferred cash contributions are made on behalf of the Highly
Compensated Employee or under which the Highly Compensated
Employee makes after-tax contributions, the Administrative Committee
shall implement rules to take into account all such contributions for the
Highly Compensated Employee under all such plans in applying the
limitations of
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    19
Section 3.6.  Such rules shall be uniformly applicable to all Employees similarly situated.
(e)        If the Company elects to apply the provisions of Section 410(b)(4)
(B) to satisfy the requirements of Code Section 401(k)(3)(A)(i), the
Company may apply the provisions of Sections 3.6, by excluding from
consideration all eligible employees (other than Highly Compensated
Employees) who have not met the minimum age and service requirements
of Code Section 410(a)(1)(A).
(f)        In the event that the Plan is aggregated with one or more other plans
to satisfy the requirements of Code Sections 401(a)(4) and 410(b) (other
than for purposes of the average benefit percentage test) or if one or more
other plans is aggregated with the Plan to satisfy the requirements of such
sections of the Code, then the provisions of Sections 3.6 shall be applied
by determining the Actual Deferral Percentage of employees as if all such
plans were a single plan.  If this Plan is permissively aggregated with any
other plan or plans for purposes of satisfying the provisions of Code
Section 401(k)(3), the aggregated plans also must satisfy the provisions of
Code Sections 401(a)(4) and 410(b) as though they were a single plan. 
Plans may be aggregated under this Section 3.7(f) only if they have the
same plan year.
3.8       Maximum Annual Additions.
(a)        The annual addition to a Participant’s Accounts for any Plan Year,
which shall be considered the “limitation year” for purposes of Code
Section 415, when added to the Participant’s annual addition for that Plan
Year under any other qualified plan of the Company or an Affiliated
Employer, shall not exceed an amount that is equal to the lesser of (i)
100% of the Participant’s aggregate remuneration for that Plan Year, or (ii)
$40,000.  The 100 percent limit referenced in the previous sentence shall
not apply to any contribution for medical benefits after separation from
service (within the meaning of Code Sections 401(h) or 419A(f)(2)) that is
otherwise treated as an annual addition.
(b)        For purposes of this Section 3.8, the “annual addition” to a
Participant’s Accounts under the Plan or any other qualified plan
maintained by the Company or an Affiliated Employer for the Plan Year
shall include:
(1)        Total contributions, including After-Tax Contributions, Before-Tax Contributions
and Company Matching Contributions made on the Participant’s behalf by the Company
to the Plan or contributions made to any other qualified defined contribution plan
maintained by the Company or an Affiliated Employer;
(2)        Forfeitures that have been allocated under any other qualified defined contribution
plan maintained by the Company or any Affiliated Employer;
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    20
(3)        Voluntary or mandatory contributions made by the Participant under any qualified
defined benefit plan maintained by the Company or any Affiliated Employer; and
(4)        Contributions made on a Participant’s behalf to an “individual medical benefit
account” under a qualified pension or annuity plan maintained by the Company or any
Affiliated Employer, as described and to the extent required under Code Section 415(l).
The phrase “annual additions” shall not include restorative payments. A “restorative
payment” is a payment made to restore losses to a Plan resulting from actions by a
fiduciary for which there is reasonable risk of liability for breach of a fiduciary duty under
ERISA or under other applicable federal or state law, where Participants who are similarly
situated are treated similarly with respect to the payments. Generally, payments are
restorative payments only if the payments are made in order to restore some or all of the
Plan’s losses due to an action (or a failure to act) that creates a reasonable risk of liability
for such a breach of fiduciary duty (other than a breach of fiduciary duty arising from
failure to remit contributions to the Plan). This includes payments to a Plan made pursuant
to a Department of Labor order, the Department of Labor’s Voluntary Fiduciary Correction
Program, or a court‑approved settlement, to restore losses to a qualified defined
contribution plan on account of the breach of fiduciary duty (other than a breach of
fiduciary duty arising from failure to remit contributions to the Plan). Payments made to the
Plan to make-up for losses due merely to market fluctuations and other payments that are
not made on account of a reasonable risk of liability for breach of a fiduciary duty under
ERISA are not restorative payments and generally constitute contributions that are
considered “annual additions”.
(c)        For purposes of this Section 3.8, the term “remuneration” with
respect to any Participant shall mean the wages, salaries and other
amounts paid with respect to that Participant by the Company or any
Affiliated Employer for personal services actually rendered, and shall
include amounts contributed by the Company or an Affiliated Employer
pursuant to a salary reduction agreement which are not includible in the
gross income of the Employee under Code Sections 125, 132(f)(4), 402(g)
(3) or 457, but excluding:
(1)        Company Matching Contributions to the Plan or to any other deferred
compensation plan maintained by the Company or any Affiliated Employer;
(2)        Amounts realized from the exercise of a non-qualified stock option;
(3)        Amounts realized when restricted stock is no longer subject to substantial risk of
forfeiture;
(4)        Amounts realized from the disposition of a qualified stock option; or
(5)        Other amounts that receive special tax benefits.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    21
“Remuneration” recognized in any limitation year shall be limited to remuneration paid in
such limitation year or within 2½ months after the end of such limitation year; provided,
however, that amounts received following severance from employment may be taken into
account during the 2½ month-period only if they would have been paid to the Participant if
the Participant had continued in employment.
(d)        If the annual additions to a Participant’s Accounts for any Plan Year
would otherwise exceed the limitation set forth in Section 3.8(a), the
excess annual additions to such Participant’s Accounts for such Plan
Year shall be reduced to the extent necessary in the following order:
(1)        The Participant’s unmatched After-Tax Contributions shall be reduced to the extent
necessary.  The amount of the reduction shall be returned to the Participant, together with
any earnings on those contributions to be returned.
(2)        The Participant’s unmatched Before-Tax Contributions shall be reduced to the
extent necessary.  The amount of the reduction shall be returned to the Participant,
together with any earnings on those contributions to be returned.
(3)        The Participant’s matched After-Tax Contributions and corresponding Company
Matching Contributions shall be reduced to the extent necessary.  The amount of the
reduction attributable to the Participant’s matched After-Tax Contributions shall be
returned to the Participant, together with any earnings on those contributions to be
returned, and the amount attributable to the Company Matching Contributions shall be
forfeited and used to reduce future Company Matching Contributions.
(4)        The Participant’s matched Before-Tax Contributions and corresponding Company
Matching Contributions shall be reduced to the extent necessary.  The amount of the
reduction attributable to the Participant’s matched Before-Tax Contributions shall be
returned to the Participant, together with any earnings on those contributions to be
returned, and the amount attributable to the Company Matching Contributions shall be
forfeited and used to reduce future Company Matching Contributions.
(e)       The “limitation year” may only be changed by a Plan amendment.
Furthermore, if the Plan is terminated effective as of a date other than the
last day of the Plan’s “limitation year”, then the Plan is treated as if the
Plan had been amended to change its “limitation year”.
(f)       Effective for limitation years commencing on or after July 1, 2007,
the following additional rules shall apply:
(1)        All defined contribution plans (without regard to whether a plan has been
terminated) ever maintained by the Employer (or a “predecessor employer”) under which
the Participant receives “annual additions’ are treated as one defined contribution plan.
For purposes of this Section, the term “Employer”
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    22
means the Company and all members of a controlled group or an affiliated service group
that includes the Employer (within the meaning of Code Sections 414(b), (c), (m) or (o)),
except that for purposes of this Section, the determination shall be made by applying
Code Section 415(h), and shall take into account tax‑exempt organizations under
Regulation Section 1.414(c)‑5, as modified by Regulation Section 1.415(a)-1(f)(1). For
purposes of this Section:
(A)       A former Employer is a “predecessor employer” with respect to a Participant in a Plan maintained by
an Employer if the Employer maintains a Plan under which the Participant had accrued a benefit while
performing services for the former Employer, but only if that benefit is provided under the Plan maintained by
the Employer. For this purpose, the formerly affiliated plan rules in Regulation Section 1.415(f)‑1(b)(2) apply
as if the Employer and predecessor Employer constituted a single employer under the rules described in
Regulation Section 1.415(a)‑1(f)(1) and (2) immediately prior to the cessation of affiliation (and as if they
constituted two, unrelated employers under the rules described in Regulation Section 1.415(a)‑1(f)(1) and (2)
immediately after the cessation of affiliation) and cessation of affiliation was the event that gives rise to the
predecessor employer relationship, such as a transfer of benefits or plan sponsorship.
(B)       With respect to an Employer of a Participant, a former entity that antedates the Employer is a
“predecessor employer” with respect to the Participant if, under the facts and circumstances, the Employer
constitutes a continuation of all or a portion of the trade or business of the former entity.
(2)        Break‑up of an affiliated employer or an affiliated service group.  For purposes of
aggregating plans for Code Section 415, a “formerly affiliated plan” of an Employer is
taken into account for purposes of applying the Code Section 415 limitations to the
Employer, but the formerly affiliated plan is treated as if it had terminated immediately prior
to the “cessation of affiliation.” For purposes of this paragraph, a “formerly affiliated plan”
of an Employer is a plan that, immediately prior to the cessation of affiliation, was actually
maintained by one or more of the entities that constitute the Employer (as determined
under the employer affiliation rules described in Regulation Section 1.415(a)‑1(f)(1) and
(2)), and immediately after the cessation of affiliation, is not actually maintained by any of
the entities that constitute the Employer (as determined under the employer affiliation
rules described in Regulation Section 1.415(a)‑1(f)(1) and (2)). For purposes of this
paragraph, a “cessation of affiliation” means the event that causes an entity to no longer
be aggregated with one or more other entities as a single employer under the employer
affiliation rules described in Regulation Section 1.415(a)‑1(f)(1) and (2) (such as the sale of
a subsidiary outside a controlled group), or that causes a plan to not actually be
maintained by any of the
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    23
entities that constitute the Employer under the employer affiliation rules of Regulation
Section 1.415(a)‑ 1(f)(1) and (2) (such as a transfer of plan sponsorship outside of a
controlled group).
(3)        Midyear Aggregation. Two or more defined contribution plans that are not required
to be aggregated pursuant to Code Section 415(f) and the Regulations thereunder as of
the first day of a “limitation year” do not fail to satisfy the requirements of Code Section
415 with respect to a Participant for the “limitation year” merely because they are
aggregated later in that “limitation year”, provided that no “annual additions” are credited
to the Participant’s Account after the date on which the plans are required to be
aggregated.
3.9       Rollovers.
(a)        With the permission of the Company or Administrative Committee
and without regard to any limitations on contributions set forth in this
Plan, the Plan may receive from an active Participant or from an Eligible
Employee who is not yet a Participant, in cash, on an after-tax or before-
tax basis, any portion of:
(1)        An “eligible rollover distribution,” as defined in Code Section 402(f)(2)(A), paid to
the Participant (or Eligible Employee) provided that the Participant (or Eligible Employee)
pays over such amount to the Trustee on or before the 60th day after the day it was
received by the Participant (or Eligible Employee);
(2)        An “eligible rollover distribution,” as defined in Code Section 402(f)(2)(A), paid as a
direct rollover to the Trustee on behalf of the Participant (or Eligible Employee) by a
qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), an annuity plan described in Code
Section 403(a), an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code or an eligible
plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision
of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state; and
(3)        A distribution described in Code Section 408(d)(3)(A)(ii) (as modified by Code
Section 408(d)(3)(D)) from an individual retirement account or annuity paid to the
Participant (or Eligible Employee) provided that the Participant (or Eligible Employee) pays
over such amount to the Trustee on or before the 60th day after the day it was received by
the Participant (or Eligible Employee).
(b)        Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Plan shall not accept any after-
tax amounts under this Section, that is, amounts that would not be taxable
to the Participant (or Eligible Employee) upon distribution from this Plan.
(c)        Upon approval by the Company the amount transferred to the Plan
by the Participant (or Eligible Employee) shall be deposited by the Trustee
and shall be credited to the
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    24
Participant’s (or Eligible Employee’s) Rollover Account.  A Participant (or Eligible
Employee) shall be 100% vested in his Rollover Account and such Rollover Account shall
share in allocations of income, gains and losses from investment options.
(d)        Upon a transfer described in this Section by an Eligible Employee
who is not a Participant, the Eligible Employee’s Rollover Account shall
represent his sole interest in the Plan until he becomes a Participant.
(e)       The Company or Administrative Committee shall develop such
other procedures and may require such information from a Participant (or
Eligible Employee) desiring to make a rollover as it deems necessary or
desirable to determine that the proposed rollover will meet the
requirements of this Section and that the amount rolled over qualifies for
rollover treatment pursuant to applicable provisions of the Code.
3.10      Makeup Contributions Related to Period of
Uniformed Services Duty.
(a)       Without regard to any limitations on contributions set forth in this
Article 3, a Participant who is reemployed after a period of service in the
uniformed services of the United States and who is credited with an Hour
of Service because of such service may elect to contribute to the Plan the
Before-Tax Contributions, Catch-Up Contributions and/or After-Tax
Contribution that could have been contributed to the Plan in accordance
with the provisions of the Plan had he remained continuously employed
by the Company throughout such period of absence (“make-up
contributions”).  The amount of make up contributions shall be
determined on the basis of the Participant’s Compensation in effect
immediately prior to the period of absence, and the terms of the Plan at
such time.  Any Before-Tax Contributions, Catch-Up Contributions and/or
After-Tax Contributions so determined shall be limited as provided in this
Article 3 with respect to the Plan Year or Plan Years to which such
contributions relate rather than the Plan Year in which payment is made. 
Any payment to the Plan described in this Section 3.10 shall be made
during the period, beginning with the date of reemployment whose
duration is the lesser of 3 times the period of absence or 5 years. 
Investment earnings (or losses) on make-up contributions shall be
credited commencing with the date the make-up contribution is made in
accordance with the provisions of Article 4.
(b)        With respect to a Participant who makes the election described in
Section 3.10(a), the Company shall make Company Matching
Contributions on the make-up contributions in the amount described in
the provisions of Sections 3.3, as in effect for the Plan Year to which such
make-up contributions relate.  Company Matching Contributions under
this Section 3.10(b) shall be made during the period described in Section
3.10(a).  Investment earnings (or losses) on Company Matching
Contributions shall be credited commencing with the date the
contributions are made in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.  Any
limitations on Company Matching Contributions described in Section 3.3
shall be applied with respect to the Plan Year or Plan Years to which such
contributions relate rather than the Plan Year or Plan Years in which
payment is made.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    25
(c)       With respect to a Participant in the Retirement Contributions
component of the Plan (regardless of whether such Participant elects to
make make-up contribution to the Plan pursuant to Section 3.10(a)), the
Company shall make Retirement Contributions in the amount described in
the provisions of Section 3.4, as in effect for the Plan Year or Years in
which such absence occurs.  Retirement Contributions under this
Section 3.10(c) shall be made during the period described in Section
3.10(a).  Investment earnings (or losses) on such Retirement Contributions
shall be credited commencing with the date the Retirement Contributions
are made in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 and no adjustment
shall be made for lost earnings or investment gains.  Any limitations on
such contributions shall be applied with respect to the Plan Year or Plan
Years to which such contributions relate rather than the Plan Year or Plan
Years in which payment is made.
(d)        All contributions under this Section 3.10 are considered “annual
additions” and shall be limited in accordance with the provisions of
Section 3.8 with respect to the Plan Year or Plan Years to which such
contributions relate rather than the Plan Year in which payment is made.
3.11      Return of Contributions.  Except as provided
below, at no time shall any contributions (or portions
thereof) revert to the Company prior to the discharge of all
liabilities under the Plan.
(a)        If all or part of the Company’s deductions under Code Section 404
for contributions to the Plan are disallowed by the Internal Revenue
Service, the portion of the contributions to which that disallowance
applies shall be returned to the Company without interest but reduced by
any investment loss attributable to those contributions.  The return shall
be made within one year after the disallowance of the deduction.
(b)        The Company may recover without interest the amount of its
contributions to the Plan made on account of a mistake of fact, reduced by
any investment loss attributable to those contributions, if recovery is
made within one year after the date of those contributions.
(c)        In the event that Before-Tax Contributions made under Section 3.1
are returned to the Company in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 3.11, the elections to reduce compensation which were made by
Participants on whose behalf those contributions were made shall be void
retroactively to the beginning of the period for which those contributions
were made.  The Before-Tax Contributions so returned shall be distributed
in cash to those Participants for whom those contributions were made.
3.12      Catch-Up Contributions After Attainment of Age 50. 
A Catch-Up Eligible Participant may, in accordance with
and subject to the limitations of this Section 3.12, Section
414(v) of the Code and the procedures adopted by the Plan
Administrator, be eligible to make Catch-Up Contributions.
Such Catch-Up Contributions shall constitute Before-Tax
Contributions and shall be made as follows:
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    26
(a)        A Catch-Up Eligible Participant shall be subject to an “Adjusted
Dollar Limit” for Before-Tax Contributions, in lieu of the dollar limit
otherwise applicable pursuant to Section 3.1 and Section 402(g) of the
Code (the “Regular 402(g) Limit”).  The “Adjusted Dollar Limit” for any
year shall be the sum of the Regular 402(g) Limit for such year plus the
“Applicable Dollar Amount” for such year under Section 414(v)(2)(B)(i) of
the Code.  The “Applicable Dollar Amount” for the Plan Year beginning on
January 1, 2014, is $5,500, and may be increased for future Plan Years in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code.  Any amount
contributed by a Participant as a Before-Tax Contribution for a Plan Year
which is in excess of the Regular 402(g) Limit for such Plan Year, shall, to
the extent of the Applicable Dollar Amount, automatically constitute a
Catch-Up Contribution hereunder.
(b)        Any Catch-Up Eligible Participant whose Before-Tax Contributions
for a Plan Year do not exceed the Regular 402(g) Limit, but whose After-
Tax Contributions and Before-Tax Contributions reach the percentage
limit of such Participant’s Compensation set forth in Section 3.1 (the
“Percentage Limit”) or whose Annual Additions reach the limit described
in Section 3.8 (the “415 Limit”), may elect, in such manner as the Plan
Administrator shall prescribe, to make further Before-Tax Contributions in
excess of such Percentage Limit and 415 Limit.  Such further Before-Tax
Contributions shall constitute Catch-Up Contributions hereunder.
(c)        A Participant’s Catch-Up Contributions for a Plan Year shall not
exceed the Participant’s Compensation for such Plan Year, reduced by
any other elective deferrals of the Participant for the Plan Year.  In addition,
a Participant’s Catch-Up Contributions for a Plan Year shall not exceed the
Applicable Dollar Amount for such Plan Year.
(d)        Catch-Up Contributions made in accordance this Section 3.12 shall
constitute Before-Tax Contributions and, except as provided hereunder or
by applicable law, shall be subject to the provisions of this Plan generally
applicable with respect to Before-Tax Contributions.  Without limiting the
foregoing, the deposit of any Catch-Up Contributions shall be made no
later than the 15th business day of the calendar month next following the
month in which the cash Compensation with respect to which such
reduction is effective would have been paid, Catch-Up Contributions shall
be credited to the Participant’s Before-Tax Account and Catch-Up
Contributions shall be subject to the same provisions related to vesting,
investment and distribution as other Before-Tax Contributions credited to
the Participant’s Before-Tax Account.
(e)        Notwithstanding anything in this Plan to the contrary, Catch-Up
Contributions made in accordance with this Section 3.12 shall not be
taken into account for purposes of the provisions of this Plan,
implementing the required limitations of Sections 402(g) and 415 of the
Code and this Plan shall not be treated as failing to satisfy the provisions
of the Plan implementing the requirements of Section 401(k)(3), 401(k)(11),
401(k)(12), 410(b) or 416 of the Code, as applicable, by reason of the
making of such Catch-Up Contributions.
* * * * End of Article 3 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    27
Article 4.
Investment of Contributions
4.1       Funds.  Contributions to the Plan shall be invested
in one or more of the investment options under the Plan. 
Effective December 20, 2013, a Company stock fund
(“Company Stock Fund”) must be one of the investment
options available for investment by Participants under the
Plan.  The Company Stock Fund is an investment fund
designated for investment in the common stock of the
Company or an Affiliated Employer (“Company Stock”).
Effective on and after December 20, 2013, a Participant may direct up to a maximum of 20%
of the total amount of the Participant’s After-Tax Contributions, Before-Tax Contributions
or Catch-Up Contributions into the Company Stock Fund.  A Participant who directs more
than 20% of the Participant’s After-Tax Contributions, Before-Tax Contributions or Catch-
Up Contributions into the Company Stock Fund will have any amount in excess of 20%
redirected into the available target date fund based on the Participant’s age.
Effective on and after December 20, 2013, a maximum of 20% of the total amount of the
Company Matching Contributions may be invested into the Company Stock Fund.  A
Participant who directs more than 20% of his Company Matching Contributions into the
Company Stock Fund will have any amount of the Company Matching Contributions
allocated in excess of 20% redirected into the available target date fund based on the
Participant’s age.
At no point will any holdings in a Participant’s Company Stock Fund be liquidated on
behalf of the Participant, even if the Participant’s total Account exceeds the 20% threshold
effective as of December 20, 2013 or on account of a transfer of accounts from another
plan of the Company or Affiliated Employer.
4.2       Investment of Participant’s Accounts.
(a)        A Participant shall direct that the total of his After-Tax
Contributions, Before-Tax Contributions and/or Catch-Up Contributions
made pursuant to Section 3.1 shall be invested in 1% increments in one or
more of the investment options.
(b)        A Participant shall direct that his Company Matching Contributions
made pursuant to Section 3.3 shall be invested in 1% increments in one or
more of the investment options.  A Participant’s Company Matching
Contributions shall be invested in accordance with the election made
under Section 4.02(a).
(c)        A Participant shall direct that his Retirement Contributions made
pursuant to Section 3.4 shall be invested in 1% increments in one or more
of the investment options.   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
this Article, in no event may any portion of a Participant’s Retirement
Contributions Account be invested in Company stock.
(d)        A Participant shall direct that the total of his rollovers transferred to
the Plan pursuant to Section 3.9 shall be invested in 1% increments in one
or more of the investment
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    28
options.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, in no event may any
portion of a Participant’s Rollover Account be invested in Company stock.
(e)        In the event that the Participant makes no investment election, his
Accounts shall be invested in the Plan’s qualified default investment
alternative (QDIA).
(f)        Any account balances transferred to this Plan from another plan of
the Company or an Affiliated Employer that are invested in Company
stock, or stock of an Affiliated Employer shall remain in the Company
Stock Fund until the Company Stock is distributed pursuant to Article 8, or
transferred by the Participant to another investment option pursuant to
Section 4.5.
(g)       Dividends, interest and other distributions received by the Trustee
in respect of any investment option shall be reinvested in the same
investment option.
4.3       Responsibility for Investments.  The Plan fiduciaries
shall determine the extent to which this Plan is intended to
provide for Participant control over investments as
provided in Section 404(c) of ERISA and the extent to
which procedures will comply with the “safe harbor” in
Department of Labor Regulation Section 2550.404c-1.  Each
Participant is solely responsible for investing his Account
based on the investment options made available under the
Plan and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, no
fiduciary shall be responsible for any losses or lost profits
resulting from any Participant’s selection.  The Company,
Trustee, Administrative Committee, Investment Committee
and any officers, supervisors and agents of the Company
are not empowered to advise a Participant as to the manner
in which his Accounts shall be invested.  The fact that an
investment option is available to Participants under the
Plan shall not be construed as a recommendation for
investment in that option.
4.4       Change of Election.  A Participant may change his
future investment election in 1% increments at any time by
providing prior notice.  Such election shall be effective as
soon as practicable following receipt of the notice
4.5       Transfer of Accounts Among Funds.  A Participant
may elect to transfer his interest between investment
options by providing prior notice in such manner as shall
be established (and changed from time to time) by the
Administrative Committee.  Such transfer may be described
in multiples of 1%, in dollars, as a rebalancing election or
other method that the Administrative Committee shall from
time to time deem appropriate.  Such election shall be
effective as soon as practicable following receipt of the
notice.  Transfers between investment options may be
limited, if necessary to comply with applicable contract
restrictions.  Participants may transfer funds out of the
Company Stock Fund at any time, but are not permitted to
transfer any funds into the Company Stock Fund.
4.6       Exercise of Voting and other Stock Rights.
(a)        Full and fractional Ordinary Shares of Rio Tinto plc represented by
American Depository Receipts (“ADRs”) held by the Company stock fund
offered as an investment option under the Plan which are allocated to a
Participant’s Accounts as of the applicable record date for voting such
Ordinary Shares shall be voted by the
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    29
Trustee in accordance with the instructions of the Participant if such instructions are
given in a manner designated for that purpose and received by the inspector of elections
designated by the Administrative Committee by the deadline established by the
Administrative Committee for Plan voting purposes.  The Company shall notify
Participants of each occasion for the exercise of voting authorized under this Section. 
The Trustee shall vote any Ordinary Shares for which timely instructions for voting have
not been received from a Participant in the same proportion as the Ordinary Shares for
which the Trustee has received instructions from other Participants hereunder.
(b)        Participant pass-through and “mirror” (i.e., proportionate) voting of
Ordinary Shares under this section shall be permitted only if and to the
extent authorized by the Administrative Committee in any instance.  If a
Participant exercises pass-through voting rights under this Section
pursuant to authority granted by the Administrative Committee, the
Participant shall be the “named fiduciary” (within the meaning of ERISA
Section 402(a)(2)) voting the Ordinary Shares represented by the ADRs
allocated to the Participant’s Accounts and sharing in the responsibility
for the proportionate voting of Ordinary Shares represented by the ADRs
allocated to other Participant Accounts for which timely instructions were
not received in the manner provided for above.
(c)        The inspector of elections, the Trustee or such other person
designated by the Administrative Committee shall tabulate the instructions
given by Participants under this section on a strictly confidential basis,
and shall provide the Administrative Committee with only the final results
of the tabulation.  Instructions received from individual Participants shall
not be disclosed to any directors, officers or employees of the Company
or any Affiliated Employer.
(d)       The Administrative Committee may also authorize under this
Section a Participant pass-through and “mirror” exercise of other stock
rights appurtenant to Ordinary Shares represented by the ADRs
(including, but not limited to, tender offer, exchange offer, dissenter,
appraisal and other similar rights) to the same extend as voting rights
would be administered as described herein if so authorized by the
Administrative Committee.
(e)        If a Participant pass-through and “mirror” exercise of stock rights is
not authorized by the Administrative Committee in any instance under this
Section, such stock rights shall be exercised by the Trustee as directed by
the Administrative Committee, or, in the absence of any such a direction,
in its discretion.
(f)        The Trustee shall have the authority to override any instructions it
receives from the Participants or the Administrative Committee to the
extent the Trustee believes that doing so is necessary to comply with
ERISA or other applicable law.  If the Trustee believes that any override will
be required under this subsection (f), the Trustee shall notify the
Administrative Committee as soon as administratively practicable.
* * * * End of Article 4 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    30
Article 5.
Valuation of Accounts
5.1       Valuation of the Funds.  As of each Valuation Date,
the Trustee shall allocate the amount of income or loss of
each investment option since the last Valuation Date
(which shall mean the net income or net loss of each
investment option, including the net appreciation or net
depreciation in the value of each investment option).
5.2       Account Adjustments.  Each Participant’s
proportionate share of each of the investment options shall
be determined as of each Valuation Date.  Whenever an
event requires a determination of the value of a
Participant’s Accounts, the value shall be computed as of
the Valuation Date coincident with or immediately
following the date of determination.  However, the
Administrative Committee reserves the right to change from
time to time the procedures used in valuing the Accounts
or crediting (or debiting) the Accounts if it concludes that
such action is justified in that it results in a more accurate
reflection of the fair market value of assets.
5.3       Statement of Accounts.  Not less frequently than
quarterly, each Participant shall be furnished with a
statement setting forth the value of his Accounts.
* * * * End of Article 5 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    31
Article 6.
Vested Portion of Accounts
6.1       After-Tax Accounts, Before-Tax Accounts, Company
Matching Contribution Accounts and Rollover Accounts.  A
Participant shall at all times be 100% vested in and have a
nonforfeitable right to the value of his After-Tax Account,
Before-Tax Account, Company Matching Contribution
Account and Rollover Account.
6.2       Retirement Contribution Accounts.  The Vested
Portion of a Participant’s Retirement Contributions
Account shall be determined based on the Participant’s full
Years of Service in accordance with the following
Schedule:
Completed Years of ServiceVested Percentage
1
2
3
0%
25%
50%
4
5
75%
100%
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Participant who attains Normal Retirement Age or who
dies while an Employee shall be treated as having a 100% vested interest in all of the
Participant’s Accounts.
6.3       Forfeiture.  If a Participant who is not 100% vested
in his or her Account incurs 5 consecutive Breaks-in-
Service, then the nonvested portion of his or her Account,
if any, will be treated as a forfeiture.
6.4       Application of Forfeitures.  Forfeitures under
Section 6.3 shall be applied as follows:
(a)        First, if an amount must be restored to a re-employed Participant’s 
Account in accordance with Section 6.5, such restoration shall be made
from forfeitures that otherwise would be allocated to Participants, or net
income of the Trust, unless the Company chooses to make an additional
contribution for that purpose.
(b)        Second, remaining forfeiture amounts for a Plan Year may be used
to pay administrative expenses of the Plan and/or to reduce the amount of
contributions which are to be made by the Company for the current or
following Plan Year.
6.5       Restoration of Forfeitures.
(a)        A former Participant who forfeited the non-vested portion of his or
her Account in accordance with Section 6.3 and who is reemployed by the
Company or an Affiliated Employer shall have such forfeited amounts
recredited to his or her Account, without adjustment for interim gains or
losses experienced by the Trust, if he returns to employment with the
Company or an Affiliated Employer before the end of the 5-year period
beginning on the later of his or her employment termination date or the
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees
1/1/2014    32
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    32
date he or she received distribution of his or her vested interest in his or her Account. 
Effective September 1, 2014, the foregoing provision will apply if the Participant returns to
employment with the Company or an Affiliated Employer before the end of the 5-year
period beginning on his or her employment termination date.
(b)        A Participant who does not satisfy these requirements or who is
reemployed after the occurrence of 5 consecutive Breaks-in-Service shall
not have any restoration rights with respect to the previously forfeited
balance in his or her Account.
6.6       Consideration of Before-Tax Contributions.  The
Plan shall take Before-Tax Contributions into account in
determining whether a Participant has a nonforfeitable
right to other contributions under the Plan for purposes of
forfeitures, and for applying provisions permitting the
repayment of distributions to have forfeited amounts
restored, and the provisions of Code Section 410(a)(5)(D)
(iii) and 411(a)(6)(D)(iii) permitting a plan to disregard
certain service completed prior to Breaks-in-Service.
* * * * End of Article 6 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees
1/1/2014    33
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
Article 7.
In-Service Withdrawals
7.1       After-Tax Contributions.  Not more than once during
a calendar year, a Participant may elect to withdraw all or a
portion of his After-Tax Account.  In the event of such
withdrawal:
(a)        The Participant’s After-Tax and/or Before Tax Contribution shall be
suspended; and
(b)        The Participant shall not be permitted to resume making After-Tax
Contributions or Before-Tax Contributions prior to the first day of the
payroll period that follows a three-month period that commences with the
effective date of the withdrawal.
7.2       Rollovers.  Not more than once during a calendar
year, a Participant may elect to withdraw all or a portion of
his before-tax and after-tax Rollover Account.
7.3       Hardship Withdrawal.  Subject to the restrictions
described in this Section 7.3, an active Participant who has
withdrawn all available amounts under Sections 7.1, 7.2, 7.5
and 7.6 may withdraw, once per calendar year, all or a
portion of his Accounts, except for his Retirement
Contributions Account, exclusive of earnings thereon
provided that:
(a)        He needs the withdrawal to cover any of the following financial
needs:
(1)        Expenses for (or necessary to obtain) medical care that would be deductible under
Code Section 213(d) (determined without regard to whether the expenses exceed 7.5% of
adjusted gross income);
(2)        Costs directly related to the purchase of a principal residence for the Participant
(excluding mortgage payments);
(3)        Payment of tuition, related educational fees, and room and board expenses, for up
to the next 12 months of post-secondary education for the Participant, the Participant’s
spouse, children or dependents (as defined in Code Section 152, and, for taxable years
beginning on or after January 1, 2005, without regard to Code Section 152(b)(1), (b)(2), and
(d)(1)(B));
(4)        Payments necessary to prevent the eviction of the Participant from the Participant’s
principal residence or foreclosure on the mortgage on that residence;
(5)        Payments for burial or funeral expenses for the Participant’s deceased parent,
spouse, children or dependents (as defined in Code Section 152, and, for taxable years
beginning on or after January 1, 2005, without regard to Code Section 152(d)(1)(B)); or
(6)        Expenses for the repair of damage to the Participant’s principal residence that
would qualify for the casualty deduction under Code Section 165 (determined without
regard to whether the loss exceeds 10% of adjusted gross income).
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    34
(b)        The distribution is necessary to satisfy the Participant’s immediate
and heavy financial need.  A distribution shall be deemed to satisfy this
requirement if:
(1)        The distribution is not in excess of the amount necessary to cover the Participant’s
immediate financial emergency, plus the amount necessary to pay any taxes and penalties
due on the amount withdrawn.
(2)        The Participant has obtained all distributions, other than hardship distributions
subject to these same requirements, and all non-taxable loans, which are currently
available under the Plan and all qualified plans maintained by the Company or an Affiliated
Employer;
(3)        The Participant makes no further After-Tax Contributions or Before-Tax
Contributions under the Plan for a period of at least 6 months after he receives the
hardship distribution; and
(4)        The Participant makes no contributions to any other qualified plan (except
mandatory contributions to a defined benefit plan) maintained by the Company or an
Affiliated Employer for at least 6 months.
No hardship withdrawals under this Section 7.3 shall be authorized with respect to any
amounts allocated to a Participant’s Retirement Contributions Account.
The Participant must affirmatively elect Employee Before-Tax Contributions and/or
Employee After-Tax Contributions following the hardship suspension.
7.4       Timing and Procedures and Form of Payment.  To
make a withdrawal under Sections 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 or 7.5, a
Participant shall give prior written notice on the
appropriate form provided by the Company.  The
Participant shall also provide any supporting data that
shall be requested by the Company.
(a)        In-service withdrawals shall be determined as of the Valuation Date
that coincides with the date the withdrawal is processed, and shall be
distributed as soon as administratively practicable.
(b)        Withdrawals shall be made pro-rata across the investment options
within each money type withdrawn.
(c)        A withdrawal described in Sections 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 or 7.6 shall be made
in cash in the form of a single lump-sum distribution.
7.5       Participant Loans.  A Participant may borrow from
the Plan up to 50% of the Vested Portion of his Account
balances.  Loans shall be subject to the following (and
subject to the Plan’s loan rules, which are considered to be
part of the Plan and which may be changed from time to
time):
(a)        A Participant’s loan shall not be for less than $1,000 and shall not
exceed the lesser of:
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees
1/1/2014    35
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    35
(1)        $50,000 reduced by the highest loan balance of the Participant’s loan outstanding
during the immediately prior 12-month period (ending the day before the new loan is
granted); or
(2)        50% of the Participant’s Vested Portion of his Accounts.
For purposes of the Plan’s loan provisions, all qualified plans maintained by the Company
and any Affiliated Employer shall be treated as a single plan.
(b)        The Participant may have no more than two loans outstanding at
anytime and may have only one loan used to purchase his primary
residence outstanding at any time.  In the event that a loan becomes a
deemed distribution to the Participant, such Participant may thereafter
have only one loan outstanding at any one time.
(c)        The period of repayment for any loan, which must be in whole
months only, shall be arrived at by mutual agreement between the
Company and the Participant, but all loans shall become due and payable
following termination of employment.  Upon such termination, loans may
be paid back by a distribution, to the extent necessary, of the Participant’s
Vested Portion of his Accounts, whether or not he elects to defer payment
of the remainder of such Accounts in accordance with Article 8.  The
period of maturity for a loan shall not exceed five years for a general
purpose loan and twenty years for a loan used to purchase the
Participant’s primary residence.
Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this Section 7.5, loan repayments shall be
suspended under the Plan as permitted under Code Section 414(u).  In the event the
Participant enters the uniformed services of the United States and retains reemployment
rights under the law, loan repayments shall be suspended (and interest shall cease to
accrue) during the period of leave, and the period of repayment shall be extended by the
number of months of the period of service in the uniformed services; provided however, if
the Participants terminates and requests a distribution pursuant to Article 8, the loan shall
be cancelled, and the outstanding balance shall be distributed.
(d)        Effective May 1, 2014, each loan shall bear interest at a rate equal to
two percentage points (2%) above the prime rate as published by Reuters
at the beginning of the last month preceding the calendar quarter in which
the loan is approved.
(e)       Payments of principal and interest shall be made in accordance with
the Plan’s loan rules.  A loan may be prepaid in full as of any date without
penalty.
(f)        No new loans can be taken out after termination or retirement, while
a Participant is receiving long term disability payments, or while the
Participant is on strike or during a lockout.  A strike or lockout will not be
considered a leave of absence for purposes of the suspension of payment
rules; therefore, failure to make timely loan repayments during a strike or
lockout may result in a loan default.  Loans that have been deemed in
default accumulate interest that increases the outstanding principal.  If the
Participant repays the deemed loan, the accumulated interest must also
be repaid.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    36
(g)       Loans shall be repaid in accordance with the Plan’s loan rules.
(h)        Each loan under this Section shall be considered an asset of the
Plan (in the form of an account receivable) until the loan receivable is
satisfied either through repayment or offset against the Participant’s
Accounts, in accordance with uniform, nondiscriminatory rules
established by the Plan Administrator.
(i)        The Company reserves the right to reduce the loan proceeds to be
provided to a Participant by the amount of the loan initiation fees
applicable to the loan.
(j)        Notwithstanding the foregoing, no loans under this Section 7.5 shall
be authorized with respect to any amounts allocated to a Participant’s
Retirement Contributions Account.
7.6       Company Matching Contributions.  Not more than
once during a calendar year, a Participant may elect to
withdraw all or a portion of his Company Matching
Contribution Account; provided, however, that if the
Participant has participated in the Plan or a Prior Plan for
fewer than 60 months, the Company Matching
Contributions credited to his Company Matching
Contribution Account within the 24-month period ending
on the withdrawal date may not be withdrawn.  A
Participant who receives a withdrawal under this Section
7.6 shall not be permitted to make After-Tax Contributions
or Before-Tax Contributions during the 3-month period that
begins on the withdrawal date.
No in-service withdrawals under this Section 7.6 shall be authorized with respect to any
amounts allocated to a Participant’s Retirement Contributions Account.
* * * * End of Article 7 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    37
Article 8.
Distribution of Accounts Upon Termination
of Employment
8.1       Eligibility.  Upon a Participant’s termination of
employment, Disability or death or presumed death, the
Vested Portion of his Accounts shall be distributed no
sooner than 30 days following termination, as provided in
this Article 8.
8.2       Forms of Distribution.  Generally, the value of a
Participant’s Account shall be paid in cash.  In the event,
however, all or a portion of the Participant’s Accounts are
invested in Rio Tinto stock, he may elect to receive such
portion of his Accounts in whole shares of Rio Tinto stock
(with the value of any fractional share and uninvested cash
paid in cash).
(a)        If the Participant retires, terminates or incurs a Disability, he may
elect to receive his distribution in one of the following forms:
(1)        distribution of his Accounts in a lump sum; or
(2)        if the Participant’s Account balance is greater than $1,000, distribution of his
Accounts in substantially equal annual, quarterly or monthly cash payments. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the number of installment payments payable to the
Participant may not exceed the greater of (A) the Participant’s life expectancy, or (B) if the
Beneficiary is the Participant’s spouse, the joint and last life expectancy of the Participant
and his Beneficiary.  If the Participant dies while any installment payments remain unpaid,
the Participant’s Beneficiary shall receive the remainder of the value of the Participant’s
Accounts in a lump sum; or
(3)        not more than once per calendar year, a partial distribution from his Accounts of
not less than $1,000.  In the event a Participant receives partial distributions in accordance
with this Section 8.2(a)(3), he shall be entitled to receive the balance in his Accounts at
anytime in accordance with Section 8.3, 8.4, or 8.5, whichever is applicable, but in no event
later than the latest date specified in such relevant Section.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if the Participant requests installments and then elects a partial distribution in
accordance with this Section 8.2(a)(3), he cannot continue installments.  Rather, he can
continue to elect partial distributions in accordance with this Section 8.2(a)(3) or can elect
a distribution in a lump sum in accordance with Section 8.2(a)(1); or
(b)        Mandatory cashout shall be made if the total vested balance of all
of the Participant’s Accounts does not exceed $1,000 pursuant to Section
8.7.
8.3       Distribution Upon Retirement or Termination.  After
termination of employment, a Participant may defer a
distribution of all of his vested Accounts at any time
following his retirement or termination, but no later than
his Required Beginning Date.  Payment shall be made as
soon as administratively practicable after the distribution
election, but no later than the Required Beginning Date.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    38
8.4       Distribution Upon Disability. Upon Disability, a
Participant may defer distribution of his Accounts, but no
later than his Required Beginning Date.  Upon electing to
receive a distribution, payment shall be made as soon as
administratively practicable after the first Valuation Date
that coincides with or next follows such elected date, but
no later than the Required Beginning Date.
8.5       Distribution Upon Death or Presumed Death.
(a)        Upon the death or presumed death of a Participant, his Beneficiary
may defer distribution from all of the Participant’s vested Accounts.  Upon
electing to receive a distribution, payment shall be made as soon as
administratively practicable after segregation of the portion of the
Accounts payable to the Beneficiary making such distribution election.
(b)        If the Beneficiary is the Participant’s Spouse, such Beneficiary may
elect to receive the distribution at any time following the Participant’s date
of death or presumed death.  Payment shall be made as soon as
administratively practicable, but in no event later than:
(1)        the December 31 of the calendar year in which the Participant would have attained
age 70½; or
(2)        the December 31 of the calendar year that follows the calendar year in which the
Participant dies, whichever occurs later.
(c)        A Beneficiary who is the Participant’s Spouse may elect to be paid
in accordance with either of the methods of payment described in Section
8.6.  A non-Spouse Beneficiary shall be paid in accordance with the
method of payment described in Section 8.6(a) and 8.6(b).  For the
purposes of this Section “Beneficiary” shall replace “Participant” in each
place that “Participant” appears in Section 8.6.
8.6       Method of Payment.  According to the Participant’s
election, the taxable portion of his distribution shall be
paid in accordance with one of the following methods:
(a)        The total distribution shall be paid directly to the Participant; or
(b)        All or a portion of the distribution that is an eligible rollover
distribution shall be transferred directly to an eligible retirement plan that
accepts eligible rollover distributions as defined in Section 11.5 and the
balance of the distribution, if any, shall be paid directly to the Participant.
8.7       Small Benefits.  Notwithstanding any Plan
provisions to the contrary, in the event the value of the
Vested Portion of the Participant’s Accounts (determined
with regard to the value of the Participant’s Rollover
Account and not including outstanding loan balances) is
equal to or less than $1,000, his Accounts shall be paid as
soon as practicable after the Valuation Date that coincides
with or next follows his date of termination, retirement,
disability or death or presumed death, whichever is
applicable.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    39
8.8       Proof of Death and Right of Beneficiary or Other
Person.  The Company may require and rely upon such
proof of death and such evidence of the right of any
Beneficiary or other person to receive the value of the
Accounts of a deceased Participant as the Company may
deem proper, and the determination of death and of the
right of that Beneficiary or other person to receive payment
shall be made in accordance with Section 9.10.  In the
absence of such proof of death, the Administrative
Committee may initiate an interpleader in order to have a
court determine the ownership rights of the Accounts.
8.9       Failure to Locate Recipient.  In the event that the
Company is unable to locate a Participant or Beneficiary
who is entitled to payment under the Plan within 5 years
from the date such payment was to have been made, the
amount to which such Participant or Beneficiary was
entitled shall be declared a forfeiture.  If the Participant or
Beneficiary is later located, the benefit that was previously
forfeited hereunder shall be restored by the Company.
8.10      Required Minimum Distributions.
(a)        A Participant’s Accounts shall be distributable following his or her
termination of employment in accordance with Section 8.3, 8.4 and 8.5, but
in no event may distributions commence later than the April 1 following
the later of the calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70½ or
the calendar year in which the Participant retires or, if the Participant is a
5% owner (as defined in Code Section 416(i)), no later than the April 1
following the close of the calendar year in which he attains age 70½ (the
“Required Beginning Date”).
(b)        No minimum distribution payments will be made to an active
Participant under the provisions of Code Section 401(a)(9) if the
Participant is not a 5% owner as defined above.  Such Participant may,
however, elect to receive in service withdrawals in accordance with the
provisions of Article 7.
(c)        In the event a Participant who is a 5% owner is required to begin
receiving payments while in service under the provisions of Section
8.10(a), he may elect to receive payments in accordance with the options
described below:
(1)        One lump sum payment on or before the required beginning date equal to his entire
Account balances and annual lump sum payments thereafter of amounts accrued during
each calendar year; or
(2)        Annual payments of the minimum amount necessary to satisfy the minimum
distribution requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) (“Required Minimum Distributions”). 
Such minimum amount shall be determined on the basis of the joint life expectancy of the
Participant and his Beneficiary.  Such life expectancy shall not be recalculated.  The
Required Minimum Distribution amount shall be allocated between the Funds in
proportion to the value of the Participant’s Accounts as of the date of each withdrawal.
(d)        2009 WRERA Provisions.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    40
(1)        Suspension of 2009 RMDs unless otherwise elected by Participant or Beneficiary. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Plan relating to required minimum distributions
under Code Section 401(a)(9), a Participant or Beneficiary who would have been required
to receive required minimum distributions for 2009 but for the enactment of Code Section
401(a)(9)(H) (“2009 RMDs”), and who would have satisfied that requirement by receiving
distributions that are equal to the 2009 RMDs, will not receive those distributions for 2009
unless the Participant or Beneficiary chooses to receive such distributions.  Participants
and Beneficiaries described in the preceding sentence will be given the opportunity to
elect to receive the distributions described in the preceding sentence.
(2)        Continuation of Extended 2009 RMDs unless otherwise elected by Participant or
Beneficiary.  Notwithstanding the provisions of the Plan relating to required minimum
distributions under Code Section 401(a)(9), a Participant or Beneficiary who would have
been required to receive 2009 RMDs and who would have satisfied that requirement by
receiving distributions that are one or more payments in a series of substantially equal
distributions (that include the 2009 RMDs) made at least annually and expected to last for
the life (or life expectancy) of the Participant, the joint lives (or joint life expectancy) of the
Participant and the Participant’s designated Beneficiary, or for a period of at least 10 years
(“Extended 2009 RMDs”), will receive those distributions for 2009 unless the Participant or
Beneficiary chooses not to receive such distributions.  Participants and Beneficiaries
described in the preceding sentence will be given the opportunity to elect to stop
receiving the distributions.
(3)        Direct Rollovers of 2009 RMDs.  Notwithstanding the provisions of the Plan relating
to required minimum distributions under Code Section 401(a)(9), and solely for purposes
of applying the direct rollover provisions of the Plan, 2009 RMDs (but not Extended 2009
RMDs) will be treated as eligible rollover distributions.
8.11      Qualified Reservist Distributions.
(a)        Qualified Reservist Distributions are NOT allowed under the Plan.
(b)        For purposes of the preceding sentence, the phrase “Qualified
Reservist Distribution” means any distribution to an individual who is
ordered or called to active duty after September 11, 2001, if:
(1)        the distribution is from amounts attributable to elective deferrals in a 401(k) plan
(i.e., Before-Tax Contributions);
(2)        the individual was (by reason of being a member of a reserve component, as
defined in section 101 of title 37, United States Code) ordered or called to active duty for a
period in excess of 179 days or for an indefinite period; and
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    41
(3)        the Plan makes the distribution during the period beginning on the date of such
order or call, and ending at the close of the active duty period.
8.12      401(k) Distribution Limitations.  For purposes of
determining whether the Company maintains an alternative
defined contribution plan (described in Treas. Reg. Section
1.401(k)-1(d)(4)(i)) that would prevent the Company from
distributing elective deferrals (and other amounts, such as
qualified non-elective contributions that are subject to the
distribution restrictions that apply to elective deferrals)
from a terminating 401(k) plan, an alternative defined
contribution plan does not include an employee stock
ownership plan defined in Code Sections 4975(e)(7) or
409(a), a simplified employee pension as defined in Code
Section 408(k), a SIMPLE IRA plan as defined in Code
Section 408(p), a plan or contract that satisfies the
requirements of Code Section 403(b), or a plan that is
described in Code Section 457(b) or (f).
* * * * End of Article 8 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    42
Article 9.
Administration of Plan
9.1       Named Fiduciary and Administrator.The Plan
Administrator shall be the “named fiduciary” within the
meaning of Section 402(a) of ERISA, and shall carry out the
duties of the “administrator” of the Plan as imposed under
ERISA.
9.2       Appointment of Committees.
(a)        The general administration of the Plan and the responsibility for
carrying out the provisions of the Plan shall be placed with the
Administrative Committee.
(b)        The investment and management of the assets of the Plan and
responsibility for monitoring and evaluating investment performance shall
be placed with the Investment Committee.
9.3       Duties of Plan Administrator.The Plan Administrator
may appoint such subcommittees with such powers as
they shall determine; may authorize one or more of their
number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument
or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel,
employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting
and consulting services as they may require in carrying out
the provisions of the Plan; and may allocate among
themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion
of their duties under the Plan, other than those granted to
the Trustee under the trust agreement or insurance
contract adopted for use in implementing the Plan as they,
in their sole discretion, shall decide.
The Plan Administrator shall interpret the Plan and decide all matters which may arise due
to possible ambiguities, inconsistencies, and omissions and will resolve conflicts which
may arise related to individual’s rights and amounts of any benefits under the Plan.  The
Plan Administrator may impose temporary restrictions on Participants’ access to their
Accounts to accommodate the administrative requirements of the Plan as may be required
during a merger of additional Participant’s Accounts into the Plan.  The determination of
the Administrator relative to the interpretation of the Plan or any disputed matter will be
conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law.
In particular, the duties and responsibilities of the Plan Administrator shall include but are
not limited to:
(a)        Determining whether an Employee of an Affiliate is eligible to
participate;
(b)        Determining the value of each Participant’s Accounts;
(c)        Determining whether a Participant is vested in his Accounts;
(d)        Furnishing each Participant with a summary plan description for
the Plan;
(e)        Filing the Plan’s annual return/report with the Internal Revenue
Service;
(f)        Furnishing the summary annual report to Participants;
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    43
(g)        Complying with other reporting and disclosure requirements of
ERISA;
(h)        Interpreting the provisions of the Plan;
(i)         Reviewing claims by Participants (and Beneficiaries) for benefits
under the Plan and any appeal by a Participant (or Beneficiary) of the
denial of a claim;
(j)         Determining whether a Participant has satisfied the requirements
for a hardship withdrawal;
(k)        Establishing rules for loans to Participants; and
(l)         Adopting certain amendments to the Plan as provided in Section
12.1.
9.4       Establishment of Rules.  Subject to the limitations
of the Plan, including the claims procedure described in
Section 9.10, the Administrative Committee from time to
time shall establish rules for the administration of the Plan
and the transaction of its business.  The Administrative
Committee shall have discretionary authority to interpret
the Plan and to make factual determinations (including but
not limited to, determination of an individual’s eligibility for
Plan participation, the right and amount of any benefit
payable under the Plan and the date on which any
individual ceases to be a Participant).  The determination of
the Administrative Committee as to the interpretation of the
Plan or any disputed question shall be conclusive and final
to the extent permitted by applicable law.
9.5       Prudent Conduct.  The Administrative Committee
members shall use that degree of care, skill, prudence and
diligence that a prudent man acting in a like capacity and
familiar with such matters would use in a similar situation.
9.6       Service in More than One Fiduciary Capacity.  Any
individual, entity or group of persons may serve in more
than one fiduciary capacity with respect to the Plan and/or
the funds of the Plan.
9.7       Limitation of Liability.  The Company, the Board of
Directors, the Administrative Committee members, the
Investment Committee members and any officer, Employee
or agent of the Company shall not incur any liability
individually or on behalf of any other individuals or on
behalf of the Company for any act, or failure to act, made in
good faith in relation to the Plan or the Plan’s funds. 
However, this limitation shall not act to relieve any such
individual or the Company from a responsibility or liability
for any fiduciary responsibility, obligation or duty under
Part 4, Title I or ERISA.
9.8       Indemnification.  The Administrative Committee
members, the Investment Committee members, the Board
of Directors and the officers, Employees and agents of the
Company shall be indemnified against any and all liabilities
arising by reason of any act, or failure to act, in relation to
the Plan or the Plan’s funds, including, without limitation,
expenses reasonably incurred in the defense of any claim
relating to the Plan or the Plan’s, funds and amounts paid
in any compromise or settlement relating to the Plan or the
Plan’s funds, except for actions or failures to act made in
bad faith, or in instances of gross negligence or willful
misconduct.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    44
9.9       Expenses of Administration.  All expenses that arise
in connection with the administration of the Plan,
including, without limitation, the compensation of the
Trustee, administrative expenses and proper charges and
disbursements of the Trustee and compensation and other
expenses and charges of any counsel, accountant,
specialist or other person who is employed by the
Company in connection with the administration thereof,
shall be paid from the Fund to the extent not paid by the
Company.
To the extent expenses attributable to Boron Hourly Participants are paid from the Plan,
these expenses may be charged to the Accounts of all Boron Hourly Participants either
proportionately based on the value of their Account balances or as an equal dollar amount
based on the number of Boron Hourly Participants in the Plan, all as determined in the
sole discretion of the Plan Administrator.
Similar action described in the preceding paragraph may also be taken with respect to
Wilmington Hourly Participants.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent expenses are incurred in connection with a
particular Participant (e.g., fees incurred in setting up and maintaining a Plan loan to the
Participant, distribution processing fees and/or fees incurred in connecting with reviewing
a domestic relations order relating to the Participant’s Account, etc.) or group of
Participants (for whatever the reason), these expenses may be charged in the discretion of
the Plan Administrator to the Account or Accounts of such Participant or as described
above to the group of Participants.
In all cases, the Company shall pay the administrative expenses required under applicable
collective bargaining agreements.
9.10      Claims Procedures.  The following claims
procedures are generally applicable to claims filed under
the Plan.  To the extent required by law and to the extent
the Administrator is ruling on a claim for benefits on
account of a disability, the Plan will follow, with respect to
that claim, claims procedures required by law for plans
providing disability benefits.
(a)       General Procedures.  The following claims procedures are
applicable to claims filed under the Plan:
(1)        Filing a Claim.  All claims shall be filed in writing by the Participant, Beneficiary or
the authorized representative of the claimant (any of these, the “claimant”) by completing
the procedures that the Administrator requires.  The procedures shall be reasonable and
may include the completion of forms and the submission of documents and additional
information.  For purposes of this Section 9.10, a request for an in-service withdrawal shall
be considered a claim.
(2)        Review of Claim.  The Administrator shall review all materials and shall decide
whether to approve or deny the claim.  If a claim is denied in whole or in part, the
Administrator shall provide written notice of denial to the claimant within a reasonable
period of time no later than ninety (90) days
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees
1/1/2014    45
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    45
after the Administrator receives the claim, unless special circumstances require an
extension of time for processing the claim.  If an extension is required, the Administrator
shall notify the claimant in writing before the end of the ninety (90)-day period and indicate
the special circumstances requiring an extension of time and the date by which the
Administrator expects to render a decision on the claim.  The extension shall not exceed
an additional ninety (90) days.  The notice of denial shall be written in a manner calculated
to be understood by the claimant and shall include the following:
(A)       the specific reason(s) for the adverse determination;
(B)       specific references to pertinent Plan provisions on which the adverse determination is based;
(C)       a description of any additional material or information necessary for the claimant to perfect his claim
and the reason why such material or information is necessary; and
(D)       a description of the Plan’s review procedures and time limits applicable to such procedures, including
a statement of the claimant’s right to bring a civil action under ERISA Section 502(a) following an adverse
determination on review.
(3)        Appeal Process.  If the claimant wishes a review of the denied claim, the claimant
shall be provided, upon request and free of charge, reasonable access to, and copies of,
all documents, records and other information relevant to the claimant’s claim for benefits. 
The claimant may submit to the Administrator in writing any issues, documents, records,
comments or other information he may have regarding his claim for benefits under the
Plan.  Such request for an appeal must be made by the claimant in writing within sixty (60)
days after receipt of notice that his claim has been denied by the Administrator.
A document, record or other information shall be considered “relevant” to a claim if such
document, record or other information (A) was relied upon in making the benefit
determination, (B) was submitted, considered or generated in the course of making the
benefit determination, without regard to whether such document, record or other
information was relied upon in making the benefit determination, or (C) demonstrates
compliance with the administrative processes and safeguards required to ensure and to
verify that benefit claim determinations are made in accordance with the Plan and that,
where appropriate, the Plan provisions have been applied consistently with respect to
similarly situated claimants.
(4)        Review of Appeal.  The Administrator shall make its decision on review solely on
the basis of the written record, including documents and written materials submitted by
the claimant.  The Administrator shall make a decision on the review within a reasonable
period of time, not later than sixty (60)
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    46
days after the Administrator receives the claimant’s written request for review unless
special circumstances require additional time for review of the claim.  If an extension is
required, the Administrator shall notify the claimant in writing before the end of the sixty
(60)-day period and indicate the special circumstances requiring an extension of time and
the date by which the Administrator expects to render a decision on the claim.  The
extension shall not exceed an additional sixty (60) days.  The decision on review will be
written in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant.  If the claim is denied, the
written notice shall include the following:
(A)       the specific reason(s) for the adverse determination;
(B)       specific references to pertinent Plan provisions on which the adverse determination is based;
(C)       a statement that the claimant shall be entitled, upon request and free of charge, reasonable access to,
and copies of, all documents, records and other information relevant to the claimant’s claim for benefits (as
“relevant” is defined in this Section 9.10); and
(D)       a statement of the claimant’s right to bring a civil action under ERISA Section 502(a).
(b)        Administrator’s Full Discretion.  The Administrator and its
designated claims administrator and appeals administrator, if any, shall
have full discretionary and power to decide all claims and reviews of
denied claims, including determining eligibility, status and the rights of all
individuals under the Plan and construing any and all terms of the Plan. 
Following the approval of a claim for benefits, the Administrator shall have
the authority to construe and administer the Plan in a manner that is
consistent with the payment of benefits in accordance with the approved
claim.
(c)       Electronic Notification.  Any notification from the Administrator,
claims administrator or appeals administrator to the claimant under this
Section 9.10 may be made electronically, provided that such notification
complies with Department of Labor Regulation Sections 2520.104b-1(c)(1)
(i), (iii), and (iv).
9.11      Plan Correction.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, the
Plan Administrator, in conjunction with the Sponsor, may undertake such correction of
Plan errors and issues as the Administrator deems necessary and/or appropriate,
including correction to preserve tax qualification of the Plan under Code Section 401(a) or
to resolve a fiduciary issue under ERISA.  Without limiting the Plan Administrator’s
authority under the prior sentence, the Plan Administrator, as it determines to be
reasonable and appropriate, may undertake correction of Plan document, operational,
demographic and employer eligibility failures under a method described in the Plan or the
IRS Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (“EPCRS”) or any successor
program to EPCRS.  The Plan Administrator, as it determines to be reasonable and
appropriate, also may undertake or assist
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    47
the appropriate fiduciary or Plan official in undertaking
correction of a fiduciary breach or other issue, including
correction under the DOL Voluntary Fiduciary Correction
Program (“VFCP”) or any successor program to VFCP.
* * * * End of Article 9 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    48
Article 10.
Management of the Funds
10.1      Master Trust Agreement.  The Fund shall be held by
a Trustee appointed from time to time by the Investment
Committee  under a master trust agreement adopted by the
Company for use in providing the benefits of the Plan and
paying its expenses not paid directly by the Company.  The
Company shall have no liability for the administration of
the Fund held by the Trustee.
10.2      Exclusive Benefit Rule.  Except as otherwise
provided in the Plan, no part of the corpus or income of the
Fund shall be used for or diverted to purposes other than
for the exclusive benefit of Participants and other persons
entitled to benefits under the Plan.  No person shall have
any interest in or right to any part of the earnings of the
Fund, or any right in or to any part of the assets held under
the Plan, except as and to the extent expressly provided for
in the Plan.
* * * * End of Article 10 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    49
Article 11.
General Provisions
11.1      Nonalienation.  Except as required by any
applicable law, no benefit under the Plan shall in any
manner be anticipated, assigned or alienated, and any
attempt to do so shall be void.  However, payment shall be
made in accordance with the provisions of any judgment,
decree or order which:
(a)        Creates for, or assigns to, a spouse, former spouse, child or other
dependent of a Participant the right to receive all or a portion of the
Participant’s benefits under the Plan for the purpose of providing child
support, alimony payments or marital property rights to that spouse, child
or dependent;
(b)        Is made pursuant to a state domestic relations law;
(c)        Does not require the Plan to provide any type of benefit, or any
option, not otherwise provided under the Plan; and
(d)        Otherwise meets the requirements of Section 206(d) of ERISA or
Code Section 414(p), as amended, as a “qualified domestic relations
order” (“QDRO”).  Effective April 6, 2007, a domestic relations order that
otherwise satisfies the requirements for a QDRO will not fail to be a QDRO:
(i) solely because the order is issued after, or revises, another domestic
relations order or QDRO; or (ii) solely because of the time at which the
order is issued, including issuance after the Participant’s death.
The Administrative Committee may, in QDRO Procedures issued in connection with the
Plan (which may be amended at any time and from time to time by the Administrative
Committee without any formal amendment to the Plan), require a domestic relations order
(a “DRO”) to meet certain requirements specified therein in order for the DRO to be
approved as a QDRO with respect to the Plan.
Any distribution due an alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order may be
made as soon as practicable following the earliest date specified in such order, or as
otherwise permitted under such order pursuant to an agreement between the Plan and the
alternate payee; however, if the amount of the distribution exceeds $1,000, the alternate
payee must consent to the distribution.  At the time benefits become payable to the
alternate payee, such alternate payee shall have the right to make a direct rollover in
accordance with Section 11.5 provided the alternate payee is the Participant’s current or
former spouse.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Participant’s benefits under the Plan shall be offset by
the amount the Participant is required to pay to the Plan under the circumstances set forth
in Code Section 401(a)(13)(C).
11.2      Conditions of Employment Not Affected by the
Plan.  The establishment of the Plan shall not confer any
legal rights upon any Employee or other person for a
continuation of employment, nor shall it interfere with the
rights of the Company to discharge any Employee
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    50
and to treat him without regard to the effect which that treatment might have upon him as
a Participant or potential Participant in the Plan.
11.3      Facility of Payment.  If the Administrative
Committee finds that a Participant or other person entitled
to a benefit is unable to care for his affairs because of
illness or accident or is a minor, the Administrative
Committee may direct that any benefit due him, unless a
claim shall have been made for the benefit by a duly
appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a
child, a parent or other blood relative, or to a person with
whom he resides.  Any payment so made shall be a
complete discharge of the liabilities of the Plan for that
benefit.  The Committee may initiate an interpleader in
order to have a court determine the rights of the parties.
11.4      Information.  Each Participant, Beneficiary or other
person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit is payable to
him or on his account under the Plan, shall file with the
Company the information that it requires to establish his
rights and benefits under the Plan.
11.5      Eligible Rollover Distributions.  Notwithstanding
any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee’s election under this Section
11.5 , a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the Administrative Committee, and in
accordance with Section 8.6, to have an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
The following definitions apply to the terms used in this Section 11.05 and, where
applicable, to the terms used in Section 8.6:
(a)        “Eligible rollover distribution” means any distribution of all or any
portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an
eligible rollover distribution does not include:  any distribution that is one
of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently
than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the
joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee’s
designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any
distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Code Section
401(a)(9); any hardship distribution described in Code Section 401(k)(2)(B)
(i)(iv); the portion of any other distribution(s) that is not includible in gross
income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized
appreciation with respect to employer securities); and any other
distribution(s) that is reasonably expected to total less than $200 during a
year.
A portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely
because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are not includible
in gross income.  However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual
retirement account or annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or (b), or to a qualified
defined contribution plan described in Code Sections 401(a), 403(a) or 403(b) that agrees
to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the
portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not so includible.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    51
(b)        “Eligible retirement plan” means an individual retirement account
described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity
described in Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code
Section 403(a), or a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), that
accepts the distributee’s eligible rollover distribution.  However, in the
case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible
retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement
annuity.
An eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in Code Section
403(b) and an eligible plan under Code Section 457(b) which is maintained by a state,
political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political
subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred
into such plan from this plan.  This definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in
the case of a surviving Spouse or non-Spousal beneficiary, or a Spouse for former
Spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order (within the
meaning of Code Section 414(p)).
An eligible retirement plan shall also mean a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A(b).
(c)        “Distributee” includes an Employee or former Employee.  In
addition, the Employee’s or former Employee’s surviving spouse and the
Employee’s or former Employee’s spouse or former spouse who is the
alternate payee under  qualified domestic relations order, as defined in
Code Section 414(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of the
spouse or former spouse.  However, the following rules shall apply to
rollovers made by the Employee’s non-spousal beneficiary:
(1)        Certain requirements not applicable.  Although a non-spouse beneficiary may roll
over directly a distribution as provided herein, any distribution made prior to January 1,
2010 is not subject to the direct rollover requirements of Code Section 401(a)(31)
(including Code Section 401(a)(31)(B), the notice requirements of Code Section 402(f) or
the mandatory withholding requirements of Code Section 3405(c)).  If a non-spouse
beneficiary receives a distribution from the Plan, the distribution is not eligible for a “60-
day” rollover.
(2)        Trust beneficiary.  If the Participant’s named beneficiary is a trust, the Plan may
make a direct rollover to an individual retirement account on behalf of the trust, provided
the trust satisfies the requirements to be a designated beneficiary within the meaning of
Code Section 401(a)(9)(E).
(3)        Required minimum distributions not eligible for rollover.  A non-spouse beneficiary
may not roll over an amount which is a required minimum distribution, as determined
under applicable Treasury regulations and other Revenue Service guidance.  If the
Participant dies before his or her required beginning date and the non-spouse beneficiary
rolls over to an IRA the maximum amount eligible for rollover, the beneficiary may elect to
use either
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    52
the 5-year rule or the life expectancy rule, pursuant to Treas. Reg. Section 1.401(a)(9)-3, A-
4(c), in determining the required minimum distributions from the IRA that receives the non-
spouse beneficiary’s distribution.
(d)        “Direct rollover” means a payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
11.6      Construction.
(a)        The Plan shall be construed, regulated and administered under
ERISA, the Code and the laws of the State of Utah to the extent not
preempted by ERISA and the Code.
(b)        The masculine pronoun shall mean the feminine wherever
appropriate, and the feminine pronoun shall mean the masculine
whenever appropriate.
(c)        The titles and headings of the articles and sections in the Plan are
for convenience only.  In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text
rather than the titles or headings shall control.
11.7      Electronic Transmission of Notices to Participants. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary,
any notice required to be distributed to Participants,
Beneficiaries and alternate payees pursuant to the terms of
the Plan may, at the direction of the Administrative
Committee, be transmitted electronically to the extent
permitted by, and in accordance with any procedures set
forth in, applicable law and regulations.
11.8      Military Service.
(a)       General.  Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this Plan,
contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military
service will be provided in accordance with Code Section 414(u).
(b)        Death benefits.  If a Participant dies while performing qualified
military service (as defined in Code Section 414(u)), the survivors of the
Participant are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit
accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) provided under
the Plan as if the Participant had resumed and then terminated
employment on account of death or presumed death.
(c)       Benefit accrual.  Continued benefit accruals pursuant to the Heroes
Earnings Assistance and Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act) are not
provided for under this Plan.  For benefit accrual purposes, the Plan shall
not treat an individual who, on or after January 1, 2007, dies or incurs a
Disability while performing qualified military service as if the individual had
resumed employment with an Employer hereunder in accordance with the
individual’s reemployment rights under USERRA on the day preceding
death or total and permanent disability (as the case may be) and
terminated employment on the actual date of death or total and permanent
disability.
(d)        Differential wage payments. For years beginning after December
31, 2008, (i) an individual receiving a differential wage payment, as defined
by Code Section
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    53
3401(h)(2), is treated as an employee of the employer making the payment, (ii) the
differential wage payment is treated as compensation, and (iii) the Plan is not treated as
failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in Code Section 414(u)(1)(C)
by reason of any contribution or benefit which is based on the differential wage payment.
(e)       Severance from Employment.  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(i)
above, for purposes of Code Section 401(k)(2)(B)(i)(I), an individual is
treated as having been severed from employment during any period the
individual is performing service in the uniformed services described in
Code Section 3401(h)(2)(A).
(1)        Suspension of deferrals. If an individual elects to receive a distribution by reason of
severance from employment, death or Disability, the individual may not make an elective
deferral or employee contribution during the 6-month period beginning on the date of the
distribution.
(2)        Nondiscrimination requirement.  Subsection (d)(iii) above applies only if all
Employees of the Company performing service in the uniformed services described in
Code Section 3401(h)(2)(A) are entitled to receive differential wage payments (as defined in
Code Section 3401(h)(2)) on reasonably equivalent terms and, if eligible to participate in a
retirement plan maintained by the Company, to make contributions based on the
payments on reasonably equivalent terms (taking into account Code Sections 410(b)(3),
(4), and (5)).
* * * * End of Article 11 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    54
Article 12.
Amendment, Merger and Termination
12.1      Amendment of the Plan.  The Board of Directors,
reserves the right at any time and from time to time, and
retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend
in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the Plan,
except as otherwise provided by law.  However, no
amendment shall make it possible for any of the Funds to
be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the
Plan, except as otherwise provided by law.  No amendment
shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the
balance of the Accounts of any Participant or of reducing
the nonforfeitable percentage of the balance of the
Accounts of a Participant below the nonforfeitable
percentage computed under the Plan as in effect on the
date on which the amendment is adopted or, if later, the
date on which the amendment becomes effective.
The Board of Directors may exercise its power to amend the Plan by adoption of
resolutions setting forth the amendment.  Furthermore, the Administrative Committee is
empowered to modify or amend the provisions of the Plan, but only as follows:
(a)       The Administrative Committee may adopt technical amendments to
the Plan which become necessary for purposes of tax or regulatory
compliance;
(b)        The Administrative Committee may adopt any other amendments to
the Plan to make it operationally and internally consistent as it becomes
necessary to do so.
The Administrative Committee may exercise its power to amend the Plan by adoption
(pursuant to a vote of the majority of its members) of a writing setting forth the
amendment.
12.2      Merger or Consolidation.  The Plan may be merged
with another qualified plan at the discretion of the Board of
Directors and subject to any applicable legal requirements. 
However, the Plan may not be merged or consolidated with,
and its assets or liabilities may not be transferred to, any
other plan unless each person entitled to benefits under
the Plan would, if the resulting plan were then terminated,
receive a benefit immediately after the merger,
consolidation or transfer which is equal to or greater than
the benefit he would have been entitled to receive
immediately before the merger, consolidation or transfer if
the Plan had then terminated.
12.3      Acquisitions and Additional Participating
Companies.  If any company is or becomes a subsidiary of
or associated with the Company, the Board of Directors
may include the employees of that subsidiary or associated
company as Participants in the Plan upon appropriate
action by the Board of Directors and by that subsidiary or
company.  In that event, or if any persons become
Employees as the result of merger or consolidation or as
the result of acquisition of all or part of the assets or
business of another company, the Board of Directors shall
determine to what extent, if any, previous service with the
subsidiary, associated company or prior company shall be
recognized under the Plan, but subject to the continued
qualification of the Trust for the Plan as tax-exempt under
the Code.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in the
Plan shall require any credit to be given for such prior
service.
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    55
12.4      Termination of the Plan.  The Board of Directors
may terminate the Plan or completely discontinue
contributions under the Plan for any reason and at any
time.  In case of termination or partial termination of the
Plan, or complete discontinuance of Company Matching
Contributions to the Plan, the rights of affected Employees
to their Accounts under the Plan as of the date of the
termination or discontinuance shall be nonforfeitable.  The
total amount in each Employee’s Accounts shall be
distributed, as the Board of Directors direct, to him or for
his benefit or continued in trust for his benefit.
* * * * End of Article 12 * * * *
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    56
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,
RIO TINTO AMERICA INC.
 
By: /s/ Cori Petersen
Its: Manager, Total Rewards US/South
Date: 20 August 2014
7032893_4
U.S. Borax Inc. 401(k) Savings & Retirement Contribution Plan for Represented Employees 
Prepared by Holland & Hart LLP
1/1/2014    57