
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, DC 20549
FORM 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER
PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-16 OR 15d-16 OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Report on Form 6-K dated July 7, 2014
Commission File Number 1-14846
AngloGold Ashanti Limited
(Name of registrant)
76 Jeppe Street
Newtown, 2001
(P.O. Box 62117, Marshalltown, 2107)
South Africa
(Address of principal executive offices)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of Form 
20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F X      Form 40-F
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by 
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1):
Yes          No X
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by 
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7):
Yes          No X
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form 
is also thereby furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Enclosure:  ANGLOGOLD ASHANTI APPOINTS CHRISTINE RAMON AS INCOMING
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Yes          No X
AngloGold Ashanti Limited 
(Incorporated in the Republic of South Africa) 
Reg. No. 1944/017354/06)
ISIN No. ZAE000043485 – JSE share code: ANG
CUSIP: 035128206 – NYSE share code: AU
7 July 2014
NEWS RELEASE
AngloGold Ashanti Appoints Christine Ramon as Incoming CFO
(JOHANNESBURG – RELEASE) – AngloGold Ashanti is pleased to announce Christine Ramon will be taking 
the post of Chief Financial Officer and Executive Director of the Board, from October 1, 2014. She will replace 
Richard Duffy, who will then step down from both the Board and Executive Committee.
The appointment of Ms. Ramon, a chartered accountant, follows a global search by the Board of Directors, as 
indicated in our press release of May 21, 2013. She was formerly the CFO at Sasol Limited, South Africa’s 
largest publicly traded energy and chemicals company, for seven years until September of last year.
“Christine is a seasoned CFO with an impressive depth of experience, who will lend an important dimension to 
our board and to the executive,” Chairman Sipho Pityana said. “We are also fortunate that we will be able to call 
on the services of Richard Duffy, who brings almost three decades of experience in mining and finance across a 
range of disciplines and jurisdictions to assist with an orderly transition.”
“We are extremely pleased to have someone of Christine’s calibre, standing and experience in this critical role 
as we continue to advance our strategy of continuing to improve sustainable cash flow and returns,” Chief 
Executive Officer Srinivasan Venkatakrishnan said. “We are deeply grateful to Richard for bridging the CFO role 
at an important time, and also for the outstanding work he’s done over the past 13 months, in helping fortify the 
balance sheet.”
Ms. Ramon, is currently a non-executive director on the board of Johannesburg-based telecommunications 
provider MTN Group, which has extensive operations across emerging markets in Africa and the Middle East. 
She also previously served on the board of South African state-owned transport company Transnet and was an 
executive director of media and entertainment group Johnnic Holdings Limited, among others.
Ms. Ramon is a member of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants, the Public Accountants’ and 
Auditors Board and the Association for the Advancement of Black Accountants of South Africa.  She previously 
served as a member of the Standing Advisory Committee to the International Accounting Standards Board and 
currently serves as Deputy Chair of the Financial Reporting Standards Council of South Africa.
About Christine Ramon
Kandimathie Christine Ramon, 47, received her BCompt degree from The University of South Africa in 1988 and 
her BCompt Honours postgraduate degree from the same institution the following year. She was admitted as a 
Chartered Accountant the following year by the Public Accountants and Auditors’ Board. Ms. Ramon completed 
her articles at Coopers & Lybrand, where she worked from 1985 to 1994, in various positions and countries, 
including merger & acquisition work in the extractive sector. She rose to the post of Audit Manager and also 
received a secondment as the Deputy Finance Director to the Independent Electoral Commission during South 
Africa’s first democratic elections. Her career has also spanned manufacturing and retail, as financial controller 
at New Age Beverages, and media, where she held the posts of Finance Director and later also Chief Executive 
Officer, of Johnnic Holdings Limited. Between 2006 and 2013, Ms. Ramon was CFO of Sasol, where she was an 
executive director and member of the group executive committee. Sasol, listed in Johannesburg and New York
with a market capitalisation of about $35bn, has a suite of projects and about 34,000 employees in various 
jurisdictions around the globe, including the US, Canada, China, Uzbekistan and Qatar. She sat on the board of 
several Sasol subsidiaries, and also held accountability for formulation and execution of group organisational 
strategy, capital markets work, treasury and financing, and also global taxation, among others.  In 2007 Christine 
was nominated by the World Economic Forum as a young global leader and between 2011 and 2013 served as 
the Chair of the CFO Forum of South Africa.
ENDS
Contacts
Media
Chris Nthite                                     
Stewart Bailey                                
General inquiries
+27 (0) 11 637 6388/+27 (0) 83 301 2481                             
+27 81 032 2563 / +27 11 637 6031
Investors
Stewart Bailey                                
Sabrina Brockman (US & Canada)    
Fundisa Mgidi (South Africa)
+27 81 032 2563 / +27 11 637 6031          
+1 (212) 858 7702 / +1 646 379 2555     
+27 11 6376763 / +27 82 821 5322
cnthite@anglogoldashanti.com 
sbailey@anglogoldashanti.com 
media@anglogoldashanti.com
sbailey@anglogoldashanti.com 
sbrockman@anglogoldashanti.com    
fmgidi@anglogoldashanti.com
Certain statements contained in this document, other than statements of historical fact, including, without limitation, those concerning the economic outlook for 
the gold mining industry, expectations regarding gold prices, production, cash costs, all-in sustaining costs, cost savings and other operating results, return on 
equity, productivity improvements, growth prospects and outlook of AngloGold Ashanti’s operations, individually or in the aggregate, including the achievement 
of project milestones, commencement and completion of commercial operations of certain of AngloGold Ashanti’s exploration and production projects and the 
completion of acquisitions and dispositions, AngloGold Ashanti’s liquidity and capital resources and capital expenditures and the outcome and consequences of 
any potential or pending litigation or regulatory proceedings or environmental, health, and safety issues, are forward-looking  statements regarding AngloGold 
Ashanti’s  operations,  economic  performance  and  financial  condition.  These  forward-looking  statements  or  forecasts  involve  known  and  unknown  risks, 
uncertainties and other factors that may cause AngloGold Ashanti’s actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from the anticipated results, 
performance or achievements expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements. Although AngloGold Ashanti believes that the expectations reflected in 
such forward-looking statements and forecasts are reasonable, no assurance can be given that such expectations will prove to have been correct. Accordingly, 
results could differ materially from those set out in the forward-looking statements as a result of, among other factors, changes in economic, social and political 
and  market  conditions,  the  success  of  business  and  operating  initiatives,  changes  in  the  regulatory  environment  and  other  government  actions,  including 
environmental approvals, fluctuations in gold prices and exchange rates, the outcome of pending or future litigation proceedings, and business and operational 
risk management. For a discussion of such risk factors, refer to AngloGold Ashanti’s annual report on Form 20-F for the year ended 31 December 2013 which  
was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on 14 April 2014. These factors are not necessarily all of the important factors 
that could cause AngloGold Ashanti’s actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. Other unknown or unpredictable 
factors  could  also  have  material  adverse  effects  on  future  results.  Consequently,  readers  are  cautioned  not  to  place  undue  reliance  on  forward-looking 
statements.  AngloGold  Ashanti  undertakes no  obligation  to  update publicly  or  release  any  revisions  to  these forward-looking statements  to reflect  events  or 
circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except to the extent required by applicable law. All subsequent written or 
oral  forward-looking  statements  attributable  to  AngloGold  Ashanti  or  any  person  acting  on  its  behalf  are  qualified  by  the  cautionary  statements  herein.  This 
communication  may  contain  certain  “Non-GAAP”  financial  measures.  AngloGold  Ashanti  utilises  certain  Non-GAAP  performance  measures  and  ratios  in 
managing its business. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, the reported operating results or cash flow 
from  operations  or  any  other  measures  of  performance  prepared  in  accordance  with  IFRS.  In  addition,  the  presentation  of  these  measures  may  not  be 
comparable to similarly titled measures other companies may use. AngloGold Ashanti posts information that is important to investors on the main page of its 
website at www.anglogoldashanti.com and under the “Investors” tab on the main page. This information is updated regularly. Investors should visit this website 
to obtain important information about AngloGold Ashanti.
AngloGold Ashanti Limited 
Incorporated in the Republic of South Africa Reg No: 1944/017354/06 
ISIN No. ZAE000043485 – JSE share code: ANG CUSIP: 035128206 – NYSE share code: AU 
Website: www.anglogoldashanti.com
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  the  registrant  has  duly 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Date: July 7, 2014
AngloGold Ashanti Limited
/s/ M E SANZ PEREZ________
By:
Name: M E Sanz Perez
Title: Group General Counsel and Company 
Secretary