
Supplementary Prospectus
Bass Metals Limited
ACN 109 933 995
ASX Code: BSM
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
This is a supplementary prospectus (Supplementary Prospectus) intended to be read
with the prospectus dated 12 July 2016 (Prospectus) issued by Bass Metals Limited
(ACN 109 933 995) (Company).
This Supplementary Prospectus dated 19 August 2016 was lodged with the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) on that date. ASIC and its officers take
no responsibility for the contents of this Supplementary Prospectus.
Other  than  as  set  out  below,  all  details  in  relation  to  the  Prospectus  remain
unchanged.  Terms  and  abbreviations  defined  in  the  Prospectus  have  the  same
meaning  in  this  Supplementary  Prospectus.    If  there  is  a  conflict  between  the
Prospectus and this Supplementary Prospectus, this Supplementary Prospectus will
prevail.
For the avoidance of doubt, references to ‘section’ in this Supplementary Prospectus
mean references to that section of the Prospectus, unless otherwise stated.
This Supplementary Prospectus will be issued with the Prospectus as an electronic
prospectus and may be accessed at www.asx.com.au.
This is an important document and should be read in its entirety. Please consult your
legal,  financial  or  other  professional  adviser  if  you  do  not  fully  understand  the
contents.
2
REASONS FOR THE SUPPLEMENTARY PROSPECTUS
2.1
Purpose of this document
Following  discussions  with  ASIC,  the  Company  has  agreed  to  provide  additional
clarifying disclosures in this Supplementary Prospectus in relation to the Company’s
existing  assets,  tenure  of  the  Graphmada  Graphite  Mine,  the  Company’s  business
model and an extract of the audited accounts of Stratmin pertaining to Graphmada
Mauritius and its subsidiaries.  These disclosures should be read in light of the general
disclosures, including risk factors contained in the Prospectus.
Page 1
2.2
No investor action required
As the content of this Supplementary Prospectus is not considered to be materially
adverse to investors:
(a)
Applications  for  New  Shares  under  the  Retail  Entitlement  Offer  and/or
Shortfall  Offer  must  be  made  using  the  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form
attached  to  or  accompanying  the  Prospectus  (see  the  Entitlement  and
Acceptance Form and section 7 of the Prospectus for detailed instructions on
how  to  complete  the  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  and  return  by  the
Closing Date); and
(b)
Applicants who have already subscribed for New Shares under the Prospectus
to the date of this Supplementary Prospectus do not need to take any action.
3
ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES
3.1
Company’s existing assets
In addition to the 6.25% interest the Company currently holds in the issued capital
of Graphmada Mauritius which owns the Graphmada Graphite Mine, the Company’s
assets  comprise  the  following  mining  tenements  located  in  Tasmania  which  are
considered prospective for zinc, lead and silver:
Tenement
EL48/2003 Mt Block
CML103M/1987 Hellyer Mine Lease
Que River Project
CML68M/1984 Que River Mine Lease (QRML)
ML 10W/1980 Access Easement to QRML
Interest
100%
100%*
100%
100%
*The  Hellyer  Mine Lease  CML103M/1987  is  owned  by  HMO  a  100%  subsidiary  of Ivy
Resources Limited. The Company has a 100% interest in all of the existing base metal
resources and base metal exploration rights through a sublease agreement.
The  Company’s  interest  in  RL11/1997  Mt  Charter  was  relinquished  in  the  quarter
ended 30 June 2016. The Company was unsuccessful in its bid to secure this tenure
under a competitive tender process in March/April 2016.
The Company’s Que River assets and other Tasmanian assets listed above are on care
and  maintenance  due  to  current  market  conditions.  The  assets  have  total  annual
costs of approximately $400,000, including a commitment of $180,000 for Mt Block
relating to the annual renewal and 2017 exploration activity plan. Such expenses are
included  in  the  Company’s  proposed  use  of  funds  as  detailed  in  section  5  of  the
Prospectus as a portion of the amount allocated as “general working capital”.
Page 2
The Company recently renewed its annual license for EL 48/2003 (Mt Block) and paid
approximately $15,000 in consulting and renewal costs to secure this license for a
further term.  As part of the renewal of EL 48/2003, the Company has submitted to
the  Department  of  State  Growth,  Tasmania  that  it  proposes  to  undertake  the
following additional work during 2016/2017:
(a)
a diamond hole drill program proposed to test the Amoeba Zone west of the
Que River mineralisation; and
(b)
further  testing  of  the  soil  geochemical  anomaly  associated  with  the  silica-
sericite alternation of the Que River- Hellyer volcanics.
The  Company’s  entire  Tasmanian  tenement  package  has  demonstrated  high  value
VHMS mineralisation and remains prospective for this style of mineralisation.
There are several untested anomalies on EL 48/2003 and the Company is committed
to fully investigating this potential.  The projected cost to manage this program is
estimated to be at least $180,000.
For  the  2016/2017  year,  the  Company  intends  to  actively  manage  the  care  and
maintenance  of  its  Hellyer  Mine  Lease  (CML  103M/1987)  and  the  Que  River  Mine
Lease  (CML  68M/1984)  and  undertake  ongoing  random  geological  surveys  and
assessments  as  required  to  expand  the  Company’s  knowledge  of  these  extensive
licenses. The Company has and will continue to engage three part time consultants
to manage these projects and processes.
Ongoing work schedule for the next 12 months may include and not be limited to:
(a)
(b)
ongoing water testing and quality management;
regular  and  monthly  environmental  management  of  the  site  with  monthly
reports produced to Senior Management;
(c)
general field work and management of the Company’s existing inventory of
data;
(d)
management of historical core and drill samples and liaison with the relevant
government authorities to ensure continuity and security of this data.
(e)
ongoing assessment and regular management of expressions of interest that
may,  from  time  to  time,  be  received  to  assist  the  Company  in  the  further
economic development of this site;
The  Company  will  continue  to  meet  expenditure  commitments  in  relation  to  its
Tasmanian  assets  and  is  looking  at  various  ways  to  maximise  shareholder  value,
including through further exploration if market conditions allow. Whilst the Company
will consider any offers on their merits, it has no present intention of disposing of its
Tasmanian assets.
Page 3
3.2
Tenure of the Graphmada Graphite Mine
Graphmada Mauritius (which is being acquired by the Company) owns all of the issued
shares  in  Graphmada  SARL,  an  entity  incorporated  in  Madagascar  (together,  the
Graphmada  Group).  Graphmada  SARL  is  the  registered  holder  of  three  mining
permits,  permit  numbers  PE  25600  (Loharano),  26670  (Mahefedok)  and  24730
(Antsirabe) (Permits).  PE 25600 and PE 26670 authorise Graphmada SARL’s current
primary mining operations and expire in 2047 and 2048 respectively.
In  addition,  in  December  2015,  Graphmada  Group  initiated  a  process  with  the
Ministry of Mines in Madagascar to extend the Loharano permit area.  The process is
pending. The Company believes the process will be granted as all preconditions have
been met, however the Ministry has suspended granting any approvals until the new
mining code is implemented in early 2017.  As a result, there is no guarantee the
process will be granted in a timely fashion or at all, and investors are urged to read
section  6(g)  of  the  Prospectus  in  full.    Graphmada  Mauritius’  current  mining
operations  will  not  be  affected  if  the  process  is  not  granted,  and  the  Company’s
prospects  and  immediate  intentions  to  increase  production  are  not  dependent  on
any additional area being secured for mining.
Graphmada Group’s permitting details and tenure are set out in the table below and
the map shown further below:
Graphmada Group’s permitting details and tenure
Permit 
Number
No.
Squares
Square 
sizes
Granted
Date
Expiry 
Date
WGS84 
UTM39s 
Easting
WGS84 
UTM39s 
Northing
PE 26670
32
Mahefedok
PE 25600
16
Loharano
PE 24730
16
Antsirabe1
625m 
x 
625m
625m 
x 
625m
625m 
x 
625m
21/01/08
20/01/48
286,965.92E
7,905,786.82N
289,464.72E
7,905,850.73N
289,592.65E
7,900,853.24N
287,093.88E
7,900,789.19N
27/09/07
26/09/47
289,400.86E
7,908,349.51N
291,899.60E
7,908,413.33N
291,963.45E
7,905,914.62N
289,464.72E
7,905,850.73N
18/01/07
17/01/47
286,902.04E
7,908,285.67N
289,400.86E
7,908,349.51N
289,464.72E
7,905,850.73N
286,965.92E
7,905,786.82N
Figure 1: Graphmada Group’s permitting details.
1 PE 24730 is not material to Graphmada Group’s primary mining operations.
Page 4
Figure 2: Graphmada Group’s Loharano and Mahefadok permits
Page 5
Furthermore,  and  consistent  with  its  aspiration  of  increasing  production  from
Graphmada Group’s ground, the Company intends to apply for additional tenure in
the future.
The  Company  has  obtained  a  legal  opinion  from  John  W  Ffooks  &  Co  on  the  legal
status  of  the  Permits.  The  legal  opinion  is  included  in  full  at  Schedule  1  of  this
Prospectus.
3.3
Business model
Following completion of the acquisition of the remaining 93.75% of the issued capital
of  Graphmada  Mauritius,  the  Company  will  own  the  Graphmada  Graphite  Mine  in
Madagascar. The mine has been highly developed by Stratmin and others, and has
been significantly de-risked with a historic sunk cost of more than $16 million to date.
Details  of  Graphmada  Mauritius’  operations,  mineral  resources  and  exploration  at
Loharano and Mahefadok projects were released to ASX on 2 September 2015 in an
announcement  titled,  “Strategic
investment
in  producing  graphite  asset”
(Announcement)2. The Announcement has been lodged with ASIC under section 712
of  the  Corporations  Act.  A  copy  of  the  Announcement  may  be  obtained  from  the
Company free of charge to anyone who asks for it during the application period of
the Prospectus.
Further  information  on  the  Loharano  project  is  included  at  Schedule  2  in  an
independent technical report on the Loharano Graphite Mine project by Creo Design
Pty Ltd (2012) (Independent Technical Report). The Independent Technical Report
was  prepared  under  the  JORC  Code  2004.    The  estimates  in  the  Independent
Technical Report have not been updated to JORC Code 2012 on the basis that the
information has not materially changed since it was last reported.
The  information  in  the  Independent  Technical  Report  that  relates  to  Mineral
Resources  and  exploration  results  is  based  on  information  compiled  by  Johan
Hattingh  a  Competent  Person  who  is  a  member  of  a  ‘Recognised  Professional
Organisation’  (RPO)  included  in  a  list  promulgated  by  ASX  from  time to  time.  Mr
Hattingh  has  sufficient  experience  that  is  relevant  to  the  style  of  mineralisation
and  type  of  deposit  under  consideration  and  to  the  activity  being  undertaken  to
qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the Australasian
Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves and
consents to the inclusion of the information in the Independent Technical Report in
the form and context in which it appears.
The  graphite  at  Graphmada  is  hosted  in  both  weathered  regolith  and  underlying
graphitic gneiss, with the grade of graphitic carbon increasing with depth. All mining
to date has been very shallow and low cost, with the mining horizon from 1.5m below
surface  to  a  depth  of  6-8m,  depending  on  the  topography,  which  is  undulating.
2 http://www.asx.com.au/asxpdf/20150902/pdf/4311myw8v0ddyz.pdf
Page 6
However, the graphite bearing regolith is known to go to depths of >30 metres, to
the underlying hard rock mineralisation.
Recent mining is from the Loharano deposit, with the Mahefedok deposit undergoing
trial  mining.  The  mineral  resource  at  Loharano  previously  reported  in  the
Announcement is set out below. This mineral resource represents the top 5 metres
of the deposit. Following completion, the Company will undertake exploration and
expansion studies in relation to the deposit as outlined in the use of funds table in
section  3.4  below  and  5.4  of  the  Prospectus.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  further
exploration  will  generate  the  same  or  similar  results.  Please  also  refer  to  section
6.2(f) of the Prospectus regarding such risks.
Mineral Resource Category – Loharano Operation (Cut-off Grade – 2%)
Classification
Tonnage (‘000)
Grade (%)
Total Indicated
Total Inferred
Total Resources*
421
5,273
5,694
5.15
4.04
4.12
Contained 
Graphite 
(tonnes)
21,630
213,029
234,659
* Rounding in effect
*These estimates were prepared and first disclosed by Stratmin under the AIM Listing
Rules and the JORC Code 2004. The estimates have not been updated to JORC Code
2012 on the basis that the information has not materially changed since it was last
reported.
To  date,  due  to  an  underperforming  processing  plant  and  with  limited  capital  to
improve the plant, production has been restrained to a small fraction of the stated
mineral resource. The Company’s due diligence showed that less than 120,000 tonnes
or less than ~2% of the mineral resource at Loharano has been mined by Stratmin.
On this basis, the information in relation to the resource estimates has not materially
changed.
Page 7
Figure 3: Cumulative tonnes mined (Loharano)
If the Company successfully completes the acquisition, it proposes upgrades aimed
at achieving the stated nameplate process capacity for the processing plant of 6,000
tonnes per annum (tpa).
The  Company  plans  to  invest  money  into  upgrading  the  processing  plant
simultaneously with ongoing drilling to further delineate its resource. There is a risk
that the Company may not be able to upgrade its large inferred resource. There is
also a  risk that the Company may not be able to identify sufficient graphite to meet
any increased or sustained levels of production and that therefore any money spent
by the Company may not be economically recoverable.
With a 140 strong workforce, which utilises 
modern facilities and infrastructure, an on-
site  doctor,  pharmacy,  housing,  offices, 
communications  and  a  state-of-the-art 
analytical laboratory in place, the Company 
is  positioned  to  develop  and  execute  its 
plans to improve and expand its production 
through timely capital investment.
Graphmada  sold  close  to  ~1,500  product
tonnes in 2015, with a high proportion being
large flake graphite with >94% purity.
Page 8
Figure 4: Graphmada historical saleable product
Production year to date (2016) has seen an increasing production volume of saleable
graphite,  albeit  at  lower  purity.  Immediately  following  completion,  the  Company
intends to invest capital to reach not only greater sustainable production volumes
but  at  purity  consistently  greater  than  94%  Graphitic  Carbon  (GC),  which  attracts
premium pricing.
In addition to a number of site visits from the Company’s Chief Executive Officer,
the Company engaged a number of  independent consultants who have also visited
the  Graphmada  Graphite  Mine  and  were  extensively  involved  in  the  due  diligence
process  undertaken  by  the  Company  on  Graphmada  Mauritius  and  the  Graphmada
Graphite Mine.  This process identified both opportunities to increase production and
also potential risks to the Company.
The Company believes that, as a result of its due diligence, both production capacity
and quality can be increased and improved in  the short to medium  term, and the
Company is currently putting in strategies to achieve this.  These strategies include:
(a)
appointing  an  experienced  Australian  management  team  and  consulting
experts to manage operations effectively and efficiently.  This includes Peter
Adamini  of
Independent  Metallurgical  Operations,  an  experienced
metallurgist; and
(b)
increased  efficiencies  achieved  through  plant  upgrades  (for  which  the
Company has allocated $2 million from funds raised under the Offer),with the
aim of increasing production to produce consistent product quality of >94%
GC including, but not limited to, the following:
(i)
improving ore feed preparation to reduce loss (~10%);
Page 9
(ii)
refurbishing the scrubber to improve liberation prior to flotation;
(iii)
replacing secondary mills with better liberation size control;
(iv)
improving  the  flow  design  of  the  flotation  circuit  and  install  level
control systems and higher quality air injection capability;
(v)
replacing slurry pumps;
(vi)
replacing of dewatering centrifuges for more efficient drying;
(vii)
sourcing an alternative drying system to replace the installed double
drum rotary dryer;
(viii)
replacing the screening system to improve capacity;
(i)
installing a blending system to improve the consistency and quality of
the bagged product; and
(ii)
replacing diesel generators and improve power supply infrastructure.
The  cost  of  these  improvements  are  detailed  in  section  3.4  below  and  5.4  of  the
Prospectus.
Furthermore,  the  Company  has  identified  significant  savings  in  administration  and
other operational costs such as executive salaries and legal costs which have been
incurred by the Graphmada Group.
The  potential  risks  identified  include  most  significantly  that  the  process  plant
foundations  and  wall  structures  of  the  Graphmada  Graphite  Mine  were  poorly
installed,  and  in  the  past  have  been  unstable  and  have  had  a  history  of  failure.
Modifications have been implemented to ensure ongoing operations, however there
remains a risk that any future failure may have a significant adverse impact on the
Graphmada Mauritius project including injury and lost production.  To mitigate this
risk,  the  Company  plans  to  reconfigure  part  of  the  plant  layout  when  upgrading
equipment,  thus  relieving  plant  foundations  and  wall  structures  of  weight  bearing
forces.
The  information  in  this  report  that  relates  to  Mineral  Resources  is  based  on
information compiled by Tim McManus, a Competent Person who is a member of the
Australasian  Institute  of  Mining  and  Metallurgy  and  a  full-time  employee  of  the
Company.
Tim McManus has sufficient experience that is relevant to the style of mineralisation
and  type  of  deposit  under  consideration  and  to  the  activity  being  undertaken  to
qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the Australasian
Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves.
Tim McManus consents to the inclusion of the information in this report in the form
and context in which it appears.
Page 10
3.4
Use of funds
As stated in section 5.4 of the Prospectus, funds raised under the Offer will primarily
be used for exploration and expansion studies, to improve production capacity, and
where  required,  replacing  operating  plant  and  equipment  at  the  Graphmada
Graphite Mine,  and for general working capital.
A  further  breakdown  of  certain  aspects  of  the  “use  of  funds”  table  provided  in
section 5.4 of the Prospectus is provided in the table below.
Any further funds raised by the Joint Lead Managers through the conditional top-up
placement  (up  to  $1.5  million)  (referred  to  in  section  2  of  the  Prospectus)  will
increase the working capital.
The  Company  proposes  to  fund  ongoing  Graphmada  operations  and  its  Tasmanian
assets holding costs through existing cash reserves and receivables of $2.2 million as
at 30 June 2016. In addition cash receipts from sales of graphite product will also
supplement its funding.
However, it is recognised that current revenue generated from graphite sales alone
is  not  able  to  sustain  the  Graphmada  Group’soperations  as  they  currently  stand.
Therefore  the  capital  raised  from  the  Offer  will  be  used  to  improve  and  expand
operations  in  order  to  reduce  the  cost  per  tonne  of  graphite  produced  and  grow
Page 11
revenue  by  producing  a  higher  quality  product  (+94%  Graphitic  Carbon)  that  will
attract better pricing. The Company’s due diligence shows that through moderate
capital investment sustainable margins can be achieved.
In addition, significant savings are available to the Company through a reduction in
overhead  costs.  The  costs  to  sustain  Stratmin,  as  an  AIM  listed  company  are
considerably  higher  than  the  costs  for  maintaining  the  Company’s  ASX  listing.
Combined  with  a  reduction  in  board  fees  and  management  salaries,  and  other
administration costs both at corporate level and on site, the Company is confident
that a sustainable cost structure can be implemented.   For example, in 2015, the
Graphmada  Group  recorded  revenue  of  £445,000  and  expenses  of  £1,762,000.
Included in these expenses were administration costs (not related to production) of
£1,085,000.  However,  the  Company  recognises  that  there  still  remains  a  risk  that
some of these cost reductions may not be realised.
Further, to reduce the risk to the Company through the handover period and post
completion, Stratmin has, under the SPA, made certain warranties, including that
the  Graphmada  Group  will  have  sufficient  net  working  capital  to  meet  budgeted
operating expenses for a period of 30 days commencing on completion.  Stratmin has
agreed  to  indemnify  the  Company  for  any  breach  of  those  warranties.    Those
warranties were negotiated in light of the extensive due diligence undertaken by the
Company on the Graphmada Group.
As a result and in effect, Graphmada Mauritius will upon completion under the SPA
have limited liabilities that the Company has consented to.  The only ongoing liability
will be a decommissioning obligation of £236,000, which will be offset by the value
of plant and equipment.  All other liabilities not consented to will be met by Stratmin,
and set off against the $1.5 million cash component of the consideration to be paid
by  the  Company  to  Stratmin  at  completion.  The  intercompany  liabilities  of  the
Graphmada Group will be assigned to Bass on completion of the SPA.
Under the SPA, the maximum amount that Stratmin may be required to pay for all
breaches  of  the  SPA,  including  warranties,  is  limited  to  the  consideration,  except
where the breach of warranty is due to, or the result of fraud dishonesty, or willful
or grossly negligent conduct. As at the date of this Supplementary Prospectus, the
Company is not aware of any material breaches of the SPA by either party.
3.5
Audited accounts
Stratmin’s only asset is 93.75% of the issued capital of Graphmada Mauritius which
in turn owns all of the issued capital in Graphmada SARL (which owns the Graphmada
Graphite  Mine).  Stratmin  has  treated  Graphmada  Mauritius  and  its  subsidiary
Graphmada SARL as a disposal group and are accounted as discontinued operations.
Included at Schedule 3 is an extract of the audited accounts for Stratmin for the year
to 31 December 2015 (Stratmin Audited Accounts).
Page 12
The Stratmin Audited Accounts have been lodged with ASIC under section 712 of the
Corporations Act and may be obtained from the Company free of charge to anyone
who asks for it during the application period of the Prospectus.
Included at Schedule 4 is the statement of financial position as at 31 December for
Stratmin Group (comprising Stratmin, Graphmada Mauritius and Graphmada SARL),
Graphmada  Group  (comprising  Graphmada  Mauritius  and  Graphmada  SARL)  and
Graphmada Mauritius, during which time Stratmin did not own any other assets.
Included at Schedule 6 is the Graphmada Group Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Included  at  Schedule  6  is  the  Graphmada  Mauritius  Statement  of  Comprehensive
Income.
The Stratmin Audited Accounts are based on the information provided in Schedules
4,  5  and  6.  The  information  in  Schedules  4,  5  and  6  was  included  in  the  audit  of
Stratmin with minor adjustments made in the consolidated accounts to comply with
UK IFRS. Included at Schedule 7 is a letter from Stratmin’s auditor confirming that
as  at  31  December  2015,  the  only  substantial  asset  held  by  Stratmin  was  the
Graphmada  Graphite  Mine  which  was  held  by  subsidiaries  of  Stratmin  at  this
reporting date.
3.6
Stratmin shareholder approval
On 29 July 2016 Stratmin announced that its shareholders had approved the sale of
Graphmada Group.  As a result the Acquisition is not subject any conditions which
may at Stratmin’s election be defeated.
4
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
4.1
Interests of promoters and named persons
Except as disclosed in the Prospectus or this Supplementary Prospectus, no expert,
promoter or any other person named in this Supplementary Prospectus as performing
a  function  in  a  professional  advisory  or  other  capacity  in  connection  with  the
preparation or distribution of the Supplementary Prospectus, nor any firm in which
any  of  those  persons  is  or  was  a  partner  nor  any  company  in  which  any  of  those
persons is or was associated with, has now, or has had, in the 2 year period ending
on the date of this Supplementary Prospectus, any interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in connection
with its formation or promotion or the Offer; or
(c)
the Offer.
Page 13
Creo  Design  provided  an  Independent  Technical  Report  of  the  Loharano  Graphite
Mine to Stratmin.  Creo Design has not received any fees for services to the Company
in the 2 years prior to the date of this Supplementary Prospectus.
John  W.  Ffooks  &  Co,  a  member  of  Bowman  Gilfillan  Africa  Group,  has  acted  as
Madagascan legal counsel and provided due diligence reports including a solicitor’s
report on tenements. The Company has paid or will pay approximately USD$4,000 to
John  W.  Ffooks  &  Co  for  these  services  up  to  the  date  of  the  Supplementary
Prospectus.  Further amounts may be paid to John W. Ffooks & Co for other work in
accordance with its normal time based charges.
Tim McManus is the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and is a full time employee
of  the  Company.  Mr  McManus  receives  an  annual  salary  of  $274,000  inclusive  of
superannuation for services provided in this role.  Mr McManus also has an interest
in 500,000 Shares.
Welbeck  Associates  Chartered  Accountants  and  Statutory  Auditor  has  acted  as
auditor for Stratmin.  Welbeck Associates has not received any fees for services to
the Company in the 2 years prior to the date of this Supplementary Prospectus.
4.2
Consents
Each person referred to in this section:
(a)
has given and has not, before the date of lodgement of this Supplementary
Prospectus with ASIC withdrawn their written consent:
(i)
to be named in the Supplementary Prospectus in the form and context
which it is named; and
(ii)
where applicable, to the inclusion in this  Supplementary Prospectus
of the statement(s) and/or reports (if any) by that person in the form
and context in which it appears in this Supplementary Prospectus;
(b)
(c)
has not caused or authorised the issue of this Supplementary Prospectus;
has  not  made  any  statement  in  this  Supplementary  Prospectus  or  any
statement on which a statement in this Supplementary Prospectus is based,
other than specified below; and
(d)
to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims all liability in
respect  of,  makes  no  representation  regarding,  and  takes  no  responsibility
for, any part of this Supplementary Prospectus, other than the references to
their name and the statement(s) and/or report(s) (if any) specified below and
included in this Supplementary Prospectus with the consent of that person.
Name
Role
John W. Ffooks & Co
Legal opinion on Permits
Tim McManus
Competent Person
Page 14
Creo Design Pty Ltd
Independent Technical
Stratmin Global Resources Plc
Welbeck Associates Chartered Accountant 
and Statutory Auditor
Report
Vendor
Auditor
5
DIRECTORS STATEMENT
This  Supplementary  Prospectus  is  issued  by  the  Company  and  its  issue  has  been
authorised  by  a  resolution  of  the  Directors.  Each  Director  has  consented  to  the
lodgment  of  this  Supplementary  Prospectus  with  ASIC  and  has  not  withdrawn  that
consent.
Dated: 19 August 2016
…………………………………………
Signed for and on behalf of  
Bass Metals Ltd by 
David Round
Page 15
SCHEDULE 1
LEGAL OPINION ON MINING PERMITS
Page 16
To:
David Round 
Bass Metals Ltd 
31 Ventnor Avenue, West Perth WA 6005 
Australia 
Email:  david@bassmetals.com.au
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
10 August 2016 
 
 
Dear Sirs, 
 
Graph-Mada Sarl (the “Company”) – Madagascar Mining Permits 
 
We  issue  this  legal  opinion  (the  “Opinion”)  at  your  request.  The  primary  purpose  of  this  Opinion  is  to 
address  the  legal  status  of  certain  graphite  mineral  mining  interests  located  in  the  Atsinanana  region  of 
Madagascar granted to or owned by the Company.
The Mining Permits
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
In preparing this Opinion we have reviewed copies of the following documents:
Certificate  from  the  Bureau  du  Cadastre  Minier  de  Madagascar  (the  “BCMM”,  the  Malagasy  Mining 
Registry))  dated  24  April  2012  certifying  the  transformation  of  the  1  square  of  2.5  km  x  2.5  km 
covered by Exploitation Permit No. 26670 issued in the name of the Company into 32 new squares of 
625m  in  respect  of  the  Toamasina  province  (the  “26670  Permit”).  The  26670  Permits  is  granted  in 
connection with the exploitation of graphite and is valid for a period of 40 years from the date of 
signature and is renewable in units of 20 years thereafter. This certificate is valid for 3 months from 
the date of signature. There is no renewal required for this certificate. The newly issued 26670 Permit 
with the newly delineated mining squares has been delivered by the BCMM following signature of 
the Managing Director of the Company in 29 June 2015. 
 
Exploitation Permit No. 24730 dated 18 January 2007 issued in the name of the Company in respect 
of the Toamasina province for sixteen (16) mining squares of 625 m x 625m (the “24730 Permit”). The 
24730 Permit is granted in connection with the exploitation of graphite and is valid for a period of 40 
years from the date of signature and may be renewable in units of 20 years thereafter. The certificate 
certifying the transformation from squares of 2.5km x 2.5km into 16 new squares of 625m x 625m has 
been approved by the BCMM and the Company is able to obtain such certificate from the BCMM. 
The  newly  issued  24730  Permit  with  the  transformation  of  mining  squares  for  625m  had  been 
delivered  by  the  BCMM  following  the  signature  of  the  Managing  Director  of  the  Company  in  26 
October 2007.
Exploitation  Permit  No.  25600  dated  27  September  2007  issued  in  the  name  of  the  Company  in 
respect  of  the  Toamasina  province  for  sixteen  (16)  mining  squares  of  625  m  x  625m  (the  “25600 
Permit”). The 25600 Permit is granted in connection with the exploitation of graphite and is valid for 
a period of 40 years from the date of signature and may be renewable in units of 20 years thereafter. 
The certificate certifying the transformation from squares of 2.5km x 2.5km into 16 new squares of 
625m  x  625m  has  been  approved  by  the  BCMM  in  26  October  2007  and  the  Company  is  able  to 
obtain such certificate from the BCMM. The newly issued 25600 Permit had been delivered by the 
BCMM following the signature of the Managing Director of the Company in 27 March 2014.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
1
The  26670  Permit,  the  25600  Permit  and  the  24730  Permit  have  been  issued  by  the  BCMM,  and 
signed  by  the  Minister  in  charge  of  Mines  (referred  to  hereinafter  as  the  “Mining  Permits”).  A 
summary table of the Mining Permits is attached at Appendix 1 hereto.
2.  We have further reviewed the following documents:
1.4.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
1.
2.
Environmental Permit no.50/07-MINENVEF/ONE/DG/PE dated 14 November 2007 relating to the 
exploitation  of  graphite  in  Mahela,  Atsinanana  region  in  connection  with  the  Exploitation  Permit 
(PE) no.26670-I, granted in the name of Graph-Mada Sarl.  
Document  from  the  BCMM  showing  the  payment  of  the  mining  fees  2015  (Frais  d’Administration 
minière). 
Notification table and a letter of formal notice dated 29 July 2016 regarding the unpaid mining fees 
2016. 
Debit  note  of  the  Company’s  bank  evidencing  the  payment  of  the  mining  fees  2016  amounting 
27,022,848 MGA.
Broadly, the process of issuing a mining permit to a party consists of the following steps:
An  application  for  a  mining  permit  at  the  BCMM  should  include  the  following  documents  and 
should be made in triplicate (the original and two copies):
Certified copy of the Statuts of the company; 
Certificate copy of extract from the Company Registry;
•  Application form from the BCMM duly completed and signed by the applicant; 
• 
• 
•  Updated fiscal card or CIF (Carte d’Immatriculation Fiscale) 
•
Certified  copy  of  the  company  professional  card  specifying  the  mining  activity  (Carte 
Professionelle); 
Legalised plan type of a mining permit R from the BCMM; 
The AERP or Autorisations Exclusives de Réservation de Périmètre granted to the company; 
Localisation map (Carte de Localisation) from the BCMM; 
Spotting map (Carte de Repérage) from the BCMM;
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Deed giving power of attorney to the representative; 
• 
• 
•
Criminal record no. 3 of the representative less than three months old; 
Certified copy of the National Identity Card of the representative; and 
Certificate of residence of the representative less than three months old.
Issuance of a provisional receipt by the BCMM following deposit of the application and payment of 
the  instruction  fee.  The  applicant  must  provide  the  BCMM  with  all  the  documents  set  out  above 
within 5 days of the date of deposit of the application.
Within 5 working days of the deposit of a completed application the BCMM issues the receipt of the 
admissibility in respect of the application (Récépissé de recevabilité de la demande). 
The applicant pays 75% of the mining fee amount within 20 working days from the date of deposit 
of the application.
Our Opinion 
3.
In issuing this opinion:
3.1.  We  have  made  all  appropriate  searches  of  the  relevant  registries  including  the  BCMM  and  the 
Company  Registry  in  Antananarivo  and  inspected  all  relevant  documents  but  not  examined  any 
corporate records of any governmental authorisations or orders, certificates of public officials or of 
representatives of the parties or any other documents not stated above, and our opinion is qualified 
in that regard;
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
2
3.2.
Insofar as we examined originals, we assume that the signatures are genuine and in respect of copies 
of such originals we assume that such copies are true and accurate copies (unless manifestly not the 
case);
3.3.  Where  compliance  with  the  BCMM  or  statutory  requirements  necessary  to  maintain  the  Mining 
Permits in good standing is not disclosed on the face of the documents referred to above, unless the 
non-compliance has come to our attention as a result of our investigations, we express no opinion on 
that compliance or permit. We have made reasonable and diligent enquiries to ensure that matters 
that should have come to our attention have done so; and  
After  due  enquiry,  we  are  not  aware  of  any  material  adverse  change  has  taken  place  since  the 
execution of the documents listed in this opinion, which would affect, undermine or otherwise alter 
their validity.
3.4.
4.
4.1.
4.2.
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.4.
In issuing this opinion, we have made particular reference to the Malagasy law set out in Appendix 2:
Law no. 99-022 of 19 August 1999, incorporating the Mining Code, as amended by law 025/2005 of 
13 July 2005; and 
Decree no. 2000-170, as amended, which sets out the technical details for the implementation of the 
Mining Code.
5.  Based  on  our  review  of  the  documents  examined  and  subject  to  the  statements  set  out  herein,  we
confirm that at the date of this opinion:
The Mining Permits are correctly registered at the BCMM in the name of the Company and that the 
Company is able to exploit them freely without reference to any other party; 
That the Company’s title to the permits will not be affected by any change to its parent company’s 
shareholders; and 
The  Company  and  its  representatives  had  all  relevant  powers  to  enter  into  all  documentation  in 
relation  to  the  acquisition  of  the  Mining  Permits  provided  and  that  all  documents  are  correctly 
executed and filed. 
That there is no outstanding payments of fees or any further payments to be made to the authorities 
in respect of the permits, save for the annual fees pertaining to each of the Mining Permits.
5.5.  We have not reviewed any other document in connection with the mining fees paid for these permits 
than the debit note of the Company’s bank evidencing the payment of the mining fees for 2016. The 
amount of fees to be paid by the holder depends on the number of square and the number of the 
year. The Exploitation Permit No. 24730 is in its thirteenth (13) years and the Exploitation Permit No. 
26670 is in its twelfth (12) years. 
There  are  no  conditions  or  restrictions  attached  to  the  Mining  Permits  that  may  impact  on  the 
exploration, mining or transfer of such permits other than:
5.6.
•
• 
•
those set out in the Mining Code (including environmental provisions - see Appendix 2 of 
this Opinion); 
in respect of the payment of annual permit fees to the BCMM; and 
in respect of the obligation to file an annual report of work completed.
5.7.
That,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  there  have  been  no  challenges  made  and  no  challenges  are 
currently underway or threatened to the Company’s title to the Mining Permits.
Yours faithfully,
John W. Ffooks & Co
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
3
Appendix 1
Summary Table of Mining Permits
No. Squares
Type
Granted date
Expiry date
16
16
32
PE
PE
PE
18/01/2007
17/01/2047
27/09/2007
26/09/2047
21/01/2008
20/01/2048
Permit 
Holder
The 
Company
The 
Company
The 
Company
Permit 
Number
24730
25600
26670
An  annual  mining  fee  is  levied  by  the  BCMM  and  is  a  function  of  the  type  of  the  mining,  they  are 
covered and the length of validity of the mining permits.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
4
Appendix 2
An Overview of the Legal System in Madagascar
Background 
 
The legal system in Madagascar is based upon the French civil law system. This is a codified legal system 
based  on  the  Napoleonic  model.  As  in  all  civil  law  systems,  statute  law  (which  is  contained  in  a  series  of 
codes)  has  the  greatest  importance.  In  contrast  with  common  law  systems,  the  doctrine  of  precedent 
(jurisprudence) has little weight.  
 
Most  of  the  current  codes  were  implemented  more  than  forty  years  ago.  Many  of  these  have  not  been 
updated for some time. However, the government of Madagascar is in the process of updating laws in key 
areas – for example, the new Companies Code enacted in 2004, the Labour Code enacted in 2004 and the 
Competition Code.   
 
The mining sector was brought up to date with the Mining Code in 1999, and the Large Mining Investment 
Law in 2002 (the main features are described below). The Mining Code has been updated with Law no. 2005-
021  dated  17  October  2005  and  its  Decree  no.  2006-910  dated  19  December  2006.  The  Large  Mining 
Investment law (“LGIM”) was put in effect with Decree no 2003-784 dated 8 January 2003.  
 
Legal Process 
 
The following procedure is adopted for enactment of new laws:
•  After consulting with various interested parties the government drafts a proposition. 
• 
• 
•  After  Senate  approval,  it  is  passed  to  the  Constitutional  Court,  which  opines  on  its
The proposal is presented to Parliament for approval. 
Following approval by the Lower House, it is approved by the Senate.
•
constitutionality.   
Following validation by the Constitutional Court, the law is returned to the President for 
signature.
•  Once signed, the law must be published in the official journal along with a decree bringing
the law into force.
In the event that the new law is uncontroversial and meets no opposition, it routinely takes about six months 
between proposition and coming into force. In the event that further clarification is necessary under the law, 
or  is  required  as  a  matter  of  practicality,  laws  are  backed  up  by  interpretive  decrees.  These  are  issued 
directly  by  the  minister  responsible  for  the  law  and  may  be  issued  without  the  need  for  approval  by 
Parliament. 
 
Dispute Resolution 
Trials of commercial cases are held at first instance before a single judge who may sit with two  
assessors but without jury. Parties are represented by an avocat, the equivalent of a barrister or trial attorney.  
In  the  trial,  much  more  reliance  is  placed  on  written  submissions  than  in  common  law  jurisdictions,  and 
much less legal argument takes place in court.  
 
Parties have the right of appeal to the Court of Appeal, where up to three judges will hear the case, again 
largely on written submission. Cases usually take a few months to reach the Court of Appeal. Following the 
Court of Appeal, parties can appeal to the Cour de Cassation on points of law and procedure only. This will be 
heard  by  up  to  five  judges.  Beyond  the  Cour  de  Cassation  lies  the  Supreme  Court,  again  comprising  five 
judges, for a final finding in law. The Constitutional Court exists solely to decide questions relating to the 
constitution.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
5
As an alternative to the court system, arbitration is recognised in Madagascar and foreign arbitral awards are 
enforceable. Madagascar has its own arbitration centre. 
 
Corporate law 
 
The system of company and corporate law in Madagascar is now similar to that found in any other French-
speaking country. Since the new company law was implemented in 2004, the procedure for setting up and 
operating companies has become much simpler.   
 
There are two sorts of company of interest to the foreign investor: the société à responsabilité limité or SARL 
(similar to an English limited company) and the société anonyme or SA (similar to an unlisted English plc). 
 
An SARL is administered by the gérant, or statutory directory. The gérant is appointed by the shareholders in 
the  statutes  or  by  extraordinary  general  meeting  of  the  Company.  The  gérant  has  full  powers  to  run  the 
company and it is very difficult to limit his apparent authority when dealing with third parties. Should he 
exceed  the  authority  he  has  under  his  appointment,  no  recourse  is  available  against  the  third  party  to 
unwind  any  unauthorised  transaction  or  claim  compensation.  Action  may  be  taken  by  the  shareholders 
against the gérant but this may not be effective.  
 
An  SA  with  more  than  three  shareholders  is  managed  by  a  directeur  général  and  administered  by  three  to 
twelve administrateurs (administrators, similar to the board of directors, which has a President (chairman of 
the  board)).  The  Directeur  Général  is  responsible  for  management  issues  while  the  administrators  are 
responsible for the internal running of the company (board meetings, approving accounts, etc). If an SA has 
fewer than four shareholders, the structure is collapsed into one position, the administrateur général, who has 
full and unfettered power to run the company.  
 
There  is  no  obligation  to  have  local  shareholders  and  an  SA  or  an  SARL  can  be  owned  100%  by  foreign 
people  or  companies.  However,  someone  involved  in  the  management  or  administration  of  a  Malagasy 
company must be either a national or a resident foreigner. In the case of an SARL this means that the gérant 
must be resident in Madagascar or a Malagasy national. For an SA, one of the administrators or the Directeur 
Général or his deputy must be resident in Madagascar or a Malagasy national. 
 
A  company’s  internal  operation  is  much  the  same  in  Madagascar  as  elsewhere.  A  company  is  run  for  the 
benefit of its shareholders, it makes its decisions through its directors and these are all recorded as minutes 
in the company’s records. 
 
Under Malagasy company law, companies are free to contract as they wish. No permissions or permits are 
required after a company’s incorporation to allow it to carry on business. 
 
A system exists in Madagascar for a company to charge or pledge its assets by way of security for a loan. 
While this is not identical with systems in common law jurisdictions, it still has effect as long as procedure is 
respected. Rights under permits or contracts can be pledged or assigned as well as rights to physical goods. 
 
Malagasy companies can open foreign currency accounts in Madagascar and can receive and send foreign 
currency. Payments within Madagascar must be made in Ariary and transfers within Madagascar of foreign 
exchange are not allowed. Foreign exchange is freely available and the Ariary is freely convertible.  
 
Real estate law 
  
The holder of a mining permit must inform the concerned landowners of its right to occupy certain portions 
of land required for its mining project, whether or not covered by the mining permit. 
 
In this instance, the permit holder is required to make enquiries in order to identify the landowner where the 
6
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
land is subject to the mining permit.  
 
There is a system of land registration in Madagascar. Land that is registered is recorded in the books at the 
provincial land registry. The topographic service holds an official plan drawn up by a surveyor, showing the 
boundaries of the land. Applying to register previously unregistered land requires an application to the local 
land registry and payment of the appropriate fees. 
 
The registration system allows charges and other interests including mortgages to be registered. In this way, 
anyone making an enquiry on a piece of land at the registry can see at once if the land is registered and if 
there are outstanding claims against it. 
 
Since  2003,  foreign  investors  have  had  the  right  to  own  land  rather  than  hold  a  99 years  lease.    There  are 
certain restrictions concerning the size of land and the investment that can be made, as well as the category 
of activity to be carried out, although these are quite broad. In addition, the Minister of Agriculture (who is 
ex officio responsible for land issues) may give permission to vary from the limits set out in the law. 
 
Once  the  relevant  landowner  is  identified,  the  latest  and  the  permit  holder  must  convene  their  respective 
rights and obligations under a lease agreement. 
 
If no lease agreement has been agreed between the parties, the landowner has the right to ask for the ejection 
of the holder of permits subject to payment of compensation to the latest or the holder of the mining permit 
can continue the mining work if the perimeter is declared a public utility matter, allowing the Ministry in 
charge of Mines to engage process for compulsory purchase. 
The holder of a mining permit must also come to an arrangement with the concerned traditional occupants, 
or the native titleholders, or the usufructaries (beneficial occupants) of lands of its right to occupy the relevant 
perimeter. 
 
Native title 
 
The Mining Code provides that the holder of the mining permit has a presumptive right to access the land 
over which the permit is granted, subject to compensation of owners/occupiers to be set by the court if not 
agreed. It would be usual for formal documented owners of land to be compensated before the work began, 
and for informal “customary” user to be compensated as the works progressed. 
 
Mining law  
 
The point of departure for mining investments in Madagascar is the Code Minier or the Mining Code, which 
has been in force since 1999. This should be read in conjunction with Decree N°2000-170, which sets out the 
technical details for the implementation of the Mining Code and Law no. 2005-025 of 17 October 2005 which 
amends the Mining Code. Its enforcing decree is Decree no. 2006-910 dated 19 December 2006. 
 
The Mining Code covers all aspects of mining. The most important aspect to consider at the present time is 
permitting.  For  all  permits,  only  one  permit  exists  per  square.  The  Minister  of  Mines  must  sign  each 
individual permit, although this is not required for Autorisation Exclusive de Réservation de Périmètre (“AERP”) 
(permit reservations).  
 
Under the Mining Code, Madagascar is divided into squares; the former size of squares corresponds after 
adoption of the new mining code to 16 new squares of 625 m on a side. (Article 232 new mining code and 
article  85  of  its  mining  decree).  Squares  issued  prior  to  this  date  (2.5km  on  a  side)  are  automatically 
converted into 16 “new” squares.  
These are administered by the Bureau de Cadastre Minier de Madagascar (“BCMM”), the Madagascar Mining 
Registry. It operates on a first-come, first-served basis. The system operates in a reliable, stable fashion and 
the risk of expropriation is low.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
7
There  are  three  basic  types:  AERPs,  Permis  de  Recherche  (“PR”)  or  Exploration  Permit  and  Permis 
d’Exploitation  (“PE”)  or  Exploitation  Permit.  Applications  for  any  type  of  permit  can  be  made  either  a 
Malagasy  citizen  or  by  a  Malagasy  registered  company  (SA  or  SARL).  There  is  no  restriction  on  the 
shareholding in the company that holds a permit, nor on transfers of shares within that company.
An  AERP  is  a  temporary  permit  area  reservation.  It  can  be  applied  for  over  any  free  area.  It  gives  an 
exclusive right over the area for three months and it is not renewable from issue (Article 22 Mining Code). At 
the holder’s option it can be surrendered or transformed into a PR. 
 
New permits are each 625m issued in respect of parcels and an Exploration Permit is valid for a period of 
five years, renewable twice for a further three (a total of eleven years) (Article 33 of Mining Code). During 
the life of the Exploration Permit, only activity germane to the exploration, evaluation and analysis of the 
square can be carried out (Article 34 of the Mining Code).  
 
Commercial exports are specifically prohibited.  
 
In order to exploit a square commercially, the permit must be transformed into an Exploitation Permit. This 
is done essentially by completing an environmental impact assessment and paying the fee prescribed from 
time  to  time  (Article  104  decree  enforcing  the  Mining  Code).  The  exploitation  permit  is  granted  for  forty 
years, renewable in increments of twenty years (Article 37 of the Mining Code).  
 
Both Exploration and Exploitation permits are real property rights that can be bought, sold, mortgaged or 
otherwise charged or disposed of (Article 59 of the Mining Code).  
 
Under the Mining Code, the holder of a permit has a right to occupy the surface of the square concerned, 
subject to payment of a reasonable rent. There is a procedure set out in the Mining Code in the event that the 
owner  of  the  surface  rights  cannot  reach  an  agreement  with  the  permit  holder  (Article  124  of  the  Mining 
Code). Similarly, the holder of the permit has rights to construct and operate equipment necessary for the 
exploitation  of  the  square  in  question.  Again,  this  is  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  reasonable  rent  to  be 
imposed if not agreed.  
 
The  Mining  Code  further  requires  exploration  permit  holders  to  undertake  an  environmental  impact 
assessment before transforming their permit into an Exploitation Permit (Article 162 Decree of the Mining 
Code). The terms of this are specified in an inter-ministerial decree known as the “MECIE” decree. 
 
If minerals are found within the permit area that is not listed on the permit, these must either be left in the 
ground or the scope of the permit changed. This would also include fossils.
A royalty is payable based on the value of the product extracted. The Mining Code states that this is 2% of 
the value of the first sale (Article 117). However, for large exports of ore (rather than refined product) it can 
be difficult to define when the first sale takes place. The Mining Department of the Ministry of Energy and 
Mines has defined this point as being the first export sale and procedures are in place to avoid tax evasion by 
transfer pricing.  
 
Any  project  exploring  or  mining  for  uranium  must  form  a  joint  venture  company  with  Office  des  Mines 
Nationales  et  des  Industries  Stratégique  (“OMNIS”),  the  Malagasy  state  entity  responsible  for  “strategic 
minerals”  (which  includes  Uranium).  The  promoter  must  enter  into  a  shareholders  agreement,  which 
typically  gives  OMNIS  a  20%  free  carry  to  US$1m,  followed  by  pari-passu  contributions  or  dilution  to  a 
minimum of 10%.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
8
The non-payment of mining fees within the legal period is subject to a fine of 5% paid within 45 days from 
the reception of the formal notice letter from the BCMM. Failure to do so, the Company may be subject to an 
withdrawal of its mining permit.  
 
Moratorium period  
According to the BCMM’s administrative notice dated 26 November 2010, the issue and transformation of 
mining permits have been suspended. 
 
According  to  the  BCMM’s  administrative  notice  dated  6  February  2012,  the  transformation  of  mining 
permits has been reopened but the issue of new permits remains suspended. 
 
Therefore, all orders issuing by the Ministry of Mines relating to the transformation of the Company mining 
squares  are  valid.  As  a  consequence  of  this,  all  the  PEs  delivered  by  the  BCMM  in  respect  of  the 
aforementioned orders are also valid. 
 
Permitting generally 
The first step for a company undertaking a mining project in Madagascar is to obtain an Exploration permit. 
The Exploration Permit allows the company to carry out research activities. To advance a mining project to 
the commercial phase, an Exploitation Permit is required. One of  
the main requirements for converting the Exploration Permit is to complete an Environmental Assessment 
(“EA”). Included in the EA will be an Environmental Management Plan (“EMP”). 
 
The  Large  Mining  Investment  Act  (“LGIM”)  is  a  government  program  that  provides  the  mine  developer 
with significant incentives. The LGIM application is described below. Included in the LGIM application is an 
investment plan as well as the EMP. 
 
It should be noted that there are no official texts in Madagascar dealing with the terms and conditions for 
mineral extraction, processing or export. 
 
The  principal  documents  associated  with  a  mining  project  are  the  Mining  Permit,  the  EMP  and  the  plan 
d’investissement (project investment plan issued for the certification under the LGIM). 
 
The LGIM issues guarantees that the terms of any permit (exploration, exploitation or environmental) will 
not be changed after the grant thereof. As well as these three major documents there are a large number of 
permits issued subsequently by the various ministries responsible. The majority of the permits will be issued 
by the Ministry of Energy and Mines and the Ministry of Environment, with other permits being issued by 
the Ministry of Territory and Development, the Ministry of Transportation, the Ministry of Civil, Ministry of 
Telecommunications, The Ministry of Water and Forests, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Culture 
and the Ministry of Defence. 
 
The LGIM 
On 8 October 2002, the Malagasy government enacted Law no. 2001-031, establishing a Loi pour les Grands 
Investissements dans le Secteur Minier Malagasy. This law is commonly referred to as  
the Large Mining Investment Code, or LGIM, and was drafted with the assistance of the World  
Bank. The main features of the LGIM are described in Section 26. The implementing regulations, Decree no. 
2003-784, were signed 8 July 2003. An amendment was published under Decree No 2005 – 476 dated 13 July.  
 
This law provides for certain investment incentives for qualifying projects and is a key ingredient in making 
large  project  attractive  investors.  Certification  of  a  project  under  the  LGIM  requires  completion  of 
environmental  studies,  issuance  of  mining  or  exploration  permits,  and  certification  by  the  Malagasy 
government of the investment plan, which must exceed approx.. US$25m.  
 
Certification  can  technically  be  achieved  based  on  exploration  permits  and  an  EA  for  the  exploration 
9
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
activities, provided sufficient detail is available regarding the financing and project development activities. 
Certification ties the project sponsors to certain timetables regarding development, however, such that early 
certification is not necessarily beneficial. 
 
Key benefits of the LGIM include:
Reduction of the royalty fee to 1%;
• 
•  Duty free import of all project equipment and material;  
• 
• 
• 
•  Guarantees concerning foreign workers.
Reduced general tax regime;  
Stability guarantees concerning legislation;  
Rights and guarantees to foreign currency including offshore accounts; and
LGIM Application Process 
An outline of the certification process is presented below together with the key features of the application 
process:
•  Application can be made, and certification granted, on the basis of exploration permits;  
•
The  key  parameter  governing  certification  is  the  investment  amount,  which  must  be 
greater than the threshold amount, currently estimated at 50 billion Ariary, (approximately 
US $25M); 
Certification of the project ties the project sponsors into a timeline, with commencement of 
initial  works  required  within  one  year  of  certification  and  the  beginning  of  commercial 
operations within 5 years;
•
•  Application requires a provisional financing plan and a feasibility study; 
• 
The application outline is fixed by the Ministry of Mines and Energy; and 
• 
The application process has set timeframes for governmental review and approval.
30 calendar days
The application process review expected timeframe is outlined in the table below: 
 
Review  of  the  application  and  recommendation  to 
Minister: 
Minister  confirms  recommendation  and  informs  the 
Council: 
Adoption of the decree of certification: 
Sponsor commits to implement the Investment Plan: 
Publishing the decree in the Journal Official: 
 
The  entire  process  after  submission  of  a  complete  application  may  take  up  to  4  months  from  the  date  of 
application.  Drafting  of  the  application  itself  take  approximately  two  months  after  all  information  is 
available (principally the feasibility study and financing plan), but the preparation of the application could 
well proceed in parallel with the completion of these other activities. 
 
Key Components of the Application 
The required components of the application include:
60 calendar days 
15 calendar days 
as soon as possible after sponsor commits
10 working days
1.  An application letter indicating:
• 
• 
• 
•
The identity of the Holder and the Entity of Transformation; 
The references of the Project Mining Permits; 
The identity of the investors; and 
Information about the intention of creating an Entity of Transformation.
2.  The feasibility study of the project; 
3.  The investment plan as per standard form, including:
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
10
• 
• 
•
The calculation of the investment amount 
The lists of the generic categories and indicative quantities of the materials, goods, and  
Equipment necessary for the building, equipment, and maintenance of the project and any 
public utility infrastructure
4.    Audited  financial  statements  of  the  investors  proving  they  have  the  required  equity  for  the 
financing plan; 
5.    A current letter from an experienced international bank indicating that the project is financeable if 
Eligibility Certification is obtained; 
6.    A certified copy of the valid Environmental Authorization related to the Mining Permits; 
7.    A  document  specifying  the  steps  taken  to  obtain  the  Environmental  Authorization  for  the 
subsequent stages of the Project; 
8.    A commitment to reserve the production for export and the application for exemption from VAT of 
imports in the list above; and
If required by the Holder, a proposal for a different international. 
 
Environmental law 
The main environmental laws in connection with the mining activity are:
•  Decree  No.  99-954  of  15  December  1999  amended  by  Decree  No.  2004-167  of  3  February
2004 relating to the compatibility of investments with the environment (MECIE); 
 Law No. 90-033 of 21 December 1990 relating to the Environmental Charter, changed and 
supplemented by laws No. 97-012 of 6 June 1997 and No. 2004-015 of 19 August 2004; 
Law  No.  96-025  of  30  September  1996  relating  to  the  local  management  of  renewable 
natural resources; 
Interministerial Order No. 4355/97 of 13 May 1997 including definitions and demarcations 
of the sensitive zones; 
Law No. 99-022 of 19 August 1999 including the mining code, changed by Law 2005-021 of 
17 October 2005;
•  Decree No. 2000-170 of 15 March 2000 fixing the conditions of application of Law No. 99-
022 of 19 August 1999 including the mining code;
•  Decree  No.  73-079  of  March  1973  relating  to  the  conditions  of  use  of  explosives  and
detonating substances; 
Interministerial  Order  No.  12032/2000  of  6  November  2000  relating  to  the  regulation  of 
mining areas in relation to environmental protection;
•  Decree No. 2005-013 of 11 January 2005 organising the application of the law;  
•  Order  No.  18177/04  of  27  September  2004  including  a  definition  and  demarcation  of
sensitive forested zones; 
Interministerial Order No. 19560/2004 related to suspension of mining and forested licence 
conferment in zones reserved as ‘conservation sites’; 
Law  No.  2001-005  of  11  February  2003  including  the  Protected  Areas  Management  Code 
and its subsequent texts:
•  Order No. 6830/2001 dated 28 June 2001 relating to the methods and the procedures for
public participation in environmental assessments;
•  General guidelines for carrying out an environmental impact study; 
•  Guidelines for conducting an environmental impact study on a mining project; 
• 
Law 2005-021 of 17 October 2005 amending Law No. 99-022 of 19 August 1999; 
•  Decree No. 2006-910 of 19 December 2006 fixing the conditions of application of Law 2005-
021 of 17 October 2005;  
Interministerial  Order  No.  18633/2008/MEFT/MEM  clarifying  the  status  of  certain 
permits suspended by Interministerial Order No. 17914 of 18 October 2006; and
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
11
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•  Draft  Law  No.  028/2008  of  29  October  2008,  including  overhaul  of  the  Protected  Areas
Management Code.
The principal safety laws are:
•  Deliberation No. 58-60/AR of 8 May 1958 laying down safety rules in mines and quarries
(OJ No. 3879 of 21 June 1958, paragraph 1465); and
•  Order No. 895/60 of 20 May 1960 determining particular hygiene and security applicable
measures in mines, mining research sites and their dependency.
Environmental review and permitting process for a mining project 
As a first step, any person or entity who wishes to conduct mineral prospecting is obliged to make a prior 
declaration to the BCMM (Mining Code 20, article 2005). This declaration of prospecting is valid for one year 
from the date of approval by the BCMM (article 66 of the implementing decree of the Mining Code 2005).  
 
After this, the adoption of the Malagasy Environment Charter and the promulgation of the MECIE decree 
imply an obligation for any public or private investment project likely to undermine the environment to be 
examined either via an environmental impact assessment (EIA), or through a Environmental Commitment 
Programme (known by its initials in French, PREE), according to the technical nature, size of the project and 
the assessment of the agencies in question. 
 
The project practicability study (screening) determines the type of study to be performed (EIA or PREE). In 
the case of a mining area, the following are subject to an EIA:
•
•
•
any developments, facilities, structures and works and jobs that might affect the sensitive 
zones  (as  required  by  Order  No.  4355/97  of  13  May  1997  giving  the  definition  and 
demarcation of sensitive zones); 
any  developments,  transport,  works  and  jobs  that  exceed  thresholds  fixed  in  the  MECIE 
Decree (see also MECIE Decree, annex I); and 
any  jobs  not  subject  initially  to  an  EIA,  but  subject  to  an  EIA  if  there  is  a  modification 
increasing environmental damage.
The environmental permit, issued by the National Office for the Environment at the end of a favourable EIA, 
on  the  basis  of  the  Technical  Evaluation  Committee’s  technical  opinion,  is  a  precondition  to  starting  any 
work located in the sensitive zones. 
 
Obtaining an environmental permit 
The environmental permit is acquired in the 60 days after a favourable EIA is filed, or 60 days as from the 
receipt of the complete files from the promoter if there is public participation by way of documents, on-site 
consultation or a public inquiry. This delay is 120 days in the case of public participation through a public 
hearing. This period will be extended by 10 days, if necessary, for answers to requests for supplementary 
information addressed by the Technical Evaluation Committee. 
 
The environmental permit is valid until an environmental auditor’s certificate is obtained when the project is 
closed (MECIE article 30), or if need be, up to the modification of the project scope, which will be specified 
by regulations (MECIE article 14). 
 
In the case of a mining area, the following are subject to a PREE:
• 
• 
•
any operations outside the sensitive zones; 
any projects with no or little impact on the environment; and 
any project not exceeding thresholds fixed by the MECIE Decree (see MECIE Decree, annex 
II).
An environmental approval, issued following the approval of the PREE by the concerned sectorial ministry, 
on the basis of its environmental department’s technical opinion, is a mandatory precondition to begin any 
12
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
work not within sensitive zones. 
The validity of the environmental approval relies on the applicant obtaining a mining licence (which is valid 
for five years, renewable twice for three years each time). 
 
An environmental undertaking relating to a research project consists of:
an environmental undertaking for research with minimal impact: for operations restricted 
to activities whose environmental impact is considered minimal; 
environmental undertaking for research with standard impact for the operations that are 
not eligible for an environmental undertaking for research with minimal impact; or 
environmental  undertaking  for  research  on  an  artisanal  mining  permit:  a  licence  of 
research and mining development reserved for farmers as defined in the Mining Code.
Obtaining an environmental authorisation 
Environmental undertaking for research with minimal impact 
An  environmental  approval  is  acquired  within  40  working  days  as  from  the  date  of  receipt  of  the  file,  as 
follows:
the receipt of the environmental undertaking for research with minimal impact report and 
requesting  the  opinion  of  the  Ministry  of  Mines’  environmental  department:  30  working 
days from the date of receipt of the report; and 
approval  of  the  Ministry  of  Mines:  10  working  days  as  from  the  date  of  receiving  an 
opinion from the environmental departments.
This period will be extended, if necessary, for answers to requests for supplementary information from the 
environmental department. 
 
Environmental undertaking for research with standard impact 
If  the  request  is  for  a  simple  environmental  undertaking  for  research  with  standard  impact  or  concerns  a 
research project in a sensitive zone, and if the operations of the holder expressly exclude operations in the 
sensitive zones that are inside the research perimeter, environmental approval is acquired 45 working days 
as from the date of receipt of the file:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the  receipt  of  the  standard  impact  report  and  requesting  the  opinion  of  the  Ministry  of 
Mines’  environmental  departments:  35  working  days  from  the  date  of  receipt  of  the 
document; and 
approval  of  the  Ministry  of  Mines:  10  working  days  as  from  the  date  of  receiving  an 
opinion from the environmental departments.
This period will be extended, if necessary, for answers to requests for supplementary information from the 
environmental  department.  However,  if  the  object  of  the  standard  impact  report  is  a  research  project  in  a 
sensitive zone or at the stage of development or at practicability, the environmental approval is acquired in 
50 working days as from the date of receipt of the file:
the receipt of the report at the environmental department and submission of the file by the 
environmental  department  to  an  ad  hoc  evaluation  committee:  10  working  days  as  from 
the date of receipt of the file; 
the transmission of the committee’s opinions to the Ministry of Mines: 30 working days as 
from the date of the environmental department sending the report; and  
approval of the Ministry of Mines: 10 working days as from the receipt of the of evaluation 
committee’s opinion.
This period will be extended, if necessary, for answers to requests of for supplementary information 
addressed by the committee.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
13
Appendix 3
Our experience
As a law firm duly incorporated under the laws of Madagascar, we are entitled to provide legal opinions 
and  consultant  services  on  Malagasy  tenure.  The  CV  of  one  of  our  Partners,  Richard  Glass,  is  attached  in 
Appendix 4 hereto. 
 
We have listed below some of our experience: 
 
Madagascar – due diligence reports for ASX Listed companies 
 
Aziana – From Greenfield Exploration to ASX Listing 
We  have  been  standing  counsel  to  Aziana  Ltd  since  their  arrival  in  Madagascar  over  six  years  ago.  We 
assisted them with their acquisition strategy for exploration ground, set up their Madagascar and offshore 
corporate  structures  and  advised  on  all  aspects  of  their  implementation  in  Madagascar.  We  have  most 
recently  acted  on  their  successful  ASX  listing,  issuing  title  opinions  and  taking  a  lead  role  assisted  by 
Australian  counsel  to  oversee  the  legal  aspects  of  the  transaction  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Exchange 
authorities. 
We acted for this non-listed group of companies financed out of Hong Kong. In addition to negotiating joint 
ventures  with  partners  for  their  various  licences,  we  ensure  that  all  their  corporate  paperwork  on  their 
various companies and licences are always up to date and ready for inspection by potential partners. 
 
Ambatovy Project - Mining Investment  
We  have  advised  the  Ambatovy  Project  in  Madagascar  since  its  inception  in  2003.  We  advise  on  the  real 
estate and permitting aspects of its US$4.5bn investment in Madagascar. The client reached financial close 
for US$2.2bn of project financing in 2008 and we continue to advise the project directly. Issues include an 
extensive  land  acquisition  programme,  preparation  for  and  conduct  of  a  compulsory  purchase  (eminent 
domain)  programme,  advising  on  the  law  on  large  mining  investments  (LGIM),  ensuring  local  law 
conformity with the international financing agreements, negotiating with key strategic partners, analysing 
risk and developing risk mitigation strategies and reviewing and revising agreements with consultants.  
 
Asia-Thai Mining – PAM Madagascar Takeover  
Advising a major Thai group in its acquisition of the Madagascar assets of a Canadian listed company. The 
team reviewed a large volume of documentation at very short notice to produce a detailed report for the 
Acquirer’s board. This included not only mining assets, but a review of all corporate and commercial 
contracts, environmental obligations and personnel.
Major Mining Investment – Hong Kong  
We are advising a Hong Kong-based private equity group on its investment in a US$100m exploration 
project in Madagascar. We have reviewed the shareholders agreement as well as producing a very detailed 
opinion on the permits and the method by which they were acquired.
TSX-V – Joint Venture  
Advising a Canadian listed gold mining company on its acquisition of mining assets in Madagascar. This 
included a due diligence review of the assets and corporate structure as well as advice on the joint venture 
structure, earn-in requirements and shareholder agreements to be put in place.
Coal of Africa – ASX Listing 
We  were  instructed  by  Australian  counsel  to  the  listed  vehicle  to  carry  out  a  thorough  corporate  due 
diligence on the Madagascar assets prior to inclusion in the listing. We reviewed the permit holdings, the 
14
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
corporate structure and advised generally on the legal environment in Madagascar to give comfort both to 
the Exchange authorities and the Board of the listed vehicle. We continue to advise the company following 
its successful listing and capital raising.
Coal Mining in Madagascar 
We  acted  for  a  major  ASX-listed  coal  producer  in  its  acquisition  of  a  coal  project  in  Madagascar.  We 
completed detailed due diligence and an opinion on the viability of the target company’s permits. We also 
advised on tax and corporate structuring issues. 
 
LP Hill PLC – Tranomaro Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Acquisition and AIM re-admission  
We advised LP Hill Plc on its acquisition of Tranomaro Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, a company 
with uranium assets in the south of Madagascar. The Firm worked closely with the NOMAD and London 
Counsel  and  completed  extensive  due  diligence,  drafted  all  the  mining  permit  transfer  documentation, 
created the new (local) project vehicle, arranged share transfers between the parties and co- ordinated the 
closing of the transaction from the Malagasy perspective. We drafted and negotiated the key joint venture 
agreement with OMNIS, the party representing the Malagasy government and issued the corporate opinions 
required by AIM ahead of re-admission.  
 
UMC Mining PLC – AIM Reverse Takeover Advising an AIM listed company on its reverse takeover of a Malagasy 
mining company.  
Our advice included review and verification of the company structure, reviewing and issuing an opinion on 
the  licences  and  licence  transfers,  commenting  on  the  share  purchase  agreement  from  a  Malagasy  law 
perspective as well as advising on the deal in a Madagascar context.  
Indian Pacific Resources – Due Diligence  
We acted for Indian Pacific Resources on their recent acquisition of permits in Madagascar. Our opinion was 
reviewed at exchange and board level.  
 
Jubilee Platinum PLC  
We have advised Jubilee Platinum PLC on its activities in Madagascar since 2004. Advice has included joint 
ventures  with  various  partners,  a  detailed  review  of  all  documentation  relating  to  the  company  and 
producing a summary for the client together with recommendations. A shareholders agreement was drafted 
to regulate the relationships of the shareholders and to set out their respective obligations.  
 
Sunridge Gold Corp  
We act for Sunridge Gold Corp, a TSX-V listed junior. In addition to their joint ventures, we take care of all 
their corporate and administrative papers and provide annual opinions to their auditors.  
 
Energold – E-Golbal Drilling  
We act for this TSX listed mining-services provider in Madagascar and Guinea. We have created subsidiaries 
for the parent company and continue to provide corporate and tax structuring advice.
Private Corporation – Gold exploration and production  
We are acting for Cyprus-based investors in the due diligence and acquisition of a stake in a Madagascar-
based gold project. We are producing detailed due diligence and reviewing all corporate documentation on 
the target. We are advising the client on the most tax-efficient structures going forward.  
 
ASX - Pre-listing Due Diligence  
Advising  an  Australian  company  on  its  pre-listing  due  diligence  and  preparation.  We  assisted  them  in 
ordering their assets correctly to simplify and speed up their listing process, as well as working in tandem 
with the listing authorities to highlight information gaps and rectify these in the shortest possible timeframe.
Burkina Faso and Mali - TSX Listing of Mining Assets 
We issued the listing opinion for a Canadian company with assets in Burkina Faso and Mali on its listing on
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
15
the Toronto Stock Exchange. We conducted extensive due diligence into the corporate and mineral assets of 
the project companies, and prepared a detailed report for inclusion in the listing prospectus.  
 
Ivory Coast – Detailed Due Diligence  
We were instructed by a Canadian finance house to undertake a detailed due diligence of target assets in the 
Ivory Coast. Working with our colleagues in Abidjan, we gave detailed advice on a 24-hour basis during the 
intense pre-closing financing phase. We then conducted the due diligence on the targets in country for which 
we seconded one of our team members from Madagascar to bring experience and direction to the process.
Mali - Bidder’s statement to exchange – ASX 
Acting for a Singapore-listed company intending to acquire an ASX listed company, we verified statements 
in  the  bidder’s  statement  relating  to  the  bidder’s  assets  in  Mali.  We  conducted  searches  at  the  mining 
registry; reviewed the mining permits; commented on the grant and renewal process; and advised on risk 
factors both in the mining sector and in the jurisdiction generally.
Togo - AIM listed junior – Togo acquisition and re-admission 
Advising a London-based AIM-listed junior on its acquisition of a Togolese mining company and its permits 
and assets. We carried out the due diligence on all Togolese aspects of the transaction and issued an opinion 
to the Nomad which was included in the prospectus.
Togo - Preliminary due diligence for AIM listing 
Acting for an AIM listed company we performed initial due diligence on mining assets in Togo. We advised 
on  specific  aspects  of  the  mining  code  concerning  transfer  and  renewal,  made  searches  at  the  companies’ 
registry in Lomé and prepared comments on the local law aspects of the documentation.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
16
Appendix 4
Richard Glass - CV
Richard	Glass	
Partner	
John	W	Ffooks	&	Co	
	
Antananarivo,	Madagascar	
Tel:	+261	33	216	7225	
Email:	richard@jwflegal.com
Summary
Richard	 was	 made	 a	 partner	 in	 2013	 and	 has	 a	 broad	 corporate	 practice	 encompassing	 oil	 &	 gas,	
mining	and	telecommunications.	He	is	an	English-law	qualified	corporate	solicitor	and	specialises	in	
advising	inward	investors	to	Sub-Saharan	Francophone	Africa.	Prior	to	joining	John	W.	Ffooks	&	Co	in	
May	 2010,	 Richard	 trained	 with	 a	 City	 law	 firm	 before	 moving	 to	 Jersey	 in	 2007	 to	 work	 in	 the	
corporate	 finance	 department	 of	 Carey	 Olsen.	 Richard	 manages	 a	 team	 of	 19	 locally	 qualified	
attorneys	 across	 14	 jurisdictions	 in	 Francophone	 Africa	 and	 specializes	 in	 advising	 on	 the	 local	 law	
aspects	 of	 international	 mergers	 and	 acquisitions,	 stock-market	 listings	 and	 drafting	 security	
documentation	(both	on	the	lender	and	borrower	side).	Richard	holds	dual	English/French	nationality,	
is	 fluent	 in	 written	 and	 spoken	 French	 and	 has	 significant	 deal-experience	 within	 the	 Francophone	
region	of	Sub-Saharan	Africa.
Immeuble Assist – Ivandry – Antananarivo 101 – Madagascar
Tel: + 261 20 224 3247 – Fax: + 261 20 224 3248
Web: www.jwflegal.com – E-mail: madagascar@jwflegal.com
17
SCHEDULE 2
INDEPENDENT TECHNICAL REPORT
Page 17
rust; 77 ‘  . _A ‘ ' - ‘ ‘1‘,"
GRAPH-MAD‘A SARL
INDEPENDENT TECHNICAL REPORT
ON THE LOHARANO GRAPHITE
I "MINE PROJECT, MADAGASCAR ' >

‘LJ‘  '4  P-re‘p‘ared by:   ', ‘_ . . ,
 : '“gwi ' 3 mg \‘ .  '
.- ‘ ZSSgptembergtf-Iig,” j_  », ' , M ‘ ' ' F x9
 xqﬁggﬂ. > I“ V m .
    m '  '
 s" i  g'ﬁ-::‘: a ‘1 _ “A. a;
- 3;;   5 '
y
0:; /%
GRAPH-MADA SARL


Client:
Graph-Mada SARL
& StratMin Global Resources Plc
INDEPENDENT TECHNICAL REPORT ON THE LOHARANO
GRAPHITE MINE PROJECT, MADAGASCAR
Creo Design (Pty) Ltd
September 2012-09-25
Prepared by: 
Dr. J. Hattingh
This report has been prepared by Creo Design (Pty) Ltd with all the reasonable skill, care 
and diligence, within the terms of the contract with the client. The report is confidential to 
the client and Creo Design accepts no responsibility of whatever nature to third party to
whom this report may be known.
No part of this document may be reproduced without prior written approval of
Creo Design (Pty) Ltd
2
INDEPENDENT TECHNICAL REPORT ON THE LOHARANO GRAPHITE MINE
PROJECT, MADAGASCAR
DOCUMENT CONTROL SHEET
AUTHOR: 
 
 
 
 
 
CHECKED BY: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED BY:
Dr. Johan Hattingh 
PhD (Geology), Pr. Sci Nat
Date: 25 September 2012
Carel van der Merwe                   Date: 21 September 2012  
B.Sc. Hons., Pr. Sci Nat
Dr. Johan Hattingh 
PhD (Geology), Pr. Sci Nat
Date: 25 September 2012
PREPARED FOR GRAPH-MADA SARL
& STRATMIN GLOBAL RESOURCES PLC
COPY
COPY NO
RECEIVED BY
DATE
Client Copy
File Copy
COPY NO: 1
Please sign and fax / email back to Creo Design on 
+27 21 880 0226 / admin@creo.co.za TO ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
2.1 
2.2 
3. 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
4. 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.3.1 
4.3.2 
4.3.3 
4.4 
4.5 
5. 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.4.1 
5.4.2 
5.4.3 
5.4.4 
5.4.5 
5.4.6 
5.4.7 
5.5 
6. 
6.1 
7. 
7.1 
7.2 
7.2.1 
7.3 
7.3.1 
7.3.2 
7.4 
8. 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
9. 
9.1 
9.2
SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 7 
INTRODUCTION AND TERMS OF REFERENCE .................................................. 9 
Competent Person .................................................................................... 10 
Site Visits ................................................................................................ 10 
RELIANCE ON OTHER EXPERTS .................................................................. 10 
Mineral Tenure ......................................................................................... 10 
Permitting ................................................................................................ 10 
General ................................................................................................... 10 
PROPERTY DESCRIPTION AND LOCATION .................................................... 11 
Location .................................................................................................. 11 
Property Title and Land Tenure ................................................................... 11 
Government Policy and Outlook Regarding the Mining Industry ...................... 15 
  Background .............................................................................................. 15 
  Mining ..................................................................................................... 16 
  Royalty payments ..................................................................................... 18 
Madagascar Environmental Policy ............................................................... 18 
Graph-Mada  Environmental Policy .............................................................. 19 
ACCESSIBILITY, PHYSIOGRAPHY, CLIMATE, INFRASTRUCTURE, & SECURITY ... 20 
Access ..................................................................................................... 20 
Physiography ........................................................................................... 22 
Climate ................................................................................................... 22 
Local Resources and Infrastructure ............................................................. 22 
  Water ...................................................................................................... 23 
  Power ...................................................................................................... 23 
  Telecommunications .................................................................................. 23 
  Mining Equipment and Processing Plant ....................................................... 23 
  Roads ...................................................................................................... 23 
  Waste and Sewage ................................................................................... 23 
  Fuel ........................................................................................................ 23 
Security ................................................................................................... 24 
EXPLORATION HISTORY ............................................................................ 24 
Property‐Scale Exploration History .............................................................. 24 
GEOLOGICAL SETTING .............................................................................. 25 
Geomorphology ........................................................................................ 25 
Regional Geology ...................................................................................... 25 
  Eastern Madagascar Geology ...................................................................... 29 
Property Geology ...................................................................................... 29 
  Brickaville Group ...................................................................................... 29 
  Manampontsy Group ................................................................................. 30 
Graphite Mineralization .............................................................................. 34 
EXPLORATION .......................................................................................... 35 
Pitting and Auger Drilling ........................................................................... 35 
Geological Mapping ................................................................................... 36 
Trenching Programme ................................................................................ 36 
Prospecting and sampling .......................................................................... 36 
GRAPH-MADA – 2012 TRENCHING PROGRAM ............................................ 37 
Trenching and auger equipment ................................................................. 37 
Sampling and Sample Handling Procedures .................................................. 38
4
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 
9.6 
9.7 
10. 
10.1 
10.2 
10.2.1 
10.2.2 
11. 
12. 
12.1 
12.2 
12.3 
12.4 
12.5 
12.5.1 
12.5.2 
12.5.3 
12.6 
12.7 
13. 
14. 
14.1 
15. 
15.1 
15.2 
15.2.1 
15.2.2 
15.2.3 
15.2.4 
15.3 
15.3.1  
15.2 
15.3 
15.3.1 
15.3.2 
15.3.3  
15.3.4 
15.3.5  
15.3.6  
15.3.7 
15.4  
15.4.1 
15.5 
16. 
17. 
18.
Logging ................................................................................................... 39 
Sample Recovery ...................................................................................... 39 
Sample Photography ................................................................................. 39 
Sample Position Surveying ......................................................................... 39 
Results .................................................................................................... 40 
SAMPLING METHOD AND APPROACH ........................................................... 40 
Laboratory Analysis ................................................................................... 40 
Standard Sampling ................................................................................... 40 
  Trench Sampling ....................................................................................... 40 
  Auger Drill Sampling ................................................................................. 41 
SAMPLE PREPARATION, ANALYSIS AND SECURITY ........................................ 41 
DATA VERIFICATION ................................................................................. 43 
Collar Surveys .......................................................................................... 43 
Channel Sample Logs ................................................................................ 43 
Assays .................................................................................................... 43 
Density ................................................................................................... 43 
Assay QA/QC ............................................................................................ 43 
  Standard Reference Material ...................................................................... 43 
  Duplicates ................................................................................................ 44 
  Blanks ..................................................................................................... 44 
LECO CS 844 QA/QC Procedures ................................................................. 44 
Metallurgical Sample Selection, Collection and Shipping ................................. 45 
ADJACENT PROPERTIES ............................................................................. 45 
MINERAL PROCESSING AND METALLURGICAL TESTING ................................. 45 
Historical Work ......................................................................................... 45 
MINERAL RESOURCE AND MINERAL RESERVE ESTIMATES ............................. 46 
Geological Interpretation ........................................................................... 46 
Exploratory Data Analysis .......................................................................... 47 
  Assays .................................................................................................... 47 
  Trench Data Evaluation ............................................................................. 47 
  Grade profile ............................................................................................ 48 
  Capping ................................................................................................... 49 
Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates .......................................... 50 
  Introduction ............................................................................................. 50 
Audit Procedures ...................................................................................... 50 
Mineral Resource and Reserve Estimation Methodology ................................. 50 
  Quality and Quantity of Data ...................................................................... 51 
  Quality Assurance/Quality Control ............................................................... 51 
  Definition of Auger and Channel sample Intersections ................................... 52 
  Block Tonnage Grade Estimation ................................................................. 52 
  Mineral Resource Blocks ............................................................................ 52 
  Classification ............................................................................................ 53 
  Mineral Reserve Estimation ........................................................................ 53 
Graph-Mada’s Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Statement ..................... 54 
  Resource and Reserve Statement ............................................................... 54 
Creo Comments ........................................................................................ 55 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .................................................... 55 
CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFIED PERSON .......................................................... 57 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................ 58
5
Manampontsy deposits.
the ferruginous upper part of the secession.
Landscape at Loharano comprising hilly terrain and deeply incised valleys.
Figures 
Figure 4-1:   Location map 
Figure 4-2:   Location map of the licence areas. 
Figure 5‐1:    Road Access to the Loharano property from the Toamasina 
Figure 7-1  
Figure 7-2:    Madagascar Geology 
Figure 7-3:    Brickaville amphibole-biotite gneiss 
Figure 7-4:   Sampling  point  in  a  trench  cut  into  the  lateralized  graphite  bearing 
 
Figure 7-5:   Exploration  pit  showing  the  humic  topsoil  grading  into  laterite  clay  with  an 
inset showing cream coloured quartz/kaolin rich graphite bearing laterite from 
 
 
the bottom of the pit. 
Figure 7-6:   Trench  and  pit  distribution  in  the  explored  portion  of  the  licence 
 
Figure 7-7:   A trench section showing the occurrence of graphite in the laterite as seen in 
 
Figure 8-1:   Ferruginous laterite scree. 
Figure 8-2:   View  to  the  west  of  Trench  3,  in  the  background,  and  Trench  5  in  the 
foreground,  parallel  to  each  other  and  across  the  presumed  strike  of  the 
 
 
graphite-bearing laterite clays. 
Figure 9-1:   Excavation of Trench T3 
Figure 9.2:   Auger drilling 
Figure 9-3:   Marked sampling point at Trench T5 
Figure 15 -1:  Idealized cross-section of the laterite clays in the graphite deposit at Loharano 
Figure 15-2:  Grade-frequency % distribution 
Figure 15-3:  Vertical  grade  variogram  based  on  weighted  averages  showing  increase  in 
 
Figure 15-4:  Plan view of 3D model of the indicated resource at Loharano 
 
Tables 
Table 4-1: 
Table 13.1:   Shows the Carbon and Sulphur values for Standards used in the Laboratory 
Table 15-1:   Graph-Mada – CREO Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Statement for the 
 
 
Appendices 
APPENDIX 1:   
APPENDIX 2:   
APPENDIX 3:
Loharano project (at 20 September 2012).
area.
grade at depth
Property Status
6
SUMMARY
1. 
 
The Loharano Graphite Project is held by Graph-Mada SARL, a company established 
in Madagascar for the purpose of the mining and beneficiation of natural crystalline 
flake graphite, in an area located in eastern Madagascar some 15 km west of the 
coast  and  20  km  south  west  of  the  town  Brickaville.  This  area  is  particularly  well 
known  for  its  high-quality  flaky  graphite.  The  graphite  is  extremely  pure  (up  to 
99%  carbon)  and  occurs  in  the  form  of  disseminated  graphite  flakes  within  the 
Proterozoic gneissic host rock of probably sedimentary origin. 
 
The  Loharano  graphite  deposits  occur  within  the  central-eastern  part  of  the 
Precambrian  belt  in  eastern  Madagascar.  Geologically,  Madagascar  can  be  divided 
into the Precambrian basement complex in the eastern part of the country, and the 
sedimentary  cover  formations  in  the  west.  Central  Madagascar  is  traversed  by  a 
100-  km  wide,  north-south-trending  shear  zone  of  possible  Pan-African  age 
transecting  the  Proterozoic  and  Archean  basement.  This  high-grade  zone  consists 
mainly of granulites and amphibolite facies rocks, migmatites, conformable granite 
sheets,  and  granite  plutons.  The  north-west-trending  Ranotsara  Shear  Zone 
separates  southern  Madagascar,  where  paragneisses  predominate,  from  central-
northern Madagascar, which consists mainly of granitic orthogneisses. 
 
The  Loharano  license  area  is  underlain  by  the  Precambrian  metamorphic  rocks  of 
the  "Graphite  System".  The  Graphite  System  is  locally  subdivided  into  the  gneiss 
and  schist  dominated  Ambatolampy  Group  to  the  west  and  the  migmatite 
dominated  Manampontsy  Group  to  the  east  underlying  the  license  area.  The 
Manampontsy  Group  is  particularly  well  known  for  its  high-quality  flaky  graphite. 
The  graphite  is  extremely  pure  (up  to  99%  carbon)  and  occurs  in  the  form  of 
fracture and foliation fillings within the gneissic and migmatitic host rocks that have 
been lateralized to clay. 
 
Here  the  graphite-bearing  composite  silicate  metamorphic  rock,  pervasively 
heterogeneous  on  a  meso-  to  megascopic  scale  typically  consists  of  darker  and 
lighter parts. The darker parts usually exhibit features of metamorphic rocks readily 
associated  with  graphite  layers,  whereas  the  lighter  parts  are  depleted  of  ferrous 
and  manganese  oxides.  The  dominant  structural  trend  is  an  approximate  north-
northeast  –  south-southwest  orientation  and  graphite  mineralization  follow  the 
same trend.  
 
Graphite  flakes  and  layers  occur  throughout  the  lateralized  sections  of  the  host 
rocks, but are often separated by thin  layers of barren clay. The graphite content 
and  size  of  the  flakes  tend  to  increase  as  the  clays  become  more  quartz-rich  in 
depth.
7
The thickness of the lateralized host rocks reaches a minimum of 10 metres in the 
historical  quarries  where  the  present  excavations  were  shown  to  be  open-ended 
terminating at depth in graphite-bearing clay. 
  
The  lack  of  outcrops  in  the  Loharano  license  area  prevents  an  insight  into  the 
primary  graphite  mineralization  in  the  graphite-bearing  metamorphic  rock.  The 
graphite  mineralization  observed  is  of  a  highly  altered  nature  in  laterite  clays 
derived from the original host rocks.  
 
An extensive trenching and pitting program was conducted in the permit area. This 
revealed  a  typical  humic  topsoil  averaging  15  centimetres,  underlain  by  a 
succession  of  reddish  brown,  yellow  and  cream-coloured  laterite  clays  showing 
rhythmic  banding  probably  caused  by  chemical  precipitation.  The  clays  become 
progressively  more  sandy  or  quartz-rich,  often  with  small  kaolinized  feldspar 
fragments,  in  depth  and  grade  into  cream  or  greyish  white  clayey  saprolite, 
reflecting the underlying gneiss. The graphite mineralization occurs as sporadically 
disseminated  flakes  throughout  the  various  clays,  occasionally  forming  thin 
discontinuous layers, but in general, in increasing amounts in depth. 
 
A  total  of  588  samples  have  been  analysed  for  total  carbon  and  organic  carbon 
content.  To  check  on  the  possible  presence  of  carbonate  carbon,  6  samples  of 
graphitic  laterite  clay,  varying  in  colour  and  composition,  were  selected  for 
assaying. The average carbonate carbon content was found to be low at 0.20%C. 
The  graphitic  carbon  content  gave  an  weighted  average  value  of  3,31%  C.  The 
lowest value obtained was 0.01% C, the highest value 17.6% C.  Lower grades are 
found predominantly in the top 1m just below surface. The average grade increases 
to  5.15%C  by  stripping  the  overburden  represented  by  the  top  1m  just  below 
surface. 
 
The assay results were entered into a data base from where the data was imported 
into  3D modelling software where the data gets displayed spatially and ultimately 
block  values  could  be  calculated.  From  this  it  was  calculated  that  an  Indicated 
Resource of 421 000t at 5.15% graphitic carbon and an Inferred Resource of 5 273 
000  at  4,04  %  graphitic  carbon  has  been  established  at  the  north  block  at  the 
Loharano licence area during the latest exploration campaign. 
 
Creo believes that the trenching, pitting and auger drilling done near the surface is 
currently  sufficient  for  delineating  a  sizeable  open  pit  with  sizeable  proportion  of 
material in the Indicated category. Trenching data and the 3D modelling undertaken 
indicates that mineralisation may extend in an easterly and southerly direction and 
substantial  scope  exists  to  extend  the  resource  in  depth.  Infill  and  extensional 
diamond core drilling will improve the geological as well as the resource confidence 
in the areas currently identified as targets.
8
INTRODUCTION AND TERMS OF REFERENCE
2. 
 
Graph-Mada SARL (Graph-Mada) is engaged in the exploration for and mining of, a 
graphite  deposit  and  development  of  a  processing  plant  into  a  state  of  the  art 
beneficiation facility in Madagascar, some 100 km south-west of Toamasina and 15 
km  inland  from  the  east  coast  of  central  Madagascar.  The  company  maintains 
offices  and  staff  in  Antananarivo,  Madagascar  and  Cape  Town,  South  Africa.  
Graph-Mada  and  StratMin  Global  Resources  Plc  (StratMin)  engaged  Creo  Design 
(Pry)  Ltd  (Creo)  in  May  2012  to  prepare  an  Independent  Technical  Report  in 
conformity  with  standards  and  in  compliance  with  the  JORC  Code  issued  by  the 
Australasian Institute for Mining and Metallurgy (“AusIMM”), under whose technical 
jurisdiction the mineral resources fall. The guidelines as set out in the JORC Code 
are  considered  by  Graph-Mada  to  be  a  concise  recognition  of  the  best  practice 
reporting  methods  for  this  type  of  mineral  development  and  accord  with  the 
principles  of  open  and  transparent  disclosure  that  are  embodied  in  internationally 
accepted Codes for Corporate Governance.   
 
Graph-Mada  has  two  graphite  licence  areas  but  only  one  has  been  developed  to 
some extent in terms of detailed mineral resource establishment and infrastructure.   
This  report  describes  the  developments  on  one  of  the  two  licence  areas  with  the 
licence number 26670 and called the Loharano Project.  Here the licence consists of 
two  blocks  where  exploration  work  was  focused  totally  on  the  northern  block.  On 
the  other  licence  area  called  the  Antsirabe  Project  located  some  60  km  to  the 
north-west  of  the  Loharano  Project  work  is  still  limited  to  basic  reconnaissance 
exploration. 
 
This  report  describes  the  Loharano  Project  and  results  of  a  first  phase  mineral 
resource estimation based on pits, auger holes and trenches excavated as part of 
an extensive exploration campaign. The report was prepared at the request of Mr. 
Marius Pienaar, President and COO of Graph-Mada under instruction of the board of 
directors  of  Graph-Mada  and  Stratmin.  A  follow-up  resource  estimation  based  on 
diamond  core  drilling  data  will  be  done  at  a  later  stage  when  core  drilling 
equipment can be sourced.  
 
The currency used in this report is expressed in US dollars and, unless specified, all 
measurements  in  this  report  use  the  metric  system.  Coordinates  used  within  this 
report  are  Universal  Transverse  Mercator  (UTM),  and  are  reported  in  UTM  zone 
38S, WGS 84 datum.  
 
The sections on Mining Operations, Process Mineral Recoveries, Markets, Contracts, 
Environmental Considerations, Other Relevant Data and Information, Taxes, Capital 
and Operating Cost Estimates, Economic Analysis, Payback, and Mine Life, are not 
applicable  to  this  report.  All  Illustrations  are  embedded  within  the  body  of  the 
report.
9
RELIANCE ON OTHER EXPERTS
2.1  Competent Person 
Johan  Hattingh  employed  by  Creo  as  a  geologist  with  more  than  20  years  of 
experience  is  the  author  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  this  report.    He  is  a 
Competent Person (CP), as defined by the JORC Code issued by the AusIMM. 
 
2.2  Site Visits 
Johan  Hattingh  visited  the  Loharano  graphite  property  in  his  capacity  as  CP  on 
behalf of Creo, to conduct an independent review during June 6 to 11, 2012 as part 
of his preparation and data acquisition for this report.  
 
Also  during  June  and  early  July  2012,  a  second  senior  geologist  from  Creo,  Carel 
van der Merwe spent 18 days on site verifying the mapping and studying the pits 
and  trench  profiles  prepared  by  Graph-Mada.  During  this  time  a  comprehensive 
trenching and channel sampling program was supervised by Carel van der Merwe. 
 
3. 
 
Johan  Hattingh  as  author  of  this  Technical  Report  states  that  he  is  a  competent 
person  for  the  areas  as  identified  in  the  appropriate  “Certificate  of  Competent 
Person” attached to this report.  
 
Johan  Hattingh  and  co-workers  from  Creo  has  followed  standard  professional 
procedures  in  preparing  the  content  of  this  report.  Data  used  in  this  report  has 
been verified where possible, and this report is based on information believed to be 
accurate at the time of its completion. The author has relied on information derived 
from the following reports pertaining to mineral rights permitting issues. 
 
3.1  Mineral Tenure 
Creo’s  CP  has  reviewed  the  mineral  tenure  related  to  the  Loharano  graphite 
properties  and  has  independently  verified  the  legal  status  and  ownership  of  the 
Loharano Project area including underlying property agreements.  
 
3.2  Permitting 
Regarding  the  status  of  the  current  permits,  Creo’s  CP  has  independently  verified 
the information, opinions and data supplied by Graph-Mada representatives and by 
independent experts retained by Graph-Mada as far as possible.
3.3  General 
The  information  mentioned  in  the  above  sections  was  sourced  from  scans  and 
photocopies  of  official  documents,  which  has  been  supplied  by  Graph-Mada.    The 
author  is  not  responsible  for  the  accuracy  of  any  mineral  tenure  or  related  data, 
and do not make any claim or state any opinion as to the validity of the property 
disposition described herein.
10
For the preparation of this report, the author has relied on maps, documents, and 
electronic files generated by the Graph-Mada management and exploration teams, 
contributing consultants, and service providers working under their supervision. To 
the extent possible under the mandate of a JORC review, the data has been verified 
with  regard  to  the  material  facts  relating  to  the  prospectiveness  of  the  property 
reviewed in this report. 
 
4.
PROPERTY DESCRIPTION AND LOCATION
4.1  Location
The  Loharano  property,  the  subject  of  this  report,  is  7.794  km²  in  size  and  is
located in east‐central Madagascar, 90 km south-west of the port city of Toamasina
(Tamatav),  in  the  Toamasina  Province  (Figure  4‐1).  The  village  of  Brickaville  is
situated some 20km north of the Loharano project block.
The project is centred on UTM coordinates 288,370 E 7,908,060 N (UTM WGS 84).
Madagascar  designates  individual  claims  by  a  central  LaBorde  UTM  location  point,
comprising a square with an area of 6.25 km², the block area extending 1.25 km in
all directions from this central point.
4.2  Property Title and Land Tenure
The claims that form part of the Loharano graphite property are held under mining
and  exploration  permits.    The  above-mentioned  permits  have  been  issued  by  the
Bureau  du  Cadastre  Minier  de  Madagascar  (the  “BCMM”,  the  Malagasy  Mining
Registry) and signed by the Ministry in charge of mining in Madagascar.
Certificates  from  the  BCMM  dated  24  April  2012,  certifying  the  transformation  of
the  size  of  the  16  mining  squares  of  2.5  km  x  2.5  km  covered  by  Exploitation
Permit No. 26670,  in the name of the Company, into 32 mining squares of 625 m x
625 m each, under the auspices of the Toamasina province. This permit represents
the  Loharano  licence  where  the  findings  on  the  northern  16  of  the  32  mining
squares (Figure 4-2) is the subject of this report.
The licenses were issued for the exploitation of graphite and are valid for a period
of 40 years from the date of signature and may be renewable in periods of 20 years
thereafter. This certificate is valid for 3 months from the date of signature.
11
Figure 4-1: Location map
12
An Exploitation Permit No. 24730 dated 5 March 2007 was issued to the Company 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Toamasina  province  for  sixteen  (16)  mining  squares  of 
2.5 km x 2.5 km. The license was issued for the exploitation of graphite and is valid 
for a period of 40 years from the date of signature and may be renewable in units 
of 20 years thereafter. 
 
The details and location of the properties are shown in Table 4‐1 and Figure 4‐2. 
 
Table 4-1:  Property Status
Loharano Property Status
Permit
#
Squares
LaBorde Projection  WGS 84, Zone 38 South
X
Y
UTMX
UTMY
Date
Granted
Expiry 
Date
26670
32
668961.76  797236.99  288369.81  7908060.09  21/01/2008  20/01/2048
Antsirabe Property Status
16
683767.35  863878.14  301492.18  7975041.94  05/03/2007  04/03/2047
24730 
 
Land  ownership  is  vested  in  the  Government  of  Madagascar  and  is  regarded  as 
communal  land  under  control  of  local  communities  using  it  mainly  for  subsistence 
farming activities and small scale brick and cobble stone quarrying operations along 
the western perimeter of the licence areas. 
 
The claims were acquired by Graph-Mada under the rules of the Code Minier 1999 
with  some  limited  amendments  that  have  been  instituted  to  the  Code  by  Decret 
2005‐021,  which  the  Bureau  du  Cadastre  Minier  de  Madagascar  (BCMM),  the 
administration  body  for  mining  permits,  has  published  in  a  brochure  dated  2006, 
available in their office in Antananarivo. The amendments relate to the reduction of 
the permit duration (from 10 years to 5) and permittable square size (from 2.5 km 
x 2.5 km to 625 m x 625 m), and changes to the fees applied. Upon the issuing of 
the  new  decree,  pre‐existing  squares  were  converted  to  new but  smaller  squares, 
and pre‐existing properties are now governed by the tenets of Decret 2005‐021. 
 
The updated Decret requires the payment of annual administration fees for permits 
of 15,000 Ariary (MGA). The conversion rate (as at 1 July 2012) is approximately 
2,150  Ariary  to  one  US  dollar.  Annual  fees  are  equivalent  to  approximately  US$9 
for  research  permits  and  US$28  for  exploitation  permits  in  years  one  and  two. 
Annual fees increase by multiplying by a factor equivalent to the number of years 
(plus  1)  that  the  permit  has  been  held  by  the  company.  Payments  of  the 
administration fees are due on March 31 of each year, along with the submission of 
an activity report.
13
Figure 4-2: Location map of the licence areas.
14
Permit  ownership  is  readily  transferable.  Upon  establishment  of  a  resource, 
Research  Permits  are  readily  transferable  into  Exploitation  Permits  through  an 
application process. 
 
The  properties  have  not  been  surveyed  by  a  registered  land  surveyor;  however, 
since  all  claim  boundaries  conform  to  the  predetermined  rectilinear  LaBorde 
Projection  grid,  these  can  be  readily  located  on  the  ground  by  use  of  Global 
Positioning System instruments. 
 
Most  current  GPS  units  and  software  packages  do  not  offer  LaBorde  among  their 
available  options,  and  therefore  defined  shifts  have  to  be  employed  to  display 
LaBorde  data  in  the  WGS  84  system.  For  convenience,  all  Graph-Mada  positional 
data is collected in WGS 84, and if necessary converted back to LaBorde.
4.3  Government Policy and Outlook Regarding the Mining Industry 
 
4.3.1 Background 
Madagascar was formerly an independent kingdom but became a French colony in 
1896  where  after  it  regained  independence  in  1960.  During  1992-93,  free 
presidential and National Assembly elections were held ending  17 years of single-
party  rule.  In  1997,  in  the  second  presidential  race,  Didier  Ratsiraka,  the  leader 
during the 1970s and 1980s, was returned to the presidency. 
 
Marc  Ravalomanana  achieved  a  second  term  following  a  landslide  victory  in  the 
generally free and fair presidential elections of 2006. In early 2009, protests over 
increasing restrictions on opposition press and activities resulted in Ravalomanana 
stepping  down  and  the  presidency  was  conferred  to  the  mayor  of  Antananarivo, 
Andry Rajoelina. Numerous attempts have been made by regional and international 
organizations  to  resolve  the  subsequent  political  gridlock  by  forming  a  power-
sharing government.  
 
In  November  2009  a  power‐sharing  coalition  government  agreed  to  govern  the 
country until the next election. Based on information provided by the Company, the 
Loharano  project  has  in  no  means  been  affected  by  the  political  situation  in 
Madagascar during this past three years, nor are there any indications that it will be 
adversely affected going forward. As of late 2011, Andry Rajoelina has appointed a 
new cabinet. The 2012 presidential election was contested between the followers of 
Didier  Ratsiraka  and  Marc  Ravalomanana,  nearly  causing  secession  of  half  of  the 
country. In April 2012, the High Constitutional Court announced Ravalomanana the 
winner.
15
The  Madagascar  legal  system  is  based  on  the  civil  law  system  based  on  the  old 
French civil code and customary law in matters of marriage, family, and obligation.  
 
After discarding socialist economic policies in the mid-1990s, Madagascar followed a 
World  Bank-  and  IMF-led  policy  of  privatization  and  liberalization.  This  strategy 
placed the country on a slow and steady growth path from an extremely depressed 
level.  Agriculture,  including  fishing  and  forestry,  is  a  mainstay  of  the  economy, 
accounting for more than 25% of GDP and employing 80% of the population.  
 
Exports of apparel boomed in recent years primarily due to duty-free access to the 
US, however, Madagascar's failure to comply with the requirements of the African 
Growth  and  Opportunity  Act  (AGOA)  led  to  the  termination  of  the  country's  duty-
free access in January 2010 and a sharp fall in textile production. Deforestation and 
erosion,  aggravated  by  the  use  of  firewood  as  the  primary  source  of  fuel,  are 
prevailing  concerns.  The  current  political  crisis,  which  began  in  early  2009,  has 
dealt  additional  blows  to  the  economy.  Tourism  dropped  more  than  50%  in  2009 
compared  with  the  previous  year,  and  many  investors  were  wary  of  entering  the 
uncertain  investment  environment.  GDP  grew  by  less  than  1%  per  year  in  2010-
2011. 
 
The Malagasy  Government  embarked  on  an  economic  revival  plan  as  early  as  the 
turn of the century. The Ministry of Energy and Mines had already initiated reform 
through  the  PRSM  program  (Projet  de  Reforme  du  Secteur  Minier)  with  the 
introduction  of  the  new  Mining  Code  in  1999  and  the  establishment  of  the  Mining 
Titles (Cadastral) Registry (Bureau du Cadastre Minier de Madagascar, or BCMM) in 
2000.  These  initiatives  are  successfully  attracting  new  investors  to  Madagascar, 
including  both  junior  and  senior  mining  companies,  to  explore  and  develop  the 
country’s  mineral  endowment  within  a  stable,  transparent  legal  and  regulatory 
framework. 
 
4.3.2 Mining  
Most  of  Madagascar’s  mining  and  mineral  processing  operations  are  privately 
owned,  including  the  gemstone,  graphite,  and  salt  mines  and  the  cement  plants.  
Artisanal miners are responsible for  the production of most of  the gemstones and 
gold  in  Madagascar.  The  State-owned  Kraomita  Malagasy  SA  (KRAOMA)  was  the 
country’s only chromite producer. Shortly after the military coup of March 2009 the 
interim  Government  suspended  the  issuance  of  mining  permits  and  discussed  the 
possibility of revising some mining contracts.  
 
The manufacturing sector accounted for an estimated 13.2% of the gross domestic 
product, and the mining and construction materials sector, 0.7 %. Employment in 
the  mining  industry  was  estimated  to  be  between  300,000  and  500,000  workers 
(Ministry of the Economy, Commerce, and Industry, 2008, p. 114).
16
After  2009,  the  production  of  most  gemstones  increased  sharply.  Ilmenite,  rutile, 
and zircon production started in 2009. Quartz production has decreased by 91% in 
2009; mica, by 71%; and chromite, by an estimated 17%. The country’s petroleum 
refinery was shut down in 2005.  
 
During 2003, in furtherance of its economic policy, the Ministry of Mines introduced 
the  5‐year  PGRM  program  (Projet  de  Gouvernances  des  Ressources  Minérales)  to 
improve and enforce the legal and statutory framework, particularly with respect to 
mining;  and  to  promote  investment  in  the  minerals  sector  through  a  dedicated 
ASPM  (Agence  de  Promotion  du  Secteur  Minier);  and  to  improve  the  geoscientific 
knowledge of Madagascar; and to address environmental, health and safety issues, 
and to contribute to poverty reduction. 
 
To achieve this, the Code Minier or the Mining Code was set as the departure point 
for mining in Madagascar although it has been in force since 1999. The Mining Code 
was  expanded  and  reinforced  by  the  Decree  N°2000-170,  which  sets  out  the 
technical details for the implementation of the Mining Code and Law no. 2005-025 
of 17 October 2005 which amends the Mining Code. Its enforcing decree is Decree 
no.  2006-910  dated  19  December  2006.  The  Mining  Code  covers  all  aspects  of 
mining.  The  most  important  aspect  to  consider  at  the  present  time  is  permitting. 
For all permits, only one permit exists per square. The Minister of Mines must sign 
each  individual  permit,  although  this  is  not  required  for  Autorisation  Exclusive  de 
Réservation de Périmètre (“AERP”) (permit reservations).  
 
In accordance with the Mining Code, Madagascar is divided into squares; the former 
size  of  squares  corresponds  after  adoption  of  the  new  mining  code  to  16  new 
squares  of  625  m  on  a  side.  (Article  232  new  mining  code  and  article  85  of  its 
mining  decree).  Squares  issued  prior  to  this  date  (2.5km  on  a  side)  are 
automatically  converted  into  16  “new”  squares.  These  are  administered  by  the 
Bureau  de  Cadastre  Minier  de  Madagascar  (“BCMM”),  the  Madagascar  Mining 
Registry. 
 
It  operates  on  a  first-come,  first-served  basis.  The  system  operates  in  a  reliable, 
stable  fashion  and  the  risk  of  expropriation  is  low.  There  are  three  basic  types: 
AERPs, Permis de Recherche (“PR”) or Exploration Permit and Permis d’Exploitation 
(“PE”)  or  Exploitation  Permit.  Applications  for  any  type  of  permit  can  be  made 
either  by  a  Malagasy  citizen  or  by  a  Malagasy  registered  company  (SA  or  SARL). 
There is no restriction on the shareholding in the company that holds a permit, or 
on transfers of shares within that company. In the late 1990s, Madagascar had four 
graphite  mining  companies  that  produced  more  than  16,000  ton  high  grade 
graphite per year.
17
In recent years, national graphite production declined to about 5,000 tons per year 
because of increasing costs of petroleum products used for drying graphite during 
final  stages  of  product  beneficiation.  Processing  costs  also  increased  because  of 
declining grades at local graphite deposits as higher-grade materials were depleted. 
Etablissements  Gallois  S.A.  was  the  only  remaining  company  that  regularly 
produced and exported graphite with an annual production of approximately 10,000 
tons. 
  
The  Antsirakambo,  Marovintsy  and  Ambalafotaka  graphite  mines  owned  by 
Etablissements  Gallois  are  located  on  the  east  cost  of  Madagascar,  in  the 
Toamasina  and  Vatomandry  regions.  The  blending  facilities,  as  well  as  the  transit 
department,  are  centred  in  the  city  of  Toamasina,  Madagascar's  main  port.  From 
here graphite is packed in 20-ton containers for export. 
 
4.3.3 Royalty payments  
No royalty payment system is in place at this stage in Madagascar. There has been 
much  debate  over  this  legislation  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  enactment  of  the 
Royalty  Bill  has  been  postponed  to  after  the  April  2012  elections.  This  proposed 
piece  of  legislation  incorporates  the  government’s  intention  to  impose  revenue 
royalties  on  mineral  projects.  To  date  no  further  development  in  this  regard  was 
made public.  
 
There  are  a  number  of  problems  with  this  proposal  as  it  needs  to  be  linked  to 
existing  tax  legislation  which  clearly  identifies  “mining”  and  “industrial”  tax  rates, 
and the intention is not to facilitate double taxation. 
 
4.4  Madagascar Environmental Policy 
In order to conduct any form of mineral prospecting or mining, companies have to 
make a declaration to the BCMM (Mining Code 20, article 2005). This declaration of 
prospecting or mining is valid for one year from the date of approval by the BCMM 
(article  66  of  the  implementing  decree  of  the  Mining  Code  2005).  After  this,  the 
adoption of the Malagasy Environment Charter and the promulgation of the MECIE 
decree  imply  an  obligation  for  any  public  or  private  investment  project  likely  to 
impact  the  environment  to  be  examined  either  via  an  environmental  impact 
assessment (EIA), or through a Environmental Commitment Programme (known by 
its acronym in French, PREE), depending on the technical nature, size of the project 
and  the  assessment  of  the  agencies  involved.  The  project  feasibility  study 
determines  the  type  of  study  to  be  performed  (EIA  or  PREE).  In  the  case  of  a 
mining project, the following are subject to an EIA:
  any  developments,  facilities,  structures  and  works  and  activities  that  might 
affect the sensitive zones (as required by Order No. 4355/97 of 13 May 1997 
giving the definition and demarcation of sensitive zones);
18
  any  developments,  transport,  works  and  activities  that  exceed  thresholds
described in the MECIE Decree (see also MECIE Decree, annex I).
Madagascar is regarded as one of the most unique places in the World, with over 
80%  of  flora  and  fauna  being  endemic  to  the  island.  Most  of  Madagascar’s 
inhabitants work in the agricultural sector however; many of the ecosystems on the 
island  have  been  adversely  altered  through  unsustainable  subsistence  agricultural 
practices.  In  order  to  serve  both  economic  development  and  the  establishment  of 
sustainable  environmental  policies  and  institutions,  the  Malagasy  government 
created the Malagasy Office of the Environment in the late 1980s, and signed the 
National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP), the most ambitious and comprehensive 
environmental program in Africa. 
 
The NEAP was launched operationally in 1991 with the following objectives:
  manage  the  national  heritage  of  biodiversity  in  protected  areas,  in
conjunction with sustainable development of surrounding areas
  improve human living conditions through protection and better management 
of natural resources, emphasizing watershed protection, reforestation, agro-
forestry, and improved water supply and sanitation
  promote environmental education, training, and communication 
  improve policy and management 
  Establish  mechanisms  for  research,  managing  data,  and  monitoring  the
environment.
4.5  Graph-Mada  Environmental Policy 
Due to the fact that no formalized ‘best practices’ framework is in place for mining 
companies 
in  Madagascar,  Graph-Mada  engaged  Malagasy  environmental 
consultants  from  AGETIPA  (Agence  d'Exécution  des  Travaux  d'Intérêt  Public 
d'Antananarivo)  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  NEAP  and 
its  principles.  
Furthermore,  Graph-Mada  has  adopted  an  internationally  accepted  best  practice 
guideline to help it continuously improve its social, environmental, and health and 
safety performance, and to comprehensively  integrate these three aspects into all 
of their exploration and mine development work.   
 
Graph-Mada has implemented the following concepts and principles for responsible 
mining related activities:
  to  have  proper  management  systems  in  place  that  will  ensure  sound
practices with sustainable development as departure point
  to employ a local Country Manager based in the capital who is responsible for 
liaising with government officials and ensuring the Company complies with all 
environmental and mining policy
  to  consult  with  local  land  users  before  conducting  any  mining  related
activities
19
  to conduct mining activities in accordance with internationally accepted ‘best
practices’  guidelines
  to be sensitive to local customs and beliefs when conducting mining activities
through continuous consultation with the community
  to  ensure  a  safe  and  healthy  work  place,  and  protecting  all  employees, 
contractors  and  sub‐contractors  and  affected  communities  from  risks  and 
hazards
  to allow for working conditions and compensation that comply with national 
laws  and  that  are  consistent  with  international  standards,  and  compatible 
with local social and economic circumstances
  to  manage  the  environment  by  reclaiming  unused  excavations,  roads  and
other disturbances where possible and to re-vegetate reclaimed areas
  to avoid water, soil and air pollution
ACCESSIBILITY,  PHYSIOGRAPHY,  CLIMATE,  INFRASTRUCTURE,  AND 
SECURITY
5. 
 
 
5.1  Access 
From  the  major  port  city  Toamasina  access  to  the  mine  is  gained  via  the  main 
paved  road  leading  from  Toamasina  to  the  capital,  Antananarivo.      This  road  is 
followed  from  Toamasina  in  a  southerly  direction.    At  about  110km  by  road  the 
road  leads  through  Brickaville  (nearest  town  to  the  mine)  and  a  further  17.4  km 
south of Brickaville the turn-off to the mine is to the left where it is marked with a 
large sign.  
 
From the turn-off a secondary all-season road leads to the mine in an southerly and 
later in an easterly direction over a distance of 2.3 km. The gravel road section is 
used  by  heavy  transports  even  during  portions  of  the  rainy  season,  but  may 
become  impassable  at  the  height  of  the  rainy  season.  Figure  5-1  shows  the  road 
access to the Loharano Property from the city of Toamasina. 
 
The  closest  railroad  access  is  from  Brickaville  northwards  to  the  harbour  city  of 
Toamasina, which is the nearest export harbour. 
 
The  capital,  Antananarivo,  is  currently  serviced  by  South  African  Airways  with 
services to Johannesburg, Air France out of Paris, and Air Mauritius to Mauritius; Air 
Madagascar  also  provides  services  to  Paris,  Johannesburg,  Mauritius,  Nairobi,  and 
Réunion.  Air  Madagascar  also  has  infrequent  flights  to  Bangkok  and  Milan; 
domestically,  Air  Madagascar  has  regularly  scheduled  jet  and  propjet  flights 
throughout  the  country,  including  daily  flights  between  Antananarivo  and 
Toamasina.
20
Figure 5‐1:  Road Access to the Loharano property from Toamasina
21
5.2  Physiography 
The  Loharano  project  area  is  situated  within  the  moderate  relief  granitic  hills, 
forming  the  centre  of  the  Madagascar  metamorphic  sub-province  at  the  eastern 
margin of the Madagascar plateau.  
 
The property is covered by dense subtropical vegetation with intermittent areas of 
grassland  vegetation,  especially  in  areas  dominated  by  laterite,  where  it  occurs 
mainly in the central portion of the mining area where red clayey soils dominates. 
Here  grass  cover  is  widespread  and  trees  are  widely  spaced.  Outcrop  is  totally 
absent due to the high degree of weathering of the substrate with bedrock totally 
decomposed  well  below  5m  below  surface  and  probably  even  below  15m  below 
surface. 
 
In  areas  of  lower  relief,  alluvial  cover  is  generally  thicker  and  covered  by  dense 
semi-rainforest  vegetation.  Drainage  systems  here  form  part  of  the  head  water 
streams of eastward draining coastal river systems. All streams are perennial and 
even  in  the  dry  season  soils  are  water  logged  below  5  m  depth.  Elevations  range 
between 20 and 50 m amsl for most of the concession area. 
 
5.3  Climate 
The  Loharano  project  falls  within  the  subtropical  Eastern  climate  zone  of 
Madagascar,  with  elevated  temperatures  year  round  peaking  in  the  hot  summer 
months  at  an  average  of  over  30°C.  The  climate  is  dominated  by  south-eastern 
trade  winds  originating  in  the  Indian  Ocean  anticyclone,  a  centre  of  high 
atmospheric pressure that seasonally changes its position over the ocean. 
 
Madagascar  has  two  seasons,  a  hot,  rainy  season  from  December  to  March/April, 
and  a  cooler  dry  season  from  April/May  to  November.  Rainfall  in  this  part  of 
Madagascar is generally high and very variable. Average annual rainfall varies from 
1500mm  to  1800mm.  The  average 
from  summer 
thunderstorms. The average annual evaporation rate is measured at 2,524mm. The 
high  rainfall  and  high  evaporation  rates  result  in  extremely  humid  conditions. 
Temperatures  can  be  extreme  and  have  varied  between  a  minimum  of  5°C  in 
winter  to  a  maximum  of  42°C  in  summer.  Average  temperatures  in  the  area, 
however,  are  in  the  range  between  a  winter  minimum  of  13°C  to  a  summer 
maximum of 33°C.  
 
5.4  Local Resources and Infrastructure 
The current infrastructure on the site comprises housing units for staff, site offices, 
workshops and stores facilities. A state of the art graphite beneficiation plant was 
designed and is being constructed on site at the moment.
is  1600  mm,  mostly
22
The civil construction work has been completed and all of the processing equipment 
for  the  plant  has  been  installed.  Electrical  reticulation  and  plumbing  has  been 
installed and tested. Commissioning is currently under way with the first successful 
wet commissioning runs completed. 
   
5.4.1 Water  
The main water source for process water is a tributary of the Iaroka River that runs 
all  year  round.  Here  a  150  mm  water  pump  delivers  process  water  to  the  plant 
situated  on  a  terrace  some  20m  above  and  160m  from  the  river  via  two  200  m3 
holding reservoirs. Potable water is extracted from a 20m deep water well near the 
mine village. 
 
5.4.2 Power 
Power is provided to the site by a 300kW generator that will be sufficient to power 
the plant and to provide electricity to the mine village. Back-up generators are kept 
on site. 
 
5.4.3 Telecommunications 
Telephone communication is available via cellular phones with good reception over 
the  entire  licence  area.  Internet  access  is  available  via  a  mobile  network  modem. 
The speed of the internet connection is very slow. 
 
5.4.4 Mining Equipment and Processing Plant 
All  Mining  equipment  is  owned  by  Graph-Mada  SARL.  Earth  moving  equipment 
includes  an  excavator,  two  articulated  dump  trucks  and  a  front  end  loader.  The 
graphite beneficiation plant is equipped with a series of slurry pumps, a screening 
plant, flotation cells, a thickener system and a dewatering filter press. 
 
5.4.5 Roads 
All  roads  in  and  around  the  mine  are  gravel  and  well  maintained.  Water  bowsers 
will  be  utilized  to  spray  the  roads  to  limit  dust  entrainment  into  the  atmosphere 
during the dry months. 
 
5.4.6 Waste and Sewage 
Septic  tanks  and  French  drains  provide  sewage  disposal.  Solid  waste  disposal  will 
take  place  in  small  landfill  sites  in  the  mined-out  areas.  Oil,  grease  and  related 
pollutants are removed by a contractor from site for disposal at appropriate waste 
sites.  Any  other  hazardous  waste  is  transported  to  a  registered  hazardous  waste 
site. 
 
5.4.7 Fuel 
Fuel  is  delivered  to  site  by  petroleum  suppliers.    Mainly  diesel  fuel  is  used  and  is 
stored in a 23 000 litre storage tank on site.
23
EXPLORATION HISTORY
5.5  Security 
Site security is maintained by a team of guards under direct supervision of the mine 
management.  Security of personnel is a company policy directed by management. 
Since  the  area  is  predominantly  rural,  few  police  or  other  security  patrols  are 
common in the area. There is always a remote possibility that local criminal activity 
might spill over to the mine site affecting operations. To mitigate this, the company 
has a good access control system in place. 
 
6. 
 
BRGM  of  France  was  the  first  official  exploration  team  in  the  area  to  conduct  a 
regional  geological  mapping  campaign  and  first  mineral  deposit  survey.  The 
Loharano area was regionally mapped by BRGM in the 1950’s as part of a geological 
research/mapping project under the auspices of the French Government. A regional 
geological map, which straddles the Precambrian geology of the area was compiled 
to a scale of 1:200,000 by BRGM in the late 1950’s and was published in 1962. 
 
In 1985, BRGM produced a country scale compilation of all exploration and mineral 
inventory  data  in  their  files  in  a  three‐volume  set.  Relatively  little  exploration  and 
development  work  was  completed  in  Madagascar  after  the  BRGM  work  and 
therefore,  the  volumes  are  key  to  retracing  historical  and  comprehensive  work. 
Following  independence  in  1960,  archival  research  did  not  reveal  evidence  of 
mineral exploration in modern times within the Loharano region. 
 
A  series  of  excellent  1/100,000  scale  geological  maps  (1952‐53)  are  available  for 
the  region  surrounding  the  property.  The  property  area  is  covered  by  1/100,000 
scale topographic map Ampasimanolotra (Brickaville) Feuille U-47 (1965) 
 
The  region  around  the  Loharano  property  has  primarily  been  explored  for  base 
metal type occurrences although colonial geologic services were alert to all kinds of 
mineral  potential  in  the  region.  Just  to  the  northwest  of  the  Loharano  Property, 
three stone quarries are currently or have recently been exploiting gneissic granite 
to produce brick size blocks for export to the main centres. 
 
6.1  Property‐Scale Exploration History 
The  graphite  deposits  at  Loharano  were  exploited  on  a  small  scale  during  French 
colonial  times,  reportedly  until  1947  when  production  was  suspended  due  to  a 
rebellion.  
 
The workings consist of two small quarries near the central part of the license area 
and  it  has  been  estimated  that  approximately  70  000  tonnes  of  graphite  ore  has 
been excavated.
24
GEOLOGICAL SETTING
Since the establishment of the company in 2006 Graph-Mada SRL has excavated a 
bulk  sample,  between  the  two  small  historical  quarries,  of  532  tonnes  of  ore 
yielding  18  tonnes  of  graphite.  Appendix  1  provides  details  of  the  analysis  of  the 
bulk sample. A sizing test by Asbury Graphite Mills Inc. of the recovered graphite 
showed  that  97%  of  the  particles  exceeded  +80  mesh  in  size.  (For  details,  see 
Appendix  2.)  The  tests  confirmed  the  possiblity  of  producing  high  grade  natural 
flaky graphite from the deposit. 
 
High  resolution  satellite  imagery  of  the  Loharano  area  was  acquired  and  analysed 
by means of spectral analysis to assist in indentifying graphite target areas. 
 
In  addition,  34  pits  have  been  dug  and  sampled,  70  auger  holes  drilled  and 
sampled and at present 955 metres of 5m deep trenching have been completed and 
sampled.  The  trenches  were  channel  sampled  at  10  metre  intervals  and  588 
samples of 1 metre or less have been submitted for analyses.  
 
7. 
 
7.1  Geomorphology 
The  Loharano  license  area  is  located  some  15km  inland  from  the  east  coast  of 
Madagascar on the western flank of a broad, open river valley incised by a tributary 
of the Laroka River into the coastal platform. The eastern part of the concession is 
occupied  by  the  wide  river  floodplain  and  the  western  part  of  the  concession  is 
occupied  by  remnants  of  the  severely  dissected  coastal  platform  where  smaller 
rivers incised deep into the coastal platform to create a rolling hill terrain (Figure 7-
1).  Rivers  drain  the  concession  predominantly  in  an  easterly  and  northerly 
direction.  Most of the concession area is located below 50m above mean sea level. 
 
7.2  Regional Geology 
Madagascar can be described as formed by two geological entities, the Precambrian 
crystalline  basement, 
Phanerozoic 
non‐metamorphosed sedimentary formations.   
 
The central and eastern two‐thirds of the island are mainly composed of Archean to 
Neoproterozoic‐aged  crystalline  basement  rocks,  made  up  of  metamorphic  schist 
and gneiss intruded by granite and basic igneous rocks. The basement is ringed by 
a series of five sedimentary basins ranging in age from Permian to Quaternary. To 
the  east,  it  is  also  bordered  by  a  narrow  band  of  Cretaceous  basalt  and  rhyolite.  
The basement is also cut by large volcanic massifs of Jurassic basalt and rhyolite, 
the  eruption  of  which  is  related  to  the  breakup  of  the  former  Gondwana 
super‐continent.
the  much
and
younger
overlying
25
Figure  7-1  Landscape  at  Loharano  comprising  hilly  terrain  and  deeply  incised 
valleys. 
 
The  basement  geology  of  Madagascar  is  a  complex  mélange  of  intercontinental 
tectonic  blocks  made  up  of  ancient  poly‐deformed  high‐grade  metamorphic  rocks 
and  later  igneous  intrusions.  The  basement  of  north‐central  Madagascar  is 
composed of two north‐south trending Archean domains. In the northernmost part 
of  the  island,  the  Archean  belts  are  overthrust  by  the  east‐west  trending  belt 
primarily  composed  of  younger  Neoproterozoic  rocks  metamorphosed  to  granulite 
facies (high‐grade) during the Cambrian.  
 
The  tectonic  and  metallogenic  framework  of  the  basement  has  been  subdivided 
(Besairie et al., 1964) into four blocks: the northern Bemarivo Block (volcanics and 
meta  sediments),  the  north-eastern  Antongil  Block  (granite,tonalite,  gneiss  and 
migmatite),  the  central  Antananarivo  Block  (migmatitic  paragneiss  and  granitoid 
orthogneiss), and the southern Bekily Block (mafic and felsic intrusions). Figure 7‐2 
shows the regional geology of Madagascar.
26
Figure 7-2:  Madagascar Geology
27
From north to south, the blocks are described below:
  The  Bemarivo  Block  (Neoproterozoic-Mesoproterozoic)  is  considered  a 
volcanic  nappe  sequence  in  the  northern  part  of  the  country.  This  fold  and 
thrust  complex  is  composed  of  meta‐sediments  and  calc‐alkaline  volcanic, 
granite  and  gneiss  that  have  collectively  been  thrust  across  north‐central 
Madagascar during the Mesoproterozoic.
  The  Antongil  Block  (Middle  to  Late  Archean)  exposed  along  the  northeast 
coast  is  a  tectonic  fragment  derived  from  the  breakup  of  the  western 
Dharwar  craton  of  southern  India.  It  comprises  a  complex  of  foliated  and 
unfoliated  granite,  tonalite  orthogneiss  (Palaeoarchaean  protolith  age  3,190 
Ma),  and  variable  migmatite  gneisses  with  100s  metre‐scale  lenses  of 
kyanite‐grade  metasedimentary  rocks  and  sparse  bodies  of  low‐grade, 
ultramafic-intermediate rocks (greenstones). The un-deformed granites yield 
ages  in  the  range  2,540  to  2,510  Ma.  Sahantaha  shelf  sediments  of 
Neoproterozoic age with a Dharwar craton provenance were deposited on the 
NW passive margin of the Antongil basement.
  The  Antananarivo  Block  (NeoArchaean  to  PalaeoProterozoic)  of  central 
Madagascar,  within  which  the  Loharano  project  lies,    consists  of  variably 
migmatitic  paragneiss  and  granitoid  orthogneiss  with  2.75  to  2.5  Ga 
protoliths, intruded by voluminous magmatic rocks, formed within an active 
continental margin setting. The block was  later affected by strain along the 
NNW-SSE  Betsimisaraka  Suture  (BS)  zone,  tens  of  kilometres  wide,  high 
strain  belt, 
facies  metasediments 
associated with km-scale lensoid masses of mafic- ultramafic rocks. It marks 
the  line  of  closure  of  the  Palaeo-Mozambique  Ocean,  separating  Central 
Madagascar  from  the  Antongil  Block  to  the  east  as  a  result  of  westward 
subduction during the Neoproterozoic. The metasedimentary protoliths were 
sourced from the Dharwar craton and have depositional ages of 800 to 550 
Ma.  Eastward  thrusting  onto  the  shelf‐craton  took  place  between  630  and 
515 Ma (Cambrian age).
comprising  amphibolite-granulite
  The  Bekily  Block  is  situated  in  the  southern  part  of  the  country  and  is 
thought  to  be  of  Proterozoic  age.  The  block  is  dominated  by  high‐grade 
metamorphism (Figure 7‐2) and is bound by several prominent shear zones. 
Numerous  syntectonic  mafic  and  felsic  intrusions  occur  in  the  region.  The 
rocks  contain  frequent  graphitic  sequences.  Two  prominent  N‐S  trending 
late‐Neoproterozoic  ductile  shear  zones,  (the  Ampanihy  and  Vorokafotra 
shears), bisect the region, with a third set of en‐echelon shears forming part 
of  the  NW‐striking,  early  Palaeozoic  aged  Ranotsara  shear  zone,  which 
defines  the  northern  edge  of  the  Block.  The  Loharano  Property  is  situated 
within the NNE striking Ampanihy shear zone.
28
  The  younger  Phanerozoic  sedimentary  cover  is  largely  restricted  to  the 
western  side  of  the  island  where  it  covers  much  of  the  Ianapera  property.  
The  oldest  Phanerozoic  rocks  are  Permian‐Triassic  in  age  and  are  found  in 
continental rift basins. Later, the Morondava Basin of Triassic to Miocene age 
formed  along  the  continental  margin,  and  deposited  a  coal‐bearing 
transgressive‐regressive  sequence  of  arenaceous  sediments.  These  later 
sediments correlate with the continental Karoo sequence of southern Africa, 
which was widespread in the former Gondwana Supercontinent.
7.2.1 Eastern Madagascar Geology 
The Loharano deposits occur within the central-eastern part of the Precambrian belt 
in  eastern  Madagascar  (Antananarivo  Block).    The  Precambrian  is  subdivided  into 
Archean, medium to high-grade metamorphic rocks such as gneisses, migmatites, 
mica schists and amphibolites, and Proterozoic metasediments.  The Precambrian of 
Madagascar  is  divided  into  two  sectors  by  the  north-west-trending  sinistral 
Ranotsara Shear Zone. Central Madagascar is traversed by a 100- km wide, north-
south-trending shear zone of possible Pan-African age transsecting the Proterozoic 
and Archean basement.  
 
This  high-grade  zone  consists  mainly  of  granulites  and  amphibolite  facies  rocks, 
migmatites,  conformable  granite  sheets,  and  granite  plutons.  The  north-west-
trending  Ranotsara  Shear  Zone  separates  southern  Madagascar  (Bekily  Block), 
where  paragneisses  predominate,  from  central-northern  Madagascar  (Antongil 
Block), which consists mainly of granitic orthogneisses. 
 
7.3  Property Geology 
The  Loharano  project  is  underlain  by  supracrustal  and  plutonic  rocks  of  Late 
Neoproterozoic  age  that  are  metamorphosed  at  upper  amphibolite  facies  and 
deformed  with  upright  NNE‐trending  structures.  The  supracrustal  rocks  consist  of 
migmatitic (± biotite, garnet) quartzofeldspathic gneiss, quartzite, and amphibolite 
gneiss.    
 
7.3.1 Brickaville Group 
Precambrian  highly  metamorphosed  migmatites  and  gneiss  belonging  to  the 
Brickaville Group occupies the higher terrain due to its resistance to weathering and 
erosion. The gneiss is essentially a white-weathering, fairly coarse-grained quartz-
feldspar  rock  with  amphibole  grains  occurring  in  clusters  and  streaks,  the  latter 
defining the well developed foliation of the rock.  Narrow biotite-amphibole  layers 
are  common  in  these  gneissic  rocks  (Figure  7-3).  Here  the  quartz-rich  highly 
metamorphosed amphibole gneiss and migmatites form prominent hills to the west 
of  the  Loharano  Project  area  with  the  contact  immediately  west  of  the  western 
boundary of the licence area.
29
Figure 7-3:  Brickaville amphibole-biotite gneiss  
 
7.3.2 Manampontsy Group
The  Loharano  license  area  is  underlain  by  the  Precambrian  metamorphic  rocks  of
the  "Graphite  System".  The  Graphite  System  is  locally  subdivided  into  the  gneiss
and  schist  dominated  Ambatolampy  Group  to  the  west  and  the  migmatite
dominated  Manampontsy  Group  to  the  east  underlying  the  license  area.  The
Manampontsy  Group  is  particularly  well  known  for  its  high-quality  flaky  graphite.
The  graphite  is  extremely  pure  (up  to  99%  carbon)  and  occurs  in  the  form  of
disseminated  and  layered  graphite  within  the  gneissic  and  migmatitic  host  rocks
that decompose to clay.
Rocks  of  the  Manampontsy  Group  is  prone  to  chemical  weathering  rendering  the
near surface part of the assemblage totally decomposed to well beyond 15m below
surface.  Here the rock is essentially lateralized into a graphite-bearing composite
silicate  metamorphic  rock  being  pervasively  heterogeneous  on  a  meso  -  to
megascopic  scale  where  it  typically  consists  of  darker  and  lighter  parts  or  zones
(figure  7-4).  No  fresh  outcrop  was  encountered  any  where  near  the  Loharano
Project area.
30
Figure  7-4:  Sampling  point  in  a  trench  cut  into  the  lateralized  graphite  bearing 
Manampontsy deposits. 
 
The  darker  parts  usually  exhibit  features  of  metamorphic  rocks  readily  associated 
with  graphite  layers,  whereas  the  lighter  parts  are  of  an  igneous  nature.  The 
dominant  structural  trend  is  an  approximate  north-northeast  –  south-southwest 
orientation and graphite mineralization follow the same trend.  
 
Trenching and pitting in the permit area revealed a typical humic topsoil averaging 
15  centimetres,  underlain  by  a  sequence  of  reddish  brown,  yellow  and  cream-
coloured  laterite  clays  showing  rhythmic  banding  probably  caused  by  chemical 
precipitation. The clays become progressively more sandy or quartz-rich, often with 
small kaolinized feldspar fragments, in depth and grade into cream or greyish white 
clayey  saprolite,  reflecting  the  underlying  gneiss  (Figure  7-5).  The  foliation  strike 
follows the regional north-south trend and the dip is 500 to the west.
31
Figure 7-5: Exploration pit showing the humic topsoil grading into laterite clay with
an  inset  showing  cream  coloured  quartz/kaolin  rich  graphite  bearing  laterite  from
the bottom of the pit.
Towards  the  northern  part  of  the  exploration  area  and  between  the  historical
workings  and  the  mine  village  in  Trench  2,  these  clays  seem  to  dip  under  the
typical red  laterite soil abundantly exposed elsewhere in the road cuttings (Figure
7-6).
Between the plant and the mine village in Trench 5, a watercourse divides typical
cream-coloured  sandy  graphitic  clay  from  typical  red  laterite  with  no  graphite,
indicating a possibly variation in the primary rock or a faulted contact (Figure 8-2).
The logs of the trench sampling programme are presented in Appendix 2.
32
Figure  7-6:  Trench  and  pit  distribution  in  the  explored  portion  of  the 
licence area.
33
7.4  Graphite Mineralization 
Graphite  flakes  and  layers  occur  throughout  the  lateralized  sections  of  the  host 
rocks  (Figure  7-7),  but  are  often  separated  by  thin  layers  (<  20  centimetres)  of 
barren  clay.  The  graphite  content  and  size  of  the  flakes  tend  to  increase  as  the 
clays become more sandy and quartz-rich in depth. (Appendix 3) 
 
The thickness of the lateritized host rocks reaches a minimum of 10 metres in the 
historical quarries, but due to the high level of the water table in the license area, it 
could  not  be  determined  elsewhere  by  trenching  or  augering.  The  average  height 
above  sea  level  is  20  metres  and  many  of  the  trenches  and  auger  holes,  still  in 
graphitic  host  rocks,  became  waterlogged  in  depth.  Virtually  all  of  the  trenches  - 
waterlogged or dry - ended at depth in graphite-bearing clay (in situ decomposed 
gneiss).  
 
The general trend of the graphite mineralization is NNE-SSW and there seems to a 
dip of 300 to the northwest which coincides with the strike and dip of the gneissic 
rocks  in  the  area.  The  deposits  remain  open-ended,  laterally  and  in  depth  and 
additional  exploration  would  be  required  to  arrive  at  reliable  tonnage  figures  at 
depth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7-7: A trench section showing the occurrence of graphite in the laterite as 
seen in the ferruginous upper part of the secession.
34
EXPLORATION
8. 
 
Systematic prospecting to determine the extent and grade of the graphite deposits 
was initiated at the end of the first quarter of 2012. 
 
Exploration  of  the  poorly  exposed  graphite  deposits  is  limited  by  a  number  of 
factors, caused by the climate and topography. The area underlain by the Loharana 
license is devoid of any fresh and unweathered outcrops of metamorphic rocks. The 
humic  topsoil  is  underlain  by  laterite  clay  and  where  eroded,  by  resistant 
ferruginous laterite (Figure 8-1). 
 
The  limits  of  the  underlying  graphite-bearing  clays  can  best  be  determined  by 
pitting  and  trenching.  The  very  shallow  water  table  would  render  any  form  of 
percussion  drilling 
impractical  and  also  prevents  sampling  in  the  deeper 
waterlogged trenches.
Figure 8-1: Ferruginous laterite scree. 
 
8.1  Pitting and Auger Drilling 
In  an  initial  effort,  during  May  2012,  to  delineate  the  graphite  deposits,  66  pits 
were dug and 23 auger holes were drilled. Thirty-four samples were recovered from 
the  pits  and  70  samples  from  the  auger  holes.  Sampling  was  done  in  1-metre 
sections.  The  pitting  and  auger  drilling  indicated  a  N300E  strike  direction  for  the 
graphite deposits with a dip varying from 350 to 500 W.
35
8.2  Geological Mapping 
Lack  of  outcrops  prevented  surface  geological  mapping.  However,  the 
historical  workings  have  been  mapped  and  on  completion  of  the  trenches  a 
subsurface geological map can be compiled.   
 
8.3  Trenching Programme 
To  further  delineate  the  extent  of  the  graphite  deposits,  it  was  decided  to  dig 
trenches perpendicular across the trend indicated by the pitting and auger drilling 
(Figure 7-6; 8-2). 
 
Trenching started on 15 June 2012 and was completed by the end of August 2012. 
It was estimated that a total of 1360 metres of trenching should define the lateral 
extent of the deposits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8-2: View to the west of Trench 3, in the background, and Trench 5 in the 
foreground, parallel to each other and across the presumed strike of the graphite-
bearing laterite clays. 
 
8.4  Prospecting and sampling 
Due  to  the  unavailablity  of  a  diamond  drill  rig,  it  was  decided  that  trenching  and 
systematic  sampling  of  the  trenches  provide  the  best  alternative  to  delineate  the 
best known graphite mineralization. The obvious place to start  in the  license area 
was in the immediate vicinity of the historical workings. The trenching program of 
this area will  be followed by diamond drilling at a  later stage as a 2nd exploration 
phase.
36
GRAPH-MADA – 2012 TRENCHING PROGRAM
Apart from reconnaissance surveys graphite mineralization in the rest of the license 
area  has  not  yet  been  prospected.  The  reconnaissance  work  has  shown  that 
additional  graphite  mineralization  occurs  inter  alia  in  the  north-eastern  portion  of 
the license area and will be subjected to a prospecting and sampling program once 
the current program is completed.    
 
9. 
 
9.1  Trenching and auger equipment 
Trenching was carried out by means of a Hitachi EX300 32-tonne excavator capable 
of digging trenches to a depth of 5 metres from surface. The excavator has a 1.6m3 
bucket, can lift 11.2 tonnes and is capable of moving 330 tonnes per hour (Figure 
9-1).  The  trench  width  is  900mm  that  allows  the  sampling  team  to  get  into  the 
trench with a ladder to survey and sample the trench. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9-1: Excavation of Trench T3
37
Auger drilling was carried out by means of a manual auger fitted with a sampling 
bit  and  bucket  and  capable  of  drilling  to  a  total  depth  of  5  metres  in  1-metre 
lengths, yielding samples of approximately 1 kg each (Figure 9-2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.2: Auger drilling 
 
9.2  Sampling and Sample Handling Procedures 
The  trenches  were  sampled  at  10-metre  intervals  along  their  length  and 
perpendicular  to  the  layering  of  the  graphitic  laterite  clays.  Samples  were  taken 
with a groove-cutting spade in 1-metre sections from the bottom of the trenches to 
the surface. 
 
The  sample  closest  to  surface  including  topsoil  in  most  instances  was  less  than  1 
metre depending on whether the actual depth of the trench sampling point was less 
or more than 5 metres. Care was taken to clean the equipment after each sample 
was taken to prevent contamination. 
 
The  auger  holes  and  pits  were  also  sampled  in  1-metre  sections.  The  samples, 
averaging  approximately  one  kilogram  in  weight,  were  collected  in  plastic  bags, 
sealed with cable ties and tagged with plastic key holder tags. Each individual set of 
trench  samples  was  packed  in  a  plastic  crate  and  sealed  for  shipment  to  the 
laboratory. A record sheet for each sample batch was created and managed by the 
site geologist to ensure a complete chain of custody record.
38
9.3  Logging 
The  trenches  were  logged  on  scaled  graph  paper  using  the  framework  of  the 
sampling and noting the nature of the laterite clays and the presence or absence of 
graphite in each sample (Appendix 3). 
 
9.4  Sample Recovery  
The trenches and auger holes on the crests and upslope sections of the hilly terrain 
of  the  license  area  provided  sampling  opportunities  where  samples  could  be 
recovered  fully  down  to  5  metres  plus,  but  the  downslope  sections  and 
watercourses  between  the  hills  quickly  became  waterlogged  at  depths  of  3  -  4 
metres.  As  a  consequence  a  number  of  the  sampling  points  did  not  succeed  in 
sampling the excavated graphite-bearing laterite fully in these areas.      
 
9.5  Sample Photography 
No  sample  photography  was  undertaken  due  to  the  constraints  posed  by  the 
narrow trenches and instability of the trench walls. 
  
9.6  Sample Position Surveying 
Sample position surveying was carried out with a handheld GARMIN GPSmap 62S 
and  all  sampling  points  were  marked  with  numbered  wooden  stakes  for  future 
surveying (Figure 9-3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9-3: Marked sampling point at Trench T5
39
9.7  Results 
A total of 588 samples from the pitting, trenching and augering program have been 
submitted for sample preparation and analyses.  
 
10.  SAMPLING METHOD AND APPROACH   
 
10.1  Laboratory Analysis 
Due to difficulties in getting carbon (and sulphur) into solution, these elements are 
not readily measured by ICP Spectroscopy and an alternative technique is needed. 
A  LECO  CS  combustion  analyzer  was  used  by  Set  Point  Laboratories  for  the 
measurement of carbon in the ore and organic materials. The sample is combusted 
in a stream of purified oxygen which produces CO2 from the carbon. The carbon is 
then quantified by infrared detection. Standards covering a range from 0.407% to 
12%  carbon  content  and  being  considered  representative  of  the  average  value  of 
the samples are run with each batch of samples. 
 
10.2  Standard Sampling 
Graph-Mada  employs  standard  geochemical  and  channel‐sampling  procedures  and 
does  not  process  its  own  samples.  Samples  are  not  taken  across  significant 
geological  boundaries,  alteration  types  and  alteration 
intensities,  but  are 
segregated into two separate samples at these points. A minimum sample length of 
0.1 m and a maximum sample length of 1.00 m are used.  
 
10.2.1 
Continuous  one‐metre  groove  (channel)  samples  approximately  12  cm  wide  were 
taken  along  the  walls  of  the  trenches.  The  following  procedural  steps  were  taken 
during the sampling process:
Trench Sampling
  Plastic sample bags are sequentially numbered with a unique series of plastic
tags.
  The trench walls are sampled from the bottom upwards to ensure that there
is no contamination from rubble or fines.
  Two technicians use hammers and spades to gently dislodge the weathered
rock along the channel profile.
  A third technician follows behind to collect the sample material, first verifying
that the sample tag corresponds with the sample.
  The sample bag is sealed with a cable tie with the sample tag inserted in the
cable tie.
  All  samples  are  brought  back  to  the  camp  in  plastic  crates  for  storage  in  a
secure facility until shipment.
  Sound  chain  of  custody  with  a  well  documented  paper  trail  was  in  place
during the sampling program.
40
10.2.2
Auger Drill Sampling
  Sample intervals are set at 1.00 m and shortened based on eventual depth
of the hole.
  Sample  intervals  are  recorded  in  the  drill  log  and  in  sample  books.  QA/QC
sample numbers are flagged at this point for later insertion.
  Plastic sample bags are numbered sequentially with the appropriate sample
number.
  The  geologist  who  logged  the  hole  verifies  the  sample  tag  with  the  sample
book.
  The sample bag is sealed with a cable tie, placed in another bag (i.e. double 
bagged)  with  a  duplicate  sample  number,  and  a  sample  tag  is  inserted 
between the sample bags to mitigate the destruction of the sample tag.
  All the samples are stored in a secure facility until shipment. 
  Sound  chain  of  custody  with  a  well  documented  paper  trail  was  in  place
during the sampling program.
11.  SAMPLE PREPARATION, ANALYSIS AND SECURITY 
 
The  sample  preparation  was  done  at  the  Laboratoire  de  Mines,  Ministère  de 
l’Energie et de Mines, Antananarivo, Madagascar, under the personal supervision of 
the Director, Dr. Georges Rasamimanana. 
 
The samples were dried, pulverized and split to approximately 150g and the sealed 
pulps shipped to Set Point Laboratories, Johannesburg, South Africa, an ISO 17025 
accredited laboratory.  
 
Set Point Laboratories used a LECO CS 844 Series analyzer utilizing the combustion 
infrared  technique  to  determine  the  total  carbon  as  well  as  the  organic  carbon 
content by heating the pulps for 2 hours at 5000 C. This heating process is preceded 
by  an  acid  leach  stage  in  the  analysis  process.    The  percentage  graphite  in  the 
samples  was  arrived  at  by  subtracting  the  organic  carbon  from  the  total  carbon 
content (see Flow Diagram below).  
 
Six random samples were subjected to carbonate testing to determine if any of the 
carbon  in  the  samples  can  be  attributed  to  the  possible  presence  of  carbonate  in 
the  host  rock.  No  significant  carbon  with  a  carbonate  origin  could  be  detected 
during the analysis.
41
All analytical results were e-mailed directly by both and to the Graph-Mada Project 
Manager,  as  well  as  the  consultants  of  Creo  responsible  for  managing  the  data.   
The results were also posted on a secure website and downloaded by Graph-Mada 
personnel using a secure username and password. 
 
  At  all  times  during  sample  collection,  storage,  and  shipment  to  the  laboratory 
facility,  the  samples  are  in  the  control  of  Graph-Mada  and  the  supervision  of 
Creo.  A well managed chain of custody with a complete paper trail was in place 
during the sampling program.
42
12.  DATA VERIFICATION 
 
12.1  Collar Surveys 
The  UTM  coordinates  of  the  pits,  auger  holes  and  the  sampling  points  in  the 
trenches  have  all  been  surveyed  with  a  GARMIN  GPSmap  62S  and  the  trench 
sampling points marked with wooden stakes. Future verification by a qualified land 
surveyor is planned.   
    
12.2  Channel Sample Logs 
Detail logs of the channel sampling program were recorded. The channel sampling 
points  in the trenches are marked and the trenches will be  left open to verify the 
logs after processing of the assay results has been completed.  
  
12.3  Assays  
The  assays  carried  out  by  Set  Point  Laboratories  were  verified  by  a  second 
laboratory, U.I.S.  Analytical  Services  in  Pretoria,  South  Africa.  Here  one  in  every 
eight  samples  was  re-analysed  to  verify  the  analysis  done  by  Set  Point 
Laboratories. The results compared very well with no substantial variation.   
 
12.4  Density 
Due  to  the  compact  and  solid  nature  of  the  graphite-bearing  host  formation,  the 
hydrostatic weighing  method was used to determine the relative density. Random 
samples representing typical ferruginous graphite-bearing laterite clay and samples 
of graphite-bearing kaolinized feldspathic clay were first weighed in air and then in 
water. Relative densities were calculated using the formula: 
 
Relative Density  =                  Weight (air)                             
                                    Weight (air) – Weight (water) 
 
The samples had an average relative density of 1.73 g/cm3. 
 
12.5  Assay QA/QC 
Set Point Laboratories’ standard procedure is to run a standard, a duplicate and a 
blank  after  every  30  samples  for  large  batches.  For  smaller  batches  (<100 
samples) a standard and duplicate are run after 15 samples and at the end.  
  
12.5.1 
Set Point uses the following standard reference materials for carbon determination 
obtained  through  LECO  from  the  U.S.  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology: 
NIST SRM 12h – 0.407%C 
BCS 352 – 6.116%C
Standard Reference Material
43
Blanks
Duplicates
NIST 915b – 12%C 
 
12.5.2 
Duplicates are run after every 30 samples. 
 
12.5.3 
Blanks are run after every 30 samples. 
 
12.6  LECO CS 844 QA/QC Procedures 
Quality Control/Quality assurance on large samples batches are applied by running 
1  laboratory  duplicate,  1  standard  and  a  blank  for  every  30  samples  analyzed  on 
the  LECO  CS  844  analyzer.  The  Leco  CS844  analyzer  is  used  to  accurately 
determine carbon and sulphur content in rock and soil samples and other inorganic 
materials  by  means  of  a  high-efficiency  combustion  furnace.  The  solid  state 
combustion furnace is capable of very rapid and complete combustion of carbon in 
any form.  
 
In  the  instance,  where  a  sample  batch  consisted  of  less  than  30  samples,  1 
laboratory  duplicate,  1  standard  and  2  blanks  are  analyzed  for  every  15  samples 
analyzed.  
 
Various calibration materials (see table 13.1 below) are used as standards for the 
quality control purposes. The calibration certificates are shown in Appendix 3. 
 
Table  13.1:  Shows  the  Carbon  and  Sulphur  values  for  Standards  used  in  the 
Laboratory
Calibration Standard
Element  Percentage
BCS 352
NIST 915
NIST 886
NIST SRM 2766
Reagent Grade Calcium Carbonate
Reagent Grade Barium Sulphate
NIST SRM 915b, Calcium Carbonate
NIST SRM 886, Refractory Gold Ore
NIST SRM 12h
C
C
S
C
C
S
C
S
C
(%)
6.116
12.0
1.466
6.10
12.0
13.74
12.0
1.466
0.407
44
Results for all the QA/QC samples were reported in the final report with the assay 
values, and indicated as such.  
 
12.7  Metallurgical Sample Selection, Collection and Shipping 
Composite  samples  taken  during  the  trenching  programme  and  made  up  of 
channel  samples with  clear  graphite  mineralization were selected by Carel van 
der Merwe of Creo Design (Pty) Ltd.  The on‐site collection, bagging and shipping 
preparation work was supervised by Carel van der Merwe as part of his site visit 
in July to August 2012.  A proper chain of custody was implemented and managed 
by Creo personnel for the duration of the sampling program.  
 
13.  ADJACENT PROPERTIES  
 
Reconnaissance  exploration  work  has  shown  that  there  are  clear  evidence  of 
graphite  mineralization  to  the  south  and  northeast  of  the  licence  area  presently 
being  explored,  but  no  mining  or  detailed  exploration  has  taken  place  here. 
Graphite  mineralisation  in  the  northern  block  of  the  Loharano  concession  extends 
south into the southern block. The gneissic granite outcrops to the northwest of the 
area investigated are manually exploited on a small scale by stone masons. 
 
14.  MINERAL PROCESSING AND METALLURGICAL TESTING 
 
Shortly after the licences were obtained in 2008 it was established that significant 
graphite  deposits  existed  within  the  Loharano  property.  This  prompted 
reconnaissance  petrographic  studies  and  preliminary  metallurgical  tests  were 
completed  on  a  selection  of  shallow  trial  pit  samples  that  covered  the  central 
part of graphite mineralisation at the northern block at Loharano.  A summary of 
this  historical  work  is  described  below.    Subsequent  hydrometallurgical  scoping 
work has  tested a  variety of  floatation options for several composite samples of 
varying grades of primary mineralization.  The results of the more recent scoping 
test work are still to be released. 
 
14.1  Historical Work 
Metallurgical testwork on  samples from the Loharano licence area commenced in 
2008, with samples taken from excavations made during mining activities that date 
back  to  Colonial  times.  These  samples  were  subjected  to  chemical  and  sizing 
analysis  (Appendix  I  &  II).  A  pilot  plant  built  on  site  was  used  to  process  532 
tonnes  of  run-of-mine  ore  yielding  18  tonnes  of  graphite.  Appendix  1  provides 
details of the analysis of the bulk sample. A sizing test by Asbury Graphite Mills Inc. 
of the recovered graphite showed that 97% of the particles exceeded +80 mesh in 
size  (Appendix  2.).  The  tests  confirmed  the  possibility  of  producing  high  grade 
natural flaky graphite (>94%) from the deposit.
45
15.  MINERAL RESOURCE AND MINERAL RESERVE ESTIMATES 
 
15.1  Geological Interpretation 
The  lack  of  outcrops  in  the  Graph-Mada  license  area  prevents  an  insight  into  the 
primary  graphite  mineralization  in  the  graphite-bearing  metamorphic  rock.  The 
graphite  mineralization  observed  is  of  a  highly  altered  nature  in  laterite  clays 
derived from the original host rocks.  
 
The alternating laterite clay horizons can visually be individualized on colour caused 
by iron content (Figure 15-1), amount of weathered feldspar and possibly alteration 
of  the  dark  minerals,  but  contacts  are  often  gradational  and  the  profile  seems  to 
change  with  the  topography.  The  clay  is  less  ferruginous  and more  sandy  (quartz 
and kaolinized feldspar fragments) in depth or at the crests of the hills suggesting 
that ground water percolating through the near surface part of the deposit tends to 
transport iron and other mobile elements to the surface. 
 
The  graphite  mineralization  occurs  as  sporadically  disseminated  flakes  throughout 
the various clays, occasionally forming thin discontinuous layers, but in general, in 
increasing amounts in depth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15 -1: Idealized cross-section of the laterite clays in the graphite deposit at 
Loharano
46
The primary control of the mineralization is the graphitic horizon or horizons in the 
underlying metamorphic rocks and as seen from occurrences in outcrops elsewhere, 
probably  gneiss.  The  regional  trend  of  the  metamorphic  rocks  is  N100E  with  dips 
varying from 200 to 500W. 
 
The  indicated  trend  of  the  graphite  mineralization  is  N300E  with  dips  similar  to 
those  of  the  regional  trend.  The  extent  of  the  graphite  mineralization  to  the 
northeast and southwest has not yet been established. 
 
To  date,  all  of  the  excavations  bottomed  in  graphite-bearing  clay.  The  minimum 
thickness is consequently 5 metres, but the southernmost historical workings in the 
highly eroded area immediately north of the Iaroka River tributary, has a graphite-
bearing  floor  10  metres  below  the  surface.  The  mineralization  model  is  that  of  a 
highly altered and partially reworked deposit striking N300E and dipping 350WNW.   
 
15.2  Exploratory Data Analysis 
Exploratory  data  analysis  is  the  application  of  various  statistical  tools  to 
characterize the statistical behaviour or grade distributions of the data set. In this 
case,  the  objective  is  to  understand  the  population  distribution  of  the  grade 
elements in the various units using such tools as histograms, descriptive statistics, 
and probability plots. 
 
15.2.1 
A  total  of  588  samples  have  been  analysed  by  Set  Point  Laboratories  for  total 
carbon and organic carbon content. To check on the possible presence of carbonate 
carbon, 6 samples of graphitic laterite clay, varying in colour and composition, were 
selected for assaying. The carbonate carbon content varied from <0.01 to 0.38% C 
and averaged at 0.20%C. The graphitic carbon content for each sample has been 
calculated  in  the  manner  described  in  paragraph  11.  All  588  samples  contained 
graphitic carbon, confirming the visual observation that graphite occurs throughout 
the various layers of laterite clay.  
 
The arithmetic average value of the assayed samples is 3,13% C and the weighted 
average  is  3,31%  C.  The  lowest  value  obtained  was  0.01%  C,  the  highest  value 
17.6% C and the range is therefore 17.59% (Figure 15-2). The standard deviation 
is 2.59% C.  
 
15.2.2 
The assay results of the samples obtained from the trenches, confirmed the general 
visual observation that the graphite mineralization increases with depth where the 
laterite clay becomes more sandy or quartz-rich (Figure 15-3).
Trench Data Evaluation
Assays
47
%
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
25
20
15
10
5
0
Loharano - Graphite Grade - Frequency % Distribution
Frequencies from 553 Samples Analyzed
Weighted Average Value = 3.128
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Graphite %
Figure 15-2: Grade-frequency % distribution  
 
The colour of these more siliceous/aluminous and less ferruginous clays is cream to 
light  grey  with  occasional  red  spots.  The  size  of  the  graphite  flakes  also  seem  to 
increase with depth. 
 
In the odd instances in the trenches where the clays contain less graphite in depth, 
this  transition  from  reddish  brown  to  cream-coloured  is  absent  and  could  indicate 
localised alteration or faulting in the primary rocks.  
 
The trenches have not been individually subjected to statistical analysis due to the 
variable  graphite  content.  Areas  of  an  acceptable  grade  are  rather  going  to  be 
defined by contouring of the analysis values.  
 
15.2.3 
The overall increase in graphite grade at depth as confirmed by the vertical grade 
variogram  analysis  (Figure  15-3)  based  on  weighted  average  figures  provides  the 
opportunity  for  selective  mining.  As  evident  from  the  vertical  variogram  grade 
analysis the weighted averages of samples taken from the top 1 m of the deposit 
range from just above 1 % graphite to 3% graphite weighted average of 2.05% C. 
Below  1  m  below  surface  the  graphite  content  increases  drastically  from  3%  to  a 
weighted  average  of  just  below  6%  graphite.  Overburden  stripping  where  the  top 
1m gets removed up to the hard limonitic clay layer just below the yellow clay layer 
(Figure 15-1) will result  in the average grade to increase from 3.13% graphite to 
5.15% graphite.
Grade profile
48
2
5
6
3
4
0
1
)
(
e
c
a
f
r
u
S
w
o
e
B
h
t
p
e
D
l
m
Loharano - Graphite Grade - Vertical Trend
Figure  15-3:  Vertical  grade  variogram  based  on  weighted  averages  showing 
increase in grade at depth   
 
15.2.4 
A  combination  of  decile  analysis  and  a  review  of  probability  plots  were  used  to 
determine the potential risk of grade distortion from higher‐grade assays. A decile 
is  any  of  the  nine  values  that  divide  the  sorted  data  into  ten  equal  parts  so  that 
each  part  represents  one  tenth  of  the  sample  or  population.  In  a  mining  project, 
high‐grade  outliers  can  contribute  excessively  to  the  total  carbon  content  of  the 
deposit. The decile analysis indicated that grade capping was not warranted for any 
of  the  zones.  This  is  not  uncommon  in  these  types  of  deposits  where  the  grade 
tends to be uniformly distributed with very few outliers.
Averages from 553 Samples Analyzed
Capping
Average Graphite %
2
3
7
8
9
5
6
0
1
4
49
Introduction
15.3  Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates  
 
15.3.1  
This  section  describes  the  methods  used  to  derive  and  classify  the  latest  Mineral 
Resource  and  Reserve  estimates  for  the  Loharano  project.  CREO  was  responsible 
for the calculation of Graph-Mada’s Mineral Resource and Reserve figures.  
 
15.2  Audit Procedures  
Creo  has  independently  verified  the  underlying  sampling  and  assay  data.  Creo 
considers  that  given  the  extensive  sampling  program,  geological  investigations, 
independent  check  assaying  and,  in  certain  instances,  independent  audits,  the 
estimates reflect an appropriate level of confidence.  
 
The Mineral Resources and Reserves estimates use the terms and definitions as set 
out by JORC. Further, the Indicated Mineral Resources are inclusive of those Mineral 
Resources modified to produce Mineral Reserves.  
 
15.3  Mineral Resource and Reserve Estimation Methodology  
The same method of estimating the mineral resources and reserves is used at each 
of the areas that comprise the graphite resource in the Loharano concession. The 
estimation of resource and reserve blocks is not typical of a mining operation where 
the value of resource blocks are estimated and classified well ahead of the mining 
blocks presently being developed and mined.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15-4: Plan view of 3D model of the indicated resource at Loharano
50
Quality and Quantity of Data
Because of the highly erratic nature of both the graphite mineralisation zones and 
of the grade within them, most of the data for evaluating resource blocks is derived 
from  development  adjacent  to  the  mining  blocks  and  from  the  position  of  the 
present mining.  
 
The continuity of grade values within the mineralised horizons is based primarily on 
experience that has been gained from mining the graphite deposit in the past and 
experience that has been gained from the study of soil profile development and of 
its advanced state of alteration of the primary rock. Mineral Resource and Reserve 
blocks have been defined based on this information. The graphite deposit geometry 
has  been  modelled  using  the  GEMCOM  Surpac®  3D  modelling  software.  This 
software  allows  the  three-dimensional  structure  of  the  mineralised  volume  to  be 
viewed graphically. This is used as a tool for visualising grade continuity and is an 
aid for mine planning.  
 
15.3.1 
Within  the  exploration  trenches  that  were  cut  perpendicular  to  the  graphite  body, 
channel sampling was performed at 10m intervals. The orientation and spacing of 
the trenches are relatively consistent but the channel sample positions between the 
various  trenches  are  although  at  set  10m  intervals,  not  that  uniform  between 
trenches. Therefore the spacing of channel samples and auger samples was not on 
a definite grid, however, the layout of sample points was totally unbiased and not 
influenced  by  any  geological  features.  The  assay  results  were  entered  into  a  data 
base  from  where  the  data  was  imported  into  the  Surpac®  3D  modelling  software 
where  the  data  gets  displayed  spatially  and  ultimately  block  values  could  be 
calculated.  
 
15.3.2 
Samples  were  prepared  at  the  Laboratoire  de  Mines,  Ministère  de  l’Energie  et  de 
Mines,  Antananarivo,  Madagascar,  under  the  personal  supervision  of  the  Director, 
Dr. Georges Rasamimanana. 
 
The samples were dried, pulverized and split to approximately 150g and the sealed 
pulps shipped to Set Point Laboratories, Johannesburg, South Africa, an ISO 17025 
accredited  laboratory.  Setpoint  is  accredited  with  SANAS  and  conducts  its  own 
quality checks to retain this rating. Graph-Mada performed random checks on the 
performance of the laboratory in the form of blank or duplicate samples.  
 
Although being an accredited laboratory, where the standards are supposedly kept 
to  a  high  standard,  the  use  of  simple  sample  checks  (duplicates,  blanks  and 
standards) are used as a standard procedure by Graph-Mada. An umpire laboratory 
was used to confirm the accuracy of the Set Point analysis by re-analysing one in 
eight samples at a second independent laboratory.
Quality Assurance/Quality Control
51
Block Tonnage Grade Estimation
Definition of Auger and Channel sample Intersections
15.3.3  
Graphite intersections are defined as all channel samples in the trenches and auger 
sample intersecting the graphite deposit, irrespective of the sample grade. For both 
auger drillhole and channel sampling, a minimum sampling width of 100cm is used 
to  conform  to  the  equipment  scale  used  during  mechanical  mining.  Where  the 
graphite deposit width is less than 1 metre, the samples are excluded.  
 
15.3.4 
The  mine  is  split  into  sub-areas  defined  by  graphite  mineralisation  type.  Within 
these  areas,  ore  resource  blocks  are  defined  adjacent  to  development  ends  and 
could  be  adjacent  to  previous  mining.  The  3D  visualisation  of  the  orebody  within 
GEMCOM  Surpac®  helps  defining  the  blocks  in  relation  to  the  orebody  geometry. 
Blocks are generally 20m on strike and 5m in the dip direction.  
 
Where blocks are defined adjacent to a development end only, the grade and true 
width  of  the  graphite  deposit  in  the  block  are  estimated  by  calculating  the 
arithmetic mean or “stretch average” of the samples along the development end. If 
the  sample  spacing  is  at  the  standard  3m,  then  the  block  value  is  derived  by 
calculating the average value of the samples.  
 
If  the  sample  interval  is  variable  then  the  block  is  assigned  the  length-weighted 
arithmetic mean of the strip averages. If the resource block is surrounded by other 
sampling, either by previous trench sampling or exploration boreholes, the block is 
assigned values based on the mean of the surrounding sampling, weighted by the 
inverse of the distance from the sampling to the centre of the block. In each case, 
one  mean  value  is  determined  for  each  channel  sampling  section  first  and  the 
means are then averaged.  
 
The number and spacing of auger drillholes and channels intersecting the graphite 
deposit  is  dictated  by  the  position  of  the  exploration  development  with  respect  to 
the orientation of the graphite deposit being explored. Because of this, there is no 
set  augerhole  spacing  and  the  number  of  augerholes  available  to  estimate  block 
values  varies  from  place  to  place.  This  parameter  cannot  therefore  be  used  as  a 
Resource classification criterion.  
 
15.3.5  
In selecting Resource blocks to be included in a mineral resource statement, a cut-
off  grade  of  2%  graphitic  carbon  is  applied.  This  is  an  economic  cut-off  based  on 
cash-flow analysis. However, some resource blocks that are below the cut-off grade 
are included within the 15-Year Forecast plan, where the blocks are required to be 
mined  to  extract  the  economic  pay  portion  of  the  total  resource,  either  for 
geological or geotechnical considerations.
Mineral Resource Blocks
52
For Graph-Mada to include a resource block in the reserves, it must satisfy one of 
the following:
  Immediately available blocks 
  Resource  blocks  that  are  adjacent  to  current  mining  areas,  have  all  mining
infrastructure in place and are fully equipped with services; or
  Blocks not immediately available 
  Resource blocks which can be made available within one month.
A  block  tonnage  is  calculated  for  each  Resource  block  using  the  estimated  true 
thickness, the block area and by using an average specific gravity (SG) for each of 
the  mine  areas  (sections).  A  density  value  of  1.73t/m3  is  used.  Development  and 
waste  rock  is  also  assigned  a  density  of  1.73t/m3.  The  SG  values  have  generally 
been accepted as being correct. The values were checked for accuracy in mid-2012. 
Detailed variation of true block densities around these accepted standards has been 
found to be very consistent.  
 
15.3.6  
The resource blocks are classified  into Indicated and Inferred  Resources based on 
the following criteria:
Classification
  Indicated Mineral Resources: Indicated blocks are blocks bounded by sampling 
on one side, or where the down dip continuation of a block has been demonstrated 
by  augerhole  or  channel  sample  intersections.  In  most  cases,  Indicated  Resource 
blocks are mainly near surface where more data sets are available and are normally 
the blocks with the highest density of channel and auger samples.
  Inferred Mineral Resources: Blocks where geological interpretation suggests that 
continued  mineralisation  is  likely  even  where  no  drilling  information  is  available. 
These  blocks  occur  adjacent  to  Indicated  Mineral  Resource  blocks  and  in  most 
instances below the Indicated Mineral Resource blocks where the deepest deposit is 
open  ended  in  depth.  Channel  sample  data  is  not  available  for  these  blocks  but 
auger sample data is available. 
 
15.3.7
Mineral Reserve Estimation Mineral Reserves are derived from 
Mineral Resources by
  the application of appropriate in–situ cut-offs (which vary from orebody to orebody
and from one part  of the deposit to the next part of the deposit);
  the addition of dilution and development mining tonnes;  
  the exclusion of those blocks within boundary, safety restrictions and also those not 
mineable  from  the  current  infrastructure  or  using  the  currently  employed  mining 
methods;
  the  application  of  block  factors,  mine  call  factors  and  plant  recovery  factors  such
that the resulting estimates reflect yield grades.
53
Resource and Reserve Statement
15.4  Graph-Mada’s Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Statement  
 
15.4.1 
No  audited  Mineral  Resource  and  Mineral  Reserve  statement  for  Graph-Mada’s 
Loharano concession was previously issued.  
 
A combined Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve statement for Graph-Mada as at 
20 September 2012 is presented in Table 1-1. The statement in Table 1-1 presents 
the  total  estimated  resources  and  reserves  at  Loharano.  All  resources  have  been 
estimated using a cut-off grade of 2%/t.  
 
This  statement  is  valid  until  31  March  2013  and  includes  adjustments  to  take 
account  of  mining  depletion  for  the  six  months  to  April  2013.  The  stated  Mineral 
Resources  are  inclusive  of  those  Mineral  Resources  upgraded  to  Mineral  Reserves 
following the application of technical and economic factors.  
 
The  conversion  factor  for  Indicated  Resources  into  reserves  for  the  mine  is  lower 
than would normally be expected. This is particularly true for the southern part of 
the  orebody,  where  the  conversion  rates  are  around  40%,  since  many  of  the 
resource blocks are scattered in old mining areas that would require re-surfacing of 
the terrain to make it accessible. The feasibility of re-shaping and preparing these 
areas must still be investigated before these blocks can be included in the reserves.  
 
 
Table 15-1: Graph-Mada – CREO Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Statement 
for the Loharano project (at 20 September 2012). 
 
Mineral Reserve Category   
 
Grade  
(%)
Contained 
Graphite 
(ton)
Contained 
Graphite  
(ton)
Tonnage  
(kt)
Grade  
(%)
Classification
Classification
Total 
Probable
Total 
Reserves
0
0
Total 
Indicated
421
421   5.15
Total Inferred
5,273   4.04
21,630
213,029
Total 
Resources
5,694
54
Mineral Resource Category
Tonnage  
(kt)
15.5  Creo Comments  
Creo  considers  that  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  trenching,  drilling,  sampling, 
sample preparation and handling is sufficient to delineate the Mineral Resources to 
the  level  of  confidence  implied  by  the  classification  used  in  the  audited  Mineral 
Resource and Mineral Reserve statement given above.  
 
The  cautionary  approach  in  the  declaration  of  mineral  resources  and  mineral 
reserves is a consequence of the inability to predict even over short distances the 
extent  and  grade  of  the  deposit  due  to  the  complex  geological  and  structural 
controls  of  the  mineralisation  and  the  correct  interpretations  thereof  of  these 
structural  features.  The  approach  used  by  Creo  to  derive  their  Mineral  Resource 
estimates is generally considered to be appropriate to the orebody being evaluated 
and in line with generally accepted norms and standards.   
 
The  estimation  method  of  Resource  and  Reserve  blocks  from  sample  data  is  not 
based only on actual grade continuity and on geostatistically proven methods and 
parameters,  but  also  on  historically  accepted  methods  using  arithmetic  averaging 
and  inverse  distance  weighting  to  estimate  block  values.  The  classification  of 
mineral resources is based on the availability and position of data in relation to the 
block  being  classified.  The  spatial  extent  of  measured  resources  is  limited  by  a 
distance  that  is  historically  accepted  and  not  based  on  the  measured  accuracy  of 
the estimation. When comparing successive resource estimates, it is noted that the 
Indicated  Resources  remain  relatively  constant,  while  the  Inferred  Resources  are 
slowly depleted. It must be accepted that despite the complexity of the mineralised 
horizons and the estimation techniques applied, the estimation methodology should 
determine  estimates  of  the  block  grades  which  are  on  average  equal  to  the  true 
mean estimates.  
 
Creo  considers  there  is  good  potential  for  the  delineation  of  further  Mineral 
Resources  and  Mineral  Reserves  following  ongoing  exploration  and  development. 
The  Graph-Mada  economic  model  includes  an  annual  revolving  drilling  budget  to 
investigate  the  extensions  to  known  graphite  deposits  outside  of  the  currently 
defined Mineral Resource base. 
 
16.  CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Based on the information presented, Creo considers the data collection procedures 
applied  during  the  sampling  phase  appropriate  and  the  sample  database  suitable 
for the purpose of resource estimation.   
 
Creo believes that the trenching, pitting and auger drilling done in the near surface 
horizon is currently sufficient for delineating a sizeable open pit with an appreciable 
proportion of material in the Indicated category.
55
Trenching data and the 3D modelling undertaken indicates that mineralisation may 
extend in an easterly and southerly direction and substantial scope exists to extend 
the resource in depth.  Infill and extensional diamond core drilling will improve the 
geological  as  well  as  the  resource  confidence  in  the  areas  currently  identified  as 
targets.    
 
  C r e o  recommends the following:
  Future  core  drilling  campaigns  should  focus  on  the  following
areas:
  The drill program should be delineated with a drill spacing of 100 m 
to  define  additional  inferred  resources,  with  the  main  goal  of  the 
program to  establish the  true  strike  length  and  width  of  the  deposit 
and delineate additional tonnes that can be included in a preliminary 
economic assessment.
  The resource model of the Loharano deposit is currently supported by 
trench  data  for  the  area  between  the  mine  village  and  the  Graph-
mada plant.  C r e o  consider these areas as high priority targets for 
diamond  drilling  that  should  be  conducted  in  Phase  I  of  the 
exploration  program  especially  to  the  south  and  to  a  depth  of  30m 
below the mine floor elevation.
  Phase II of the exploration program should be an infill program with a 
drill  spacing of 50 m to upgrade the inferred resources, with the main 
goal of the program to establish an updated indicated resource.
  Graph-mada  should  also  focus  on  extending  the  resources  at  the 
southern  Loharano  block  with  additional  trenching  followed  by  a 
limited  exploratory  drill  program.  To  the  south,  additional  drilling 
may extend the mineralization to the south since the trenches appear 
to indicate continuation of mineralization.
Following  the  site  visit,  audit  of  the  project  database,  and  review  of  the  QA/QC 
program, Creo recommends the following:
  The samples should be submitted to a secondary laboratory not previously
used by Graph-mada.
  It  is  also  recommended that Graph-mada  modify the  insertion of  blank 
samples into the sample stream, it is preferred that samples be inserted 
following samples that return high‐grade graphite.
Pulps from earlier assays should be inserted in the sample stream with a new tag 
number  in  order  to  incorporate  a  blind  pulp  duplicate  procedure  into  the  QA/QC 
protocol.
56
17.  CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFIED PERSON 
 
Johan Hattingh 
I,  Johan  Hattingh  of  Stellenbosch,  South  Africa,  do  hereby  certify  that  as  the 
author  of  this  Independent  Technical  Report  on  the  Loharano  Graphite  Mine 
Project,  Madagascar,”  dated  September  25  2012,  I  hereby  make  the  following 
statements:
  I  am  a  Principal  Resource  Geologist  with  Creo  Design  (Pty)  Ltd.  with  a 
business address at 9 Quantum Street, Unit 20, Techno Park, Stellenbosch, 
South Africa.
  I am a graduate of Stellenbosch University (B.Sc., 1985; B.Sc. Hons., 1988)
and University of Port Elizabeth (M.Sc., 1992; Ph.D. Geology, 1996).
  I am a member in good standing of the Geological Society of South Africa 
and  I  am  registered  with  The  South  African  Council  for  Natural  Scientific 
Professionals (Registration #400112/93).
  I  have  practiced  my  profession  in  the  mining  industry  continuously  since
graduation.
  I did visit the property during June/July 2012 
  I have read the  definition  of  “qualified  person”  set out  in  JORC and  certify 
that,  by  reason  of  my  education,  affiliation  with  a  professional  association 
(as  defined  in  JORC),  and  past  relevant  work  experience,  I  fulfil  the 
requirements to be a “qualified person” for the purpose of JORC.
  My  relevant  experience  with  respect  to  resource  modelling  includes  23 
years  experience in  the  mining  sector  covering exploration geology, mine 
geology,  grade  control,  and  resource  modelling.  I  was  involved  in 
numerous  projects  around  the  world  in  both  base  metals  and  precious 
stone and metals deposits.
  I  am  responsible  for  the  entire  content  of  this  technical  report  titled 
“Independent  Technical  Report  on  the  Loharano  Graphite  Mine  Project, 
Madagascar,” dated September 25, 2012”.
  I have no prior involvement with the property that is the subject of the
Technical Report.
  As  of  the  date  of  this  Certificate,  to  my  knowledge,  information,  and 
belief,  this  technical  report  contains  all  scientific  and  technical 
information that is required to be disclosed to make the technical report 
not misleading.
th day of September 2012.
Signed and dated this 25
 
 
 
 
J. Hattingh  
Ph.D. Geology, Pr. Sci Nat
57
Besairie,  H.  (1964).  Madagascar,  Carte  Géologique  1/1,000,000.  In 
three sheets, Antananarivo.
Besairie,  H.  (1964).  Madagascar,  Carte  Géologique  1/1,00,000.  In 
one sheet, Ampasimanolotra (Brickaville). 
 
BRGM  (1985).  Plan  Directeur  d’Actions  Pour  la  Mise  en  Valeur  des 
Ressources du Sol et du Sous‐Sol de Madagascar, Direction des Mines 
et  de  la  Géologie,  Contrat  d’etude  No  01/84/MIEM‐DME/FED,  Three 
volumes: Premier Phase‐Premier partie 573 pp; ‐ Deuxieme partie 418 
pp; Deuxieme Phase 146 pp.
18.  REFERENCES
58
APPENDIX 1:
59
Mesh Screen Anansis 1 . 2
Mesh mm Lab No.1 Lab No.2
(‘36) (56)
s 3.35 0.00 i 0.00
[a 2.35 Trace ‘ Trace
‘10 2.00 Trace Trace
{14 1.41 0.10 i 0.10
{16 1.19 0.30 i 0. 30
[20 0.350 3.30 i 3. 20
30 0.600 14.20 14.20
40 0.425 27.10 27.50
[50 0.300 24.00 ‘ 2500
so 0250 10.90 10.90
{70 0.212 7.10 ‘ 7.00
[110 0.180 4.00 \ 4.00
[100 0.150 2.00 i 2.50
200 0.015 3.50 i 3.40
‘210 0.053 0.70 \ 0.70
[325 0.045 0.30 i 0. :0
‘PAN n/a 0.70 ‘ 0.50
[+ 50 mesh 0.300 an ‘ 70.40
[+ 30 mesh 0.100 511 i 92.2
summav
111e (wa samples we received are between 90 and 91 LOL
111ere are siill Iois of debris such as wood and organic mauer ihal reﬂec: the limited upgrade of
mese flakes.
We also shave a lot 0f stones present.
A10 size level we have a very good + 80 mesh ﬂake (91 792% +80 mesh) bui ii is 100 ﬁne 10 be a +50
mesh ﬂake (70% v 50 mesh].
/
60 //
Creo %
n is r 1: N
swemm 5m


APPENDIX 2:  
 
Asbury Graphite Mills Inc. Founded 1895
405 Old Main Street • P.O. Box 
Asbury, NJ  08802 
144 
Tel:  908-537-2155  Fax: 908-
 
 
Internet: www.asbury.com 
537-6989
A Division of
To:  Graph-Mada Sarl 
      Lot IVM 104 NK - 67 HA SUD 
      Antananarivo 101 
      Madagascar 
 
Asbury Graphite Mills, Inc. sizing test results showed the following results from the 
graphite ore sample provided.  
 
Particle Size: 
+10 mesh     0.86 % 
+20 mesh   12.22 % 
+30 mesh   26.32 % 
+40 mesh   32.48 % 
+50 mesh   17.03 % 
+60 mesh     4.61 % 
+70 mesh     2.31 % 
+80 mesh     1.22 % 
+100 mesh   0.74 % 
-100 mesh    2.21 % 
 
 
If anyone has any questions or needs additional  information please contact me at 
any time. 
 
Best regards, 
Stephen Riddle 
Asbury Graphite Mills, Inc. 
405 Old Main Street 
Asbury, New Jersey 08802-0144 
Phone 908-537-2155 
E-mail sariddle@asbury.com
61
APPENDIX 3:
62
Trench T3
Sample ID width (in) Lithological Description 91. Carbon 94 Graphite

T3701A 0.9 Dark grey huml'c soil and brown clayrno discernible graphite
13,013 1 yellowish brown clay with graphite
T370112 1 Vellowish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3701D 1 Reddish brown to cream clay-no discernible graphite
T3701E 1 Reddish cream clay with fragments of altered feldspar— n.d. gr
T217021: 0.6 Dark grey humic soil and brown clay with graphite
T1025 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3702C 1 Reddish cream clay sandy clay with minor graphite
T3702D 1 Reddish cream clay sandy clay with minor graphite
T3_02E 1 Reddish cream clay sandy clay with minor graphite
T3_03A 0.2 Dark grey humlc snil
T1033 1 Reddish cream sandy clayrhu discernible graphite
T370312 1 Reddish brown clay with graphite
T3703D 1 Vellow to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3703E 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3704A 1 Darkgrey humicsnil and brown clay-minor graphite
T1045 1 yellow brown sandy clay with graphite
T3704C 1 Reddish to yellow brown sandy clay with graphite
T3701} 0 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite

Waterlogged below 4.00 m
T317051: 1 Brown sandy clay with graphite
T370535 1 Vellow brown with red spots sandy clay-no discernible graphite
T3705C 1 Vellow brown with red spots sandy clay-no discernible graphite

waterlogged below 3m
T370614 0.8 Dark grey humic soil, minor brown clay-no discernible graphite
13,053 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3706C 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite

Waterlogged below 2.80m
T3707A 0.4 Medium grey humic soil with small graphite flakes
T3707E 1 Dark grey humic soil with small graphite flakees
T3707C 1 Light reddish grey sandy clay with graphite
T3707D 1 Dark grey and brown clay with graphite

waterlogged below 3.40m
T3708A 0.4 Dark grey humic soil — no discernible graphite
T3_OBB 1 Dark grey humlc sail and brown clay with graphite
T3_02C 1 yellow to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3708D 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3708E 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3709A 1 Dark grey humic soil-no discernible graphite
T3709l3 1 Light brown soil-no discernible graphite
T3709C 1 Brownish to reddish grey sandy clay with graphite
T3709D 1 Cream to grey sandy clay with graphite
T3709E 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3401: 0.7 Dark grey humic soil with Fe-laterite fragments
i3710l3 1 Brownish grey sandy clay with graphite
T3710C 1 Brownish grey sandy clay with graphite
T3_1DD 1 Reddish grey sandy day with graphite
T3710E 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3711A 0.9 Dark grey humic soil — no discernible graphite
T3711B 1 Dark grey clayey soil with graphite
T3711C 1 Light grey yellowish sandy clay with graphite
T3410 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T3711E 1 Reddish grey sandy clay with graphite

Creo ‘33 ////
DLWN /
GRAPHVMADA EARL


Yrench T4
Sample ID Width (m) lithologitzl Description is Carbon is Graphite
T4_01A 1 Dark grey to brown humic soil and day with graphite
14,019 1 Brnwnish grey sandy clay with graphite
mgmc 1 Light reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T470“: 1 Cream to brown sandy clay with graphite
TagOZA 1 Dark grey humic soil with graphite ﬂakes
14,023 1 Grey to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
mgozc 1 lieddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T4120 1 lieddish brown sandy clay with graphite
Tum 0.7 Dark grey humic soil 7 no discernible graphite
T4703“? 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
rum 1 Reddish to yellowish brawn sandy clay with graphite
T4130 1 heddish brown to cream sandy clay with graphite
Tagan 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
TAgodA 0.2 Dark grey humic soil-no discernible graphite
14,049 1 Dark grey humic soil with small graphite ﬂakes
Tunic 1 heddish brown to cream sandy clay with graphite
T47O4D 1 heddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T4704E 1 heddish brown sandy clay with graphite
TAgoSA 0.3 Dark grey humic soil—no discernible graphite
14,059 1 yellowish bmwn sandy clay with graphite
mgosc 1 yellow to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
Tagnsn 1 Reddish bmwn sandy clay with gmphile
TILDSE 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
TAVosA 0.93 Dark grey humic soil-no discernible graphite
14,063 1 yellow brown sandy clay with graphite
1405c 1 heddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T4160 1 heddish brown sandy clay with graphite
mgose 1 heddish brown sandy clay with graphite
rum 1 Dark grey to light brown humic soilrno disoemible graphite
14,075 1 yellow brown sandy clay with graphite
Tum 1 yellow brown sandy clay with graphite
T4707D 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T4707E 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
Yrench T5
Sample ID Width (m) lillmlngitzl Description is Carbon is Graphite
T5go1A 1 Black humic soil and brown clavano discernible graphite
15,019 1 yellow brown clay with graphite
mom 1 yellow ro reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
ngum 1 Mottled reddish brown and cream sandy clay with graphite
ngo1z 1 yellow to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
isgozA 0.5 Dark grey humic soil and brown clay with small graphite flakes
15,023 1 Light yellow brown clayey soil with small graphite ﬂakes
ngozc 1 yellow to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
mom 1 Reddish brown to cream sandy clay with graphite
ngozz 1 Reddish to cream /light brown sandy clay with gmphite
T5702}: 1 Reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
T5_03A 1 Dark grey humic soil-no discernible graphite
15,035 1 yellowish brown sandy clay with graphite
ngoac 1 yellow to reddish cream sandy clay with graphite
mean 1 yellow to reddish brown sandy clay with graphite
Waterlogged below Am
ngDAA 0A Dark grey humic soil-no discernible graphite
15,049 1 Dark grey clay-no disoernible graphite
TSJMC 1 yellow ro reddish sandy clay with graphite
ngoau 1 Red, yellow and cream clay with minor graphite
ngME 1 Red, yellow and cream clay with minor graphite
Wateriogged below 4.40m
Creo 6“ /////
D as l a N I


APPENDIX 4:
65
ANALVSIS REPORT
Sample Type: Pulp
Condition of samples: Acceptable

Total Organic
Element carbon C
Units % %
T12LH030 10.5 0.20
T12LH031 5.35 0.01
T12LH032 3.71 0.03
T12LH033 0.88 0.15
T13LH034 4.73 < 0.01
TL13LH035 6.04 0.13
T13LH036 5.74 0.08
T13LH037 3.97 0.15
T13LH038 2.84 0.06
T14LH39 5.25 0.20
T15LH40 0.24 0.159
T15LH41 1.43 0.05
T15LH42 3.54 0.04
T15LH43 3.92 0.06
T16LH044 1.33 0.06
Y16LH045 8.36 0.14
T17LH046 2.04 0.08
T17LH047 1.58 0.09
T17LH048 1.95 0.09
T17LH049 1.09 0.04
T18LH050 5.45 0.19
T18LH051 7.06 0.20
T18LH052 4.48 0.10
T18LH053 3.81 0.07
T13LH054 3.63 < 0.01
T19LH055 5.01 0.13
T19LH056 3.56 < 0.01
T20LH057 5.55 0.06
T20LH058 1.41 0.02
T20LH059 0.88 0.10
T20LH060 1.44 < 0.01
T20LH061 1.40 0.04
T21LH062 1.53 0.10
T21LH063 2.09 0.05
T21LH064 5.12 < 0.01
T21LH065 4.78 < 0.01
TZZLHOSG 1.95 0.03
TZZLH067 1.94 0.07
T22LH068 2.08 0.05
T22LH069 1.74 0.02
T22LH070 1.98 0.04

Creo 65 /////
DLiu—‘N GRAPHVMADA SARL


ANALYSIS REPORT
Sample Type: Pulp
Condition of samples: Acceptable
Total Organic
Element :3 rhan C
Units % %
POALH01 1.80 0.05
P019LH02 1.32 <0.01
POZlLH03 5.01 0.08
POZZ/lLH04 1.84 0.05
POZZ/ZLHUS 3.21 (0.01
P024LH06 8.51 0.18
P0251H07 8.09 0.03
Po26/1LH08 6.88 < 0.01
P026/21H09 4.99 0.01
PO28LH010 0.83 0.02
P030/1LH011 5.72 0.20
POSO/ZLHUlZ 8.71 0.14
P030/3LH013 6.55 0.03
P031LH014 1.61 <0.01
P0321H015 1.18 0.06
P035LH016 1.08 0.11
P036LH017 3.36 0.12
P039LH018 1.48 0.05
P0401H019 6.89 0.12
P041LH020 4.39 0.12
P0421H021 1.99 0.26
P043LH022 1.91 0.18
P044LH023 8.91 0.18
P056LH024 1.30 < 0.01
POSBLH025 1.55 0.06
POGOLHOZS 1.89 0.09
P061LH027 3.15 0.03
POGZLHOZS 6.92 0.03
P063LH029 8.29 0.06
P065LH030 3.61 0.29
P066LH031 2.42 0.11
(T 05 LH 011l/ (T 21 U 4.99 0.03
Pleas: mite:
1 Only elements Dr analytes with inaieatea method numbers are cat/572d under the scape afaeereaitatian.
Please refer ta the table at the end af this repartfar the caheentratian ranges eaverea;
2 Results relate arin ta the samples tested;
3 Results are reported an an "as received" hasls unless atherwise speciﬁed;
4 This report may riot be repraduced, except in full, without the written approval of Set Point Labaratories;
5 while every effort is made ta provide analysis of the highest arcumcy, the liahility DfSet Point Labammries
is restricted to the cast af the analysis.
Creo ‘37 ////
caaenmm SARL


SCHEDULE 3  EXTRACT  OF  AUDITED  FINANCIAL  STATEMENTS  OF  STRATMIN  FOR  THE
PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015 (NOTE 12, PAGE 29)
NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  (CONTINUED) 
YEAR TO 31 DECEMBER 2015
12  DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
In  December  2015  Bass  Metals  Limited  acquired  6.25%  of  Graphmada  Mauritius,  the  holding  company  for  the 
Group’s graphite operations in Madagascar, and in May 2016 it was announced that Bass Metals Limited would 
proceed  with  an  offer  to  acquire  the  remaining  93.75%  of  Graphmada  Mauritius  that  it  did  not  already  own. 
Completion of the acquisition is expected to take place following the Company’s Annual General Meeting in July 
2016. Consequently Graphmada Mauritius and its subsidiaries have been treated as a disposal group and accounted 
for as discontinued  operations.
The results of the discontinued operations, which have been included in the consolidated income statement, were 
as follows:
2015 
£’000
2014 
£’000
Revenue 
Expenses 
Loss before tax 
Attributable  tax expense 
Net loss attributable to discontinued operations
445 
(1,762) 
(1,317) 
- 
(1,317)
92 
(1,241) 
(1,149) 
(4) 
(1,153)
The major classes of assets and liabilities comprising the disposal group and classified as held for sale are as follows:
Goodwill 
Property, plant and equipment 
Inventories 
Trade and other receivables 
Cash and bank balances 
Total assets classified as held for sale 
 
 
Trade and other payables 
Decommissioning obligation 
Total liabilities associated with assets classified as held for sale 
Net assets of disposal group
2015 
£’000 
4,699 
1,288 
384 
170 
2 
6,543
259 
236 
495 
6,048
During the year discontinued operations used net cash of £404,000 (2014: £901,000) in operating activities,  paid 
£42,000 (2014: £413,000) in respect of investing activities, and paid £nil (2014: £nil) in respect of financing activities .
Page 18
SCHEDULE 4  STRATMIN GROUP, GRAPHMADA GROUP AND GRAPHMADA MAURITIUS
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSTION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2015 (AUDITED)1
Stratmin GROUP 
2015 
£’000
2014 
£’000
5,012   
1,230
Graphmada Group
2015 
£’000
-
2014 
£’000
-
1,185
1,228
Graphmada Mauritius
2015 
£’000
2014 
£’000
- 
                 -                     -
-
-                         -
-
-
6                        -
-
-
-                        -
-
-
6,248
1,185
1,228
Non-Current assets 
Goodwill 
Property, plant and
equipment
Investment in 
subsidiaries
Available for sale
investments
Loans to group 
undertakings
Current assets 
Assets of the disposal 
group classified as 
held for sale 
Inventories 
Trade and other
receivables
Trade and other
receivable 
Intercompany 
Cash and cash
equivalents
Current liabilities 
Liabilities of the 
disposal group 
classified as held for 
sale 
Trade and other
payables
Intercompany
liabilities
- 
2
-
1
-
3
6,543 
- 
124
156
6,823
495 
355
Short term borrowings 
 
Non-Current liabilities 
Decommissioning
87 
1,198 
 
-
obligation
Net assets/(liabilities) 
Equity 
Share capital 
Share premium
5,628 
 
6,046 
31,818
account
Merger reserve 
Reverse acquisition
23,460 
(48,478)
23,460   
(48,478)
reserve
Investment reserve 
Other reserves 
Retained earnings 
Equity attributable to
(33) 
134 
(7,506) 
5,441
(32)  
293   
(5,321)  
6,198
-
-
-
-
- 
- 
-
-
1
1
- 
-
-
- 
- 
 
-
1 
 
1 
-
- 
-
-
- 
- 
2
-
-
2
- 
14
234
- 
248 
 
-
(246) 
 
1 
-
- 
-
-   
242   
357
91
690
-   
382
226   
608   
   
132
6,198   
   
4,505   
31,771
- 
287 
268
82
2
639
- 
257
4,652
- 
4,909 
 
236
(3,321)2 
 
3 
-
- 
-
- 
- 
(3,324) 
-
- 
168 
375
7
550
- 
105
3,181
- 
3,286 
 
132
(1,640) 
 
3 
-
- 
-
-  
- 
(1,643) 
-
- 
- 
(247) 
-
-  
- 
                 - 
-
owners of the 
Company
Non-controlling
interests
187
-
-
-
-
-
5,628
6,198
Notes 
1 The Consolidated Stratmin Group Financial Report includes the Financial Position for Graphmada Group. Graphmada Mauritius 
is included in Graphmada Group. 
2 The intercompany liabilities are to be assigned to Bass on completion of the SPA. Refer to section 3.4 for further details.
(3,321)
(1,640)
(246)
1
Page 19
SCHEDULE 5  GRAPHMADA GROUP STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
31 December 2015
Continuing operations 
Revenue 
Cost of sales 
Gross (loss)/profit 
 
Administrative expenses 
Other operating expenses
Operating loss 
 
Finance costs
Loss from continuing operations 
 
Loss before tax 
 
Tax
Loss for the year 
 
 
 
Other comprehensive income: 
Items that may be subsequently reclassified to profit and loss: 
 
Market value adjustment to investments 
 
 
Other comprehensive income/(expense) for the period 
 
 
Total comprehensive loss for the year attributable to equity holders of the 
parent
2015 
£’000
392 
(456) 
(64)
(1,085) 
         (314)
(1,463) 
 
-
(1,463)* 
 
(1,463)
-
(1,463)
- 
- 
 
 
6
2014 
£’000
87 
(115) 
(28)
(709) 
(79)
(816) 
 
-
(816) 
 
(816) 
 
(4) 
 
 
(820)
- 
- 
 
 
-
(1,457)
(820)
The loss reported in the Total comprehensive loss for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent
(£ 1,457,000) expressed within the Graphmada Group’s Statement of Comprehensive Income (Schedule 5) and
the Net loss attributable to discontinued operations reported within the Extract of the Notes to Stratmin Global
Resources Plc (“Stratmin”) Financial Report for the year ended 31 December 2015 (£1,317,000 - Schedule 3)
indicated a difference of £140,000.
This difference in these reported losses was adjusted at the time of the audit completion and was required in
order for Stratmin to comply with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) and is reconciled as
follows:
Page 20
Total Comprehensive loss as reported by Graphmada group at Schedule 5 (as referred above)
Add – Additional Income (from Graphite sales) not previously recognized by Graphmada Group
Less – Additional expense relating to the loss on plant cost not previously recognized by the
Graphmada Group
(£1,457,000)
£53,000
(£17,000)
Add - Capitalisation of decommissioning of plant costs that had previously been recognized as an
£104,000
expense by the Graphmada Group
Net loss attributable to discontinued operations as per Schedule 3
£1,317,000
Page 21
SCHEDULE 6  GRAPHMADA MAURITIUS STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
31 December 2015
Continuing operations 
Revenue 
Cost of sales 
Gross (loss)/profit 
 
Administrative expenses 
Other operating expenses
Operating loss 
 
Finance costs
Loss from continuing operations 
 
Loss before tax 
 
Tax
Loss for the year 
 
 
 
Other comprehensive income: 
Items that may be subsequently reclassified to profit and loss: 
 
Market value adjustment to investments 
 
 
Other comprehensive income/(expense) for the period 
 
 
Total comprehensive loss for the year attributable to equity holders of the 
parent
2015 
£’000
2014 
£’000
- 
- 
-
(247) 
-
-
-
-
- 
                  -
(247) 
 
-
(247) 
 
(247)
-
(247)
- 
- 
 
 
-
(247)
- 
 
-
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
 
-
- 
- 
 
 
-
-
Page 22
SCHEDULE 7
AUDITOR’S LETTER
Page 23
30 Percy Street, London W1T 203   l
T +44 (0)20 7467 1700 E. advice@welbeckassociatescom ~ g a; 'ﬁ a ' “73;;
F. +44 (0)20 7535 5639 w. www.welbeckassociates.oom "ii?
a. Registered Auditors
Bass Metals Ltd
31 Ventnor Ave
WEST PERTH WA 6005
11‘“ August 2016
Dear Sir/Madam
Reference — Stratmin Global Resources Plc
We performed the audit of Stratrnin Global Resources Pic (“Stratmin”) for the year ended 31
December 2015 and this audit included the subsidiaries of Stratmin, namely Graphmada Mauritius (2
company incorporated in Mauritius) and Graphmada SARL (a company incorporated in Madagascar
and the operator of the Lohorano Graphite Operation in Madagascar. We confirm that as at the
reporting date of 31 December 2015. the only substantial asset held by Stratmin Global Resources
Pic was the Lohorano Operating Graphite Mine which was held by subsidiaries of Stratmin at this
reporting date
Please note that we did ask for some minor adjustments to be put through the consolidated accounts
at the audit stage regarding the subsidiary companies as we need to comply with UK IFRS and the
local accountants would not know what these were.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any further queries.
Yours sincerely
,1 A
/ 
MW
/ ’ 
Jonathml’Bradlev—Hoare
Audit Partner
Welbeck Associates
Directors:
7 .    m a W a:  “When Blad'eY“H°are MA FCA
if}?  Peter M Clark FCA
“ewes:— /  Peter McBride FCA

