
JOINT NEWS RELEASE
three‐cornered  amalgamation
TO COMPLY WITH THIS RESTRICTION MAY CONSTITUTE A VIOLATION OF U.S. SECURITIES LAWS.
Nighthawk Gold Corp. Announces Proposed Acquisition of Superior Copper Corporation 
 
NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION TO U.S. NEWSWIRE SERVICES OR FOR DISSEMINATION IN THE UNITED STATES. ANY FAILURE 
 
Toronto, Ontario: February 25, 2016 — Nighthawk Gold Corp. (TSX‐V: NHK) ("Nighthawk") 
and Superior Copper Corporation (TSX‐V: SPC) ("Superior") are pleased to announce that they 
have  entered  into  a  definitive  agreement  dated  as  of  February  24,  2016  (the  "Definitive 
Agreement”) providing for the acquisition (the “Acquisition") by Nighthawk of Superior by way 
(the  "Amalgamation").  Shareholders  of  Superior 
of  a 
representing  21.1%  of  the  common  shares  of  Superior  ("Superior  Shares")  issued  and 
outstanding have entered into lock-up agreements with Nighthawk in support of the transaction. 
Nighthawk  and  Superior  are  both  publicly  listed  companies  on  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange 
("TSXV"). Following the Acquisition, Nighthawk is expected to continue to trade on the TSXV 
and Superior will be delisted.  
 
Particulars of the Transaction 
 
Under  the  terms  of  the  Definitive  Agreement,  Superior  will  amalgamate  with  a  wholly‐owned 
subsidiary of Nighthawk, and all of the issued and outstanding Superior Shares will be acquired 
by Nighthawk from the existing holders thereof in consideration of the issuance of 0.32493545 
of one common share of Nighthawk (each whole such common share, a "Nighthawk Share") 
for each Superior Share so held (the "Exchange Ratio"), subject to the exercise of available 
dissent rights. Based on the 20 day volume-weighted average price of each of the companies 
on the TSXV for the period ending February 24, 2016, the Acquisition represents a premium to 
shareholders of Superior of approximately 55%. No finder’s fee is payable in connection with the 
Acquisition. 
 
Also in connection with the Acquisition, all of the outstanding stock options of Superior will be 
exchanged for equivalent stock options of Nighthawk, and all of the outstanding share purchase 
warrants  of  Superior  will  thereafter  entitle  the  holders  to  acquire  Nighthawk  Shares  in  lieu  of 
Superior  Shares,  in  each  case  subject  to  adjustment  based  on  the  Exchange  Ratio  and 
otherwise on the same terms and conditions. 
 
The Amalgamation will require the approval of at least 66⅔% of the votes cast by shareholders 
of Superior at a special meeting of shareholders of Superior (the "Superior Meeting") expected 
to  be  held  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  transaction  is  currently  expected  to  close  shortly 
thereafter.  A  management  information  circular  is  expected  to  be  mailed  to  shareholders  of 
Superior in connection with the Superior Meeting to be held to, among other things, consider the 
Amalgamation  and  in  accordance  with  applicable  securities  laws.  Substantial  additional 
information  regarding  the  details  of  the  proposed  Acquisition  will  be  included  in  such 
management information circular. Superior expects to mail the management information circular 
by  April  2016.  The  board  of  directors  of  Superior,  on  the  recommendation  of  its  independent 
special committee ("Superior Special Committee"), has unanimously approved the Acquisition 
and will recommend that shareholders of Superior vote in favour of the Amalgamation. 
 
It is anticipated that immediately following the closing of the Acquisition (assuming there are no 
changes  to  the  outstanding  common  shares  or  convertible  securities  of  either  company),  an 
aggregate of approximately 112,739,407 Nighthawk Shares will be issued and outstanding, of
- 2 -
which it is anticipated that 54,285,714 Nighthawk Shares will be held by former shareholders of 
Superior  (representing  approximately  48.2%  of  the  Nighthawk  Shares),  and  58,453,693 
Nighthawk  Shares  will  be  held  by  existing  shareholders  of  Nighthawk  (representing 
approximately 51.8% of the Nighthawk Shares). Furthermore, it is anticipated that no Nighthawk 
Shares  will  be  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to  outstanding  convertible  securities  upon  the 
closing of the Acquisition, other than up to 9,745,421 Nighthawk Shares issuable upon exercise 
of outstanding share purchase warrants, and up to 8,187,867 Nighthawk Shares issuable upon 
exercise of outstanding stock options. 
 
The  Definitive  Agreement  contains  customary  terms  and  conditions  for  a  transaction  of  this 
nature,  including  covenants  applicable  to  each  such  entity  until  closing  of  the  Acquisition 
regarding  their  respective  businesses  and  affairs.  A  copy  of  the  Definitive  Agreement  is 
available under both Nighthawk’s and Superior’s issuer profiles on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.  
 
Reasons for the Merger 
 
The Amalgamation has been initiated to combine Nighthawk’s Colomac Gold Project with the 
working  capital  of  Superior  to  create  a  strong,  well-funded  exploration  company  with  an 
experienced  management  team  to  enhance  shareholder  value  for  both  companies.  The 
combined  entity  will  be  well  positioned  in  the  Northwest  Territories,  a  stable  mining-friendly 
jurisdiction, to advance the Colomac Gold Project. 
 
Nighthawk President and C.E.O., Dr. Michael J. Byron, stated, “The Board and Management of 
Nighthawk  unanimously  support  the  planned  merger  between  our  two  companies.  The  new 
combined company will be well funded and well managed by a dynamic Board with an excellent 
track  record  and  long  history  of  success.  The  outstanding  technical  and  financial  team  will 
perfectly augment Nighthawk’s property portfolio with gold deposits in the Northwest Territories. 
The new company will focus on systematically advancing its assets in the Northwest Territories 
through a diligent priority process focussing on its best assets with a view to long term success 
to  transition  Nighthawk  from  an  explorer  to  a  mine  finder.  We  believe  that  this  business 
combination will provide the best opportunity for Nighthawk’s shareholders to participate in the 
long  term  value  and  advancement  of  our  assets  which  we  have  worked  so  hard  to  advance 
through very trying market conditions over the last few years.”  
 
Superior President and C.E.O., Mr. John Tait, stated, “This is a classic business merger that 
combines management, directors, projects and capital at a low point in the cycle. We think the 
amalgamation will begin to benefit the shareholders of both companies immediately as well and 
even more so in the long term. I am excited about the prospect of the combined company and 
believe  that  with  our  pooled  resources  we  can  work  together  and  make  this  a  successful 
business venture for all of our shareholders”. 
 
About Nighthawk and Superior 
 
Nighthawk is a Canadian-based exploration company focused on acquiring and developing gold 
mineral properties in the Northwest Territories. Including the mineral claims and leases of the 
Colomac Gold Project, Nighthawk’s Indin Lake Gold Property comprises a total land package of 
222,203 acres in the Indin Lake Greenstone Belt, located approximately 200 kilometres north of 
Yellowknife, Northwest Territories. Superior is a Canadian-based exploration company focused 
on base and precious metal exploration, which holds a 100% interest in the property known as 
the Superior Project, which covers 39,015 acres approximately 85 kilometres north of Sault Ste.
- 3 -
Marie,  Ontario.  The  Acquisition  is  subject  to  the  satisfaction  or  waiver  of  certain  customary 
closing conditions.  
 
Mr.  Robert  Cudney  is  currently  a  shareholder  of  both  Nighthawk  and  Superior.    Mr.  Cudney 
exercises control or direction over: (i) 9,491,091 Nighthawk Shares representing approximately 
16.2%  of  all  issued  and  outstanding  Nighthawk  Shares  as  of  the  date  hereof  (of  which 
9,381,091 such Nighthawk Shares are registered in the name of Northfield Capital Corporation 
("Northfield"), a company controlled by Mr. Cudney, and 110,000 such Nighthawk Shares are 
registered in the name of Mr. Cudney directly); and (ii) 25,709,500 Superior Shares representing 
approximately 15.4% of all issued and outstanding Superior Shares as of the date hereof (of 
which 24,309,500 such Superior Shares are registered in the name of Northfield and 1,400,000 
such Superior Shares are registered in the name of Mr. Cudney directly). In addition, Nighthawk 
and Superior have one common director, being the Honourable Ernie Eves, and one common 
officer,  being  Michael  Leskovec,  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  both  Nighthawk  and  Superior.  
Other than the foregoing, Nighthawk and Superior are arm’s length parties, and there are no 
other current non‐arm’s length parties of Nighthawk which are insiders of Superior or presently 
hold any direct or indirect beneficial interest in either Superior or any of its assets. There are 
currently  no  “control  persons”  (as  defined  by  the  applicable  regulations  of  the  TSXV)  of 
Nighthawk  or  Superior.  Based  on  the  current  shareholdings  and  present  knowledge  of 
Nighthawk and Superior, it is anticipated that following the closing of the Acquisition, no person 
or company will beneficially own, directly or indirectly, or control or direct more than 10% of the 
issued and outstanding Nighthawk Shares other than Mr. Cudney who is expected to exercise 
control  or  direction  over,  directly  or  indirectly,  an  aggregate  of  17,845,018  Nighthawk  Shares 
representing approximately 15.8% of all issued and outstanding Nighthawk Shares as of such 
date  (assuming  there  are  no  changes  to  the  outstanding  common  shares  or  convertible 
securities of either company). 
 
Board of Nighthawk 
 
Following the closing of the Acquisition, it is proposed that the board of directors of Nighthawk 
shall be comprised of seven (7) members, of which four (4) such members shall be designated 
by Nighthawk and three (3) such members shall be designated by Superior. 
 
Advisors and Counsel  
 
Dundee Securities Ltd. ("Dundee") has acted as the exclusive financial advisor to the special 
committee of Nighthawk ("Nighthawk Special Committee"). Dundee has provided an opinion 
to  the  Nighthawk  Special  Committee,  based  upon  and  subject  to  certain  assumptions, 
limitations  and  qualifications  in  the  opinion;  the  consideration  being  offered  by  Nighthawk  in 
respect  of  the  Acquisition  is  fair,  from  a  financial  point  of  view,  to  Nighthawk  and  the 
shareholders  of  Nighthawk.  Cassels  Brock  &  Blackwell  LLP  has  acted  as  legal  counsel  to 
Nighthawk.  
 
Primary  Capital  Inc.  ("Primary  Capital")  has  acted  as  the  exclusive  financial  advisor  of  the 
Superior Special Committee. Primary Capital has provided an opinion to the Superior Special 
Committee that, based upon and subject to certain assumptions, limitations and qualifications in 
the opinion, the consideration being offered by Nighthawk to shareholders of Superior in respect 
of the Amalgamation is fair, from a financial point of view, to Superior and the shareholders of 
Superior. Peterson & Company LLP has acted as legal counsel to Superior.
- 4 -
Financial and Technical Information regarding Nighthawk and Superior 
 
For  further  details  concerning  Superior  and  Nighthawk,  including  their  respective  property 
interests  and  financial  information,  please  refer  to  the  annual  audited  financial  statements  of 
each of Superior and Nighthawk for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2015 and July 31, 2015, 
respectively;  the  interim  financial  statements  of  Superior  for  the  six  month  period  ended 
November  30,  2015;  and  the  interim  financial  statements  of  Nighthawk  for  the  three  month 
period ended October 31, 2015, together with the accompanying management’s discussion and 
analysis  for  each  such  period,  and  the  additional  public  filings  of  each  such  company,  all 
available  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com.    For  further  details  on  the  property  interests  of 
Nighthawk, please refer to the technical report entitled “Technical Report and Mineral Resource 
Estimate Update on the Colomac Property of the Indin Lake Project, Indin Lake Belt, Northwest 
Territories,  Canada”  dated  June  17,  2013  and  available  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com.  For 
further details on the property interests of Superior, please refer to the technical report entitled 
“Technical  Report  on  the  Coppercorp  Property,  Sault  Ste.  Marie  Mining  Division,  Ontario, 
Canada” dated February 12, 2011 and available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com. 
 
Conditions to Closing 
 
Completion of the Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions, including, but not limited to, 
receipt  of  applicable  regulatory  approvals  (including  TSXV  acceptance)  and  the  requisite 
majority approval of shareholders of Superior. There can be no assurance that the Acquisition 
will be completed as proposed or at all.  Investors are cautioned that, except as disclosed in any 
management  information  circular  to  be  prepared  in  connection  with  the  Acquisition,  any 
information released or received with respect to the proposed Acquisition may not be accurate 
or complete and should not be relied upon. Trading in the securities of Nighthawk and Superior 
should be considered highly speculative. The TSXV has in no way passed upon the merits of 
the proposed Acquisition and neither has approved nor disapproved the contents of this press 
release. 
 
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF 
NIGHTHAWK GOLD CORP. 
 
Dr. Michael J. Byron 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
 
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF 
SUPERIOR COPPER CORPORATION 
 
Mr. John Tait 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT: 
Dr. Michael J. Byron, President and Chief Executive Officer 
Nighthawk Gold Corp. 
Tel: (416) 628-5940 or via email at mbyron@nighthawkgold.com 
 
Mr. John Tait, President and Chief Executive Officer 
Superior Copper Corp. 
Tel: (416) 628-5905 or via email at jtait@superiorcopper.ca
- 5 -
This news release contains "forward-looking information" and "forward-looking statements" (collectively, 
"forward-looking statements") within the meaning of the applicable Canadian securities legislation. All 
statements,  other  than  statements  of  historical  fact,  are  forward-looking  statements  and  are  based  on 
expectations, estimates and projections as at the date of this news release. Any statement that involves 
discussions with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives, assumptions, 
future events or performance (often but not always using phrases such as "expects", or "does not expect", 
"is  expected",  "anticipates"  or  "does  not  anticipate",  "plans",  "budget",  "scheduled",  "forecasts", 
"estimates", "believes" or "intends" or variations of such words and phrases or stating that certain actions, 
events or results "may" or "could", "would", "might"  or "will" be taken to occur or be achieved) are not 
statements of historical fact and may be forward-looking statements. In this news release, forward-looking 
statements  relate,  among  other  things,  to:  the  anticipated  benefits  of  the  Acquisition  to  the  respective 
shareholders  of  Nighthawk  and  Superior;  the  timing  and  receipt  of  stock  exchange  and  regulatory 
approvals for the Amalgamation; the timing and ability of Nighthawk and Superior to satisfy the conditions 
precedent to completing the Acquisition; the closing of the Acquisition; the length of the current market 
cycle  and  requirements  for  an  issuer  to  survive  in  the  current  market  cycle;  future  growth  potential  of 
Nighthawk and Superior and their respective business; and future development plans. 
 
These forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions and estimates of management 
of Nighthawk and Superior, as the case may be, at the time such statements were made. Actual future 
results  may  differ  materially  as  forward-looking  statements  involve  known  and  unknown  risks, 
uncertainties  and  other  factors  which  may  cause  the  actual  results,  performance  or  achievements  of 
Nighthawk and Superior, as the case may be, to materially differ from any future results, performance or 
achievements  expressed  or  implied  by  such  forward-looking  statements.  Such  factors,  among  other 
things,  include:  risks  that  the  Acquisition  may  not  be  completed  as  currently  proposed  or  at  all; 
satisfaction  or  waiver  of  all  applicable  conditions  to  closing  of  the  Acquisition  (including  receipt  of  all 
necessary  stock  exchange,  shareholder  and  regulatory  approvals  or  consents,  and  the  absence  of 
material changes with respect to the parties and their respective businesses, all as more particularly set 
forth  in  the  Definitive  Agreement);  the  synergies  and  other  anticipated  benefits  expected  from  the 
Acquisition not being realized; delays in the timing of the proposed Acquisition; business integration risks; 
fluctuations in general macroeconomic conditions; fluctuations in securities markets and the market price 
of Nighthawk Shares and the Superior Shares; fluctuations in spot and forward prices of gold, silver, base 
metals  or  certain  other  commodities;  fluctuations  in  currency  markets  (such  as  the  Canadian  dollar  to 
United  States  dollar  exchange  rate);  change  in  national  and  local  government,  legislation,  taxation, 
controls,  regulations  and  political  or  economic  developments;  risks  and  hazards  associated  with  the 
business  of  mineral  exploration,  development  and  mining  (including  environmental  hazards,  industrial 
accidents,  unusual  or  unexpected  formations  pressures,  cave-ins  and  flooding);  inability  to  obtain 
adequate insurance to cover risks and hazards; the presence of laws and regulations that may impose 
restrictions  on  mining;  employee  relations;  relationships  with  and  claims  by  local  communities  and 
indigenous  populations;  availability  of  increasing  costs  associated  with  mining  inputs  and  labour;  the 
speculative  nature  of  mineral  exploration  and  development  (including  the  risks  of  obtaining  necessary 
licenses,  permits  and  approvals  from  government  authorities);  availability  of  financing;  and  title  to 
properties. In addition, the failure of a party to comply with the terms of the Definitive Agreement may
result in that party being required to pay a non‐completion or other fee to the other party, the result of
which  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  paying  party's  financial  position  and  results  of 
operations and its ability to fund growth prospects and current operations. Although the forward-looking 
statements contained in this news release are based upon what management of Nighthawk and Superior 
believes,  or  believed  at  the  time,  to  be  reasonable  assumptions,  neither  Nighthawk  nor  Superior  can 
assure  its  respective  shareholders  that  actual  results  will  be  consistent  with  such  forward-looking 
statements,  as  there  may  be  other  factors  that  cause  results  not  to  be  as  anticipated,  estimated  or 
intended. 
 
Readers should not place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements and information contained in 
this news release. Except as required by law, neither Nighthawk nor Superior assumes an obligation to 
update  the  forward-looking  statements  of  beliefs,  opinions,  projections,  or  other  factors,  should  they 
change, except as required by law.
- 6 -
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is 
defined  in  the  policies  of  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange)  accepts  responsibility  for  the 
adequacy  or  accuracy  of  this  release.  No  stock  exchange,  securities  commission  or 
other  regulatory  authority  has  approved  or  disapproved  of  the  information  contained 
herein.