
8-K 1 v447511_8k.htm 8-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 OR 15(d) of The Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): August 19, 2016
Energy XXI Ltd
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
BERMUDA
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation)
001-33628
(Commission File
 
Number)
98-0499286
(IRS Employer Identification
 
No.)
Canon’s Court, 22 Victoria Street, P.O. Box HM
1179, Hamilton HM EX, Bermuda
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (441) 295-2244
(Former name or former address, if changed since last report.)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the
filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:
oWritten communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
oSoliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
o
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.14d-2(b))
o
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.13e-4(c))
Item 1.01 Entry into a Material Definitive Agreement.
As previously reported by Energy XXI Ltd, a Bermuda exempted company (the “Company”), on
April 14, 2016, the Company, Energy XXI Gulf Coast, Inc., an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of
the Company (“EGC”), EPL Oil & Gas, Inc., an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company
(“EPL”) and certain other subsidiaries of the Company listed on Schedule 1 of the Restructuring
Support Agreement (as defined below) (together with the Company, EGC and EPL, the
“Debtors”) filed voluntary petitions for reorganization (the petitions collectively, the “Bankruptcy
Petitions”) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas, Houston
Division (the “Bankruptcy Court”) seeking relief under the provisions of chapter 11 of Title 11
(“Chapter 11”) of the United States Code (the “Bankruptcy Code”) under the caption In re Energy
XXI Ltd, et al., Case No. 16-31928 (the “Chapter 11 Cases”).
Also, as previously reported, prior to filing the Bankruptcy Petitions, on April 11, 2016, the
Debtors entered into a Restructuring Support Agreement (as amended, the “Restructuring
Support Agreement”) with certain holders (the “Second Lien Noteholders”) of EGC’s 11.000%
Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2020 (the “Second Lien Notes”), providing that the
Second Lien Noteholders party thereto (the “Restructuring Support Parties”) will support a
restructuring of the Debtors, subject to the terms and conditions of the Restructuring Support
Agreement. On May 16, 2016, the Debtors entered into the First Amendment to the Restructuring
Support Agreement by and among the Debtors and the Restructuring Support Parties. On June
28, 2016, the Debtors entered into the Second Amendment to the Restructuring Support
Agreement by and among the Debtors and the Restructuring Support Parties. On July 28, 2016,
the Debtors entered into the Third Amendment to the Restructuring Support Agreement by and
among the Debtors and the Restructuring Support Parties.
The Restructuring Support Agreement contains certain milestones for progress in the Chapter 11
Cases (the “Milestones”). On August 19, 2016, the Debtors entered into the Fourth Amendment to
the Restructuring Support Agreement by and among the Debtors and the Restructuring Support
Parties (the “Fourth RSA Amendment”). Pursuant to the Fourth RSA Amendment, the following
Milestone was modified:
no later than September 30, 2016, the Bankruptcy Court will have entered an order authorizing
·
the assumption of the Restructuring Support Agreement.
The Milestones may be extended further pursuant to a subsequent amendment. A copy of the
Fourth RSA Amendment is attached hereto as Exhibit 10.1 to this Current Report on Form 8-K
(this “Form 8-K”). The foregoing description of the Fourth RSA Amendment is only a summary,
does not purport to be complete, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Fourth RSA
Amendment.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 8-K and the related exhibits contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of
the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, including those relating to
the intent, beliefs, plans or expectations of the Company are based upon current expectations
and are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. It is not possible to predict or
identify all such factors and the following list should not be considered a complete statement of
all potential risks and uncertainties relating to the bankruptcy filing by the Debtors, including, but
not limited to: (i) the Company’s ability to obtain Bankruptcy Court approval with respect to
motions or other requests made to the Bankruptcy Court in the Chapter 11 Cases, including
maintaining strategic control as debtor-in-possession, (ii) the ability of the Company and its
subsidiaries to negotiate, develop, confirm and consummate the Plan, (iii) the effects of the
Company’s bankruptcy filing on the Company and on the interests of various constituents, (iv) the
Bankruptcy Court rulings in the Chapter 11 Cases as well the outcome of all other pending
litigation and the outcome of the Chapter 11 Cases in general, (v) the length of time that the
Company will operate under Chapter 11 protection and the continued availability of operating
capital during the pendency of the proceedings, (vi) risks associated with third party motions in
the Chapter 11 Cases, which may interfere with the Company’s ability to confirm and
consummate the Plan, (vii) the potential adverse effects of the Chapter 11 proceedings on the
Company’s liquidity or results of operations, (viii) increased advisory costs to execute the
Company’s reorganization, (ix) the impact of NASDAQ’s delisting on the liquidity and market
price of the Company’s common stock and on the Company’s ability to access the public capital
markets, (x) the uncertainty that any trading market for the Company’s common stock will exist or
develop in the over-the-counter markets, and (xi) other risks and uncertainties. These risks and
uncertainties could cause actual results, including project plans and related expenditures and
resource recoveries, to differ materially from those described in the forward-looking statements.
For a more detailed discussion of risk factors, please see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of the
Company’s most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and Part II, Item 1A of the Company’s
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the periods ended September 30, 2015, December 31, 2015
and March 31, 2016 for more information.  The Company assumes no obligation and expressly
disclaims any duty to update the information contained herein except as required by law.
Item 9.01 Financial Statements and Exhibits
(d)Exhibits
Exhibit
No.
Description
10.1
Fourth Amendment to Restructuring Support Agreement by and among the Debtors and
 
the Restructuring Support Parties, dated as of August 19, 2016.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
Energy XXI Ltd
 
 
 
 
 
By:  /s/ Bruce W. Busmire
 
 
 
August 23, 2016
Bruce W. Busmire
Chief Financial Officer
Exhibit Index
Exhibit
No.
Description
10.1
Fourth Amendment to Restructuring Support Agreement by and among the Debtors and
 
the Restructuring Support Parties, dated as of August 19, 2016.