
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
The following management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) of the financial conditions and results of 
operations of Canadian Spirit Resources Inc. (“CSRI” or the “Corporation”) for the three and six months 
ended  June  30,  2016  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  unaudited  interim  condensed  financial 
statements for the same periods as well as the MD&A and audited financial statements for the year ended 
December  31,  2015  prepared  under  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”),  as  issued  by 
the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  and  the  International  Financial  Reporting  Interpretations 
Committee. The financial data presented herein is in accordance with IFRS and all amounts are presented 
in  Canadian  dollars.    This  MD&A  has  been  prepared  by  management  and  includes  information  up  to 
August 29, 2016, the date of review and approval by the Corporation’s Board of Directors. 
 
Corporate Overview 
CSRI is a natural resources company whose shares are listed under the trading symbol ‘SPI’ on the TSX 
Venture Exchange (the “Exchange”) focused on the exploration and development of opportunities in the 
unconventional natural gas resource sector of the energy industry.  Operating on its own 100% working 
interest  lands,  and  together  with  its  joint  venture  partner,  Canbriam  Energy  Inc.  (“Canbriam”),  the 
Corporation’s  principal  activity  is  exploring  and  developing  the  productive  capability  of  its  Montney 
unconventional natural gas and natural gas liquids play in  the Farrell Creek/Altares area of northeastern 
British Columbia.  The Corporation commenced natural gas production from the Montney Formation in 
early 2011. 
 
Selected Quarterly Information 
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  results  of  the  Corporation  for  the  eight  most  recently  completed 
quarters (000’s, unless otherwise indicated):
1
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
The Corporation has not added any new production on its joint venture lands over the last five years, and 
therefore is subject to the inherent production declines associated with each producing natural gas well. 
Over the past few years, the continuous decline in natural gas prices due to excess North American gas 
supply has had a significant negative impact on Canadian natural gas producers. In the last two years, the 
average natural gas sales price the Corporation realized has steadily fallen from a high of $3.70 per Mcf 
in the third quarter 2014 to $1.06 per Mcf in the fourth quarter 2015. Further declines to $0.93 per Mcf in 
the  month  of  March  2016  influenced  CSRI  and  Canbriam  to  shut-in  all  joint  venture  natural  gas 
production at Farrell Creek/Altares effective March 31, 2016. 
 
A contributing factor to low natural gas prices in 2016 for a majority of producers in northeastern British 
Columbia  has  been  the  lack  of  take  away  capacity  for  the  sizeable  natural  gas  reserves  that  have  been 
discovered, especially in the Montney Formation. This has resulted in large volumes of natural gas being 
trapped behind the sales point at Station 2, the benchmark pricing point  on the Spectra pipeline system. 
The average natural gas price at Station 2 for the second quarter 2016 was $1.20 per Mcf. This has had a 
significant  negative  impact  on  netbacks  for  a  majority  of  the  regional  producers  in  northeastern  British 
Columbia.  The  pipeline  companies  are  responding  by  adding  new  capacity  through  maintenance  and 
expansion of the current system as well as new greenfield pipelines.  
 
The decline in natural gas and oil prices over the past eight quarters has resulted in industry activity level 
plummeting to historic lows. 
 
Natural Gas Properties 
Farrell Creek/Altares: Operational Highlights 
Despite difficult equity markets, the Corporation has raised a total of $4.1 million of equity capital in the 
period from December 2015 to June 2016. The principal use of the proceeds was to drill a 100% working 
interest  vertical  stratigraphic  test  well  at  c-69-H/94-B-1  in  West  Farrell  Creek  for  land  retention  and 
resource delineation purposes.  
 
The c-69-H/94-B-1 well was successfully drilled and cased, and was rig released on March 6, 2016 at a 
final  total  depth  of  2,762  metres. The  tenure  on  8.35  sections  of  lands,  CSRI  (8  sections  at  100%)  and 
joint venture (1 section at 35%), has been extended for an additional 10 years.  While drilling through the 
Doig  and  Montney  Formations,  extremely  high  pressures  were  encountered.    On  June  25,  2016  the 
Corporation  perforated  three  zones  in  the  Montney  Formation  in  the  c-69-H/94-B-1  well.  Pressure 
recorders were placed across these perforations and will be retrieved at the end of the third quarter 2016.  
 
CSRI’s Board of Directors has approved a base capital expenditure budget for 2016 of $3.6 million (net), 
primarily  including  $2.9  million  for  the  vertical  test  well  for  land  retention  and  resource  delineation 
purposes at c-69-H/94-B-1  in the  southwestern  block  of the  Corporation’s  100%  working  interest lands 
that was drilled in the first quarter 2016.  
 
On March 31, 2016, due to continuing negative netbacks from its joint venture natural gas production, the 
Corporation  and  its  joint  venture  partner  shut  in  their  natural  gas  production  at  Farrell  Creek/Altares.  
With improving natural gas prices, the processing facility and associated wells are due to be reactivated 
on or about October 1, 2016.
2
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
Fresh Water Sourcing 
The Williston Reservoir Water Pipeline Project (25% owned by CSRI; operated by Canbriam) is able to 
deliver up to 10,000 m3/d of fresh water from the Williston Reservoir to the Farrell Creek/Altares area in 
northeastern British Columbia on a year-round basis until December 31, 2031.  The project will reduce, 
by  approximately  $500,000  per  well,  the  cost  of  delivering  a  secure  supply  of  fresh  water  used  in  the 
fracture stimulation of both vertical and horizontal wells and will lessen the impact on local communities 
and infrastructure by reducing the need to transport fresh water overland by truck to drilling sites. 
 
Montney Formation Resource Assessment 
GLJ Petroleum Consultants (“GLJ”) was engaged to prepare an independent resource assessment of the 
Montney Formation on the Corporation’s Farrell Creek/Altares lands in northeastern British Columbia as 
at February 29, 2012 in accordance with National Instrument 51-101, Standards of Disclosure for Oil and 
Gas Activities.  The engagement was used to assess the future development and resource potential of the 
Montney Formation but did not include the Doig and Doig phosphate intervals (fracture stimulated and 
tested  by  other  Farrell  Creek/Altares  operators)  or  the  adsorbed  gas  component  associated  with  any 
formation.  For more information, refer to the second quarter 2012 Management Discussion and Analysis 
which has been filed on SEDAR at www.sedar.com and on the Corporation’s website at www.csri.ca. 
 
Montney Formation Reserves 
An  independent  reserve  evaluation  covering  the  Montney  Formation  at  Farrell  Creek/Altares  was 
prepared by GLJ as at December 31, 2015 in accordance with National Instrument 51-101, Standards of 
Disclosure  for  Oil  and  Gas  Activities.    The  evaluation  is  based  on  CSRI’s  corporate  plan  to  drill  and 
complete four additional Montney wells over the next few years to further develop its Montney lands at 
Farrell Creek/Altares.  Proceeding with full development will be contingent upon factors such as access to 
capital,  economic  price  conditions,  infrastructure,  and  environmental  and  regulatory  matters.    For  more 
information,  the  Corporation’s  Form  51-101F1  Statement  of  Reserves  Data  and  Other  Oil  and  Gas 
Information  and  related  documents  have  been  filed  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com  and  on  the 
Corporation’s website at www.csri.ca 
 
Results from Operations 
Natural Gas Production and Revenues
Note: 
(1)  Given  that  there  was  no  production  during  the  second  quarter  2016,  the  year-to-date  daily  volumes  represent  three  months  of  active 
production reported over a six month period.   
 
Reductions in daily and total sales volumes for the three month period ended March 31, 2016 (until shut-
in) compared to the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2015 are due to the typical decline curves 
exhibited by each of the five Montney wells on production.  In addition to the decline in production
3
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
volumes, overall natural gas revenues experienced by the Corporation for the six months ended June 30, 
2016 compared to the six months ended June 30, 2015 have decreased drastically due to depressed natural 
gas prices.  
 
Due to the low natural gas price environment and the focus of CSRI’s joint venture partner on their own 
100% working interest lands at Altares, the Corporation has not added any new production over the last 
five  years,  and  therefore  is  subject  to  the  inherent  declines  associated  with  each  producing  natural  gas 
well.    Although  the rate  of  decline has  diminished, future  production additions are  required  to alleviate 
this decline. 
 
Royalties 
The five Montney Formation wells tied into the Farrell Creek/Altares Montney joint venture gas plant are 
all  deep  horizontal  wells  and  as  such,  each  of  these  producing  wells  qualifies  for  the  British  Columbia 
Government’s  Deep  Royalty  Credit  Program.    This  Program  generates  up  to  $2.81  million  (gross)  in 
royalty credits for each well and the royalty credits are drawn down over time as the wells produce natural 
gas.    Commencing  with  the  second  quarter  2013,  the  British  Columbia  Government  introduced  a 
minimum  3%  royalty  which  is  applicable  to  wells  within  the  Deep  Royalty  Credit  Program.    Royalty 
credits  that  were  previously  generated  from  the  discontinued  Summer  Drilling  Credit  Program  can  be 
used to offset this minimum royalty.  Between these two well royalty credit programs, and at the rates of 
production experienced in the first half of 2016 the Corporation will not have to actually remit any crown 
royalties to the British Columbia Government for the next five years or more.  Royalty credits applied are 
accounted  for  as  an  offset  against  the  capital  costs  accumulated  within  Property,  Plant  and  Equipment 
(“P,P&E”). 
 
Operating Netbacks 
During  the  three  months  ended  June  30,  2016,  the  Corporation  applied  $Nil  (2015:  $756)  of  royalty 
credits against crown royalties that would otherwise have been payable.
4
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
During  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016,  the  Corporation  applied  $532  (2015:  $16,419)  of  royalty 
credits against crown royalties that would otherwise have been payable.
Operating Costs 
Operating costs, which have fixed and variable rate components, relate to the Corporation’s share of plant 
maintenance, supervision and other production expenses in conjunction with the five producing Montney 
Formation wells at Farrell Creek/Altares.  Operating costs also include transportation costs to transfer the 
natural gas from the pipeline system at Farrell Creek/Altares to the sales point at Spectra Station 2 and the 
British Columbia provincial carbon taxes.  
 
Despite an overall decrease in operating costs from 2015 to 2016, as the tables for Operating Netbacks on 
page  4  and  above  show,  total  operating  costs  have  increased  on  a  per  Mcf  basis.    The  increase  in 
operating costs on a per Mcf basis in 2016 is attributed to the decline in production (and ultimate shut-in 
of production as of March 31, 2016) and an increase in well servicing and plant maintenance costs.  As 
production  continues  to  decline,  the  fixed  component  of  field  operations  remain  relatively  constant  and 
the per unit cost increases.  In addition, lower gas volume throughput requires more operational attention 
at the joint venture gas plant. The continued high level of operating costs on a gross basis is mainly due to 
additional costs associated with natural gas recycling at the Farrell Creek/Altares Montney joint venture 
gas plant due to low volume throughput. 
 
Depletion 
Depletion of Developed and Producing P,P&E is calculated using the unit of production method based on 
proved plus probable reserves.  The depletion expense for the three and six month periods ended June 30, 
2016  of  $Nil  and  $66,587  respectively  (2015:  $94,187  and  $196,521  respectively)  equates  to  $Nil  and 
$1.15 per Mcf respectively (2015: $1.39 and $1.39 per Mcf respectively). The reduction in depletion, on 
both  a  gross  basis  and  on  a  per  Mcf  basis,  is  due  to  the  decrease  in  (or  shut-in  of)  in  production  (see 
Natural Gas Production and Revenues on page 3).
5
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources 
The Corporation’s capital expenditures for the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 
are detailed in the following table:
During  the  first  six  months  of  2016,  certain  land  leases  expired  thus  eliminating  the  future  economic 
benefits  related  to  such  leases.  Therefore,  for  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016,  the  Corporation 
expensed $255,500 (2015: $Nil) of land lease costs as exploration and evaluation expense.  
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016, net capital expenditures (before royalty credits 
earned)  totaled  $0.4  million  and  $3.5  million,  respectively  (2015:  $0.1  million  and  $0.4  million, 
respectively),  compared  to  an  allocated  budgeted  capital  expenditure  (before  royalty  credits  earned)  of 
$0.2 million and $3.2 million, respectively (2015: $0.1  million and $0.3 million, respectively).  For the 
six  months  ended  June  30,  2016,  the  main  component  of  the  drilling,  completion  and  facilities  total  of 
$3.0  million  were  the  costs  related  to  the  drilling  of  the  c-69-H/94-B-1  100%  working  interest  vertical 
well for land retention and resource delineation purposes on the Corporation’s western block of lands.  
 
As at June 30, 2016, the Corporation had a net working capital balance of $1.3 million consisting of cash 
in the amount of $1.4 million, accounts receivable and prepaids of $0.1 million and the current portion of 
unapplied royalty credits of $0.1 million, but offset by accounts payable and  other accrued liabilities of 
$0.3 million. 
 
CSRI’s  capital  budget  is  approved  on  an  annual  basis,  and  subsequently  reviewed  quarterly,  by  the 
Corporation’s Board of Directors.  The Board of Directors has approved a base capital expenditure budget 
for 2016 of $3.6 million (net), primarily towards the drilling of the c-69-H/94-B-1  vertical test well for 
land  retention  purposes  on  the  Corporation’s  100%  working  interest  western  lands  in  the  first  quarter 
2016, and also includes an estimated $0.3 million for capitalized overhead. 
 
CSRI  has  budgeted  for  cash  administration  expenses  (general  and  administrative  expenses  excluding 
share-based  compensation)  for  2016  to  total  $1.3  million  (a  reduction  of  3.6%  from  2015  budgeted 
expenses)  before  capitalization  of  exploration  and  development  related  overhead,  and  has  budgeted  for 
operating  netbacks  from  the  Farrell  Creek/Altares  Montney  operations  for  2016  of  $0.1  million  (2015: 
$0.1 million). 
 
Reclamation and Abandonment Management 
For  operations  in  British  Columbia,  the  Corporation  is  required  to  provide  deposits  towards  future 
abandonment and reclamation costs based on the number of wells and facilities for which the Corporation 
is  the  primary  permit  holder.    Based  on  the  original  Liability  Management  Rating  (“LMR”)  review 
performed by the British Columbia Oil and Gas Commission (“BCOGC”) in 2011, the Corporation was 
assessed  an  initial  LMR  amount  of  $1,235,829.    Up  to  June  30,  2016,  CSRI  has  been  assessed  by  the
6
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
BCOGC  additional  cash  deposit  LMR  amounts  totaling  $432,391,  bringing  the  total  LMR  amount  to 
$1,668,220. 
 
In prior periods, the Corporation had in place a demand bank line of credit facility and a series of letters 
of credit to secure the initial LMR deposit amount.  In January 2015, the line of credit was terminated and 
the  letters  of  credit  formerly  placed  with  the  BCOGC  totaling  $1,235,829  were  replaced  with  cash 
deposits.    As  a  result,  the  total  assessed  LMR  amount  of  $1,668,220  as  at  June  30,  2016  is  secured  by 
cash deposits.  Since these cash deposits are held against future abandonment and reclamation liabilities, 
the balance is therefore considered by management to be restricted in its use and is classified as a non-
current asset. 
 
General and Administrative Expenses
Consulting fees for the three  and six  months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 are comprised of  computer 
network maintenance fees, software technical support, land administration fees, economic analysis project 
work, geological consulting services and investor relations fees.   
 
Salaries  and  benefits,  before  capitalization,  for  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016  have  increased  by 
$27,055  or  8.2%  compared  with  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2015  due  to  normal  annual  salary 
increases and the higher cost of temporary administrative staffing requirements.  
 
The Corporation capitalizes, within both Exploration and Evaluation (“E&E”) assets and P,P&E, certain 
salary and benefit costs associated with staff directly involved in exploration and development activities.  
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016, the Corporation capitalized a total of $67,542 
and  $140,594,  respectively  (2015:  $95,597  and  $206,128,  respectively)  of  general  and  administrative 
expenses, including consulting fees, salaries and benefits directly related to exploration and development 
activities. 
 
The  granting  of  1,600,000  stock  options  in  the  first  half  of  2016  (2015:  Nil),  although  offset  by  the 
decrease  in  the  average  price  of  the  Corporation’s  shares  on  the  Exchange  from  the  six  months  ended 
June 30, 2015 of $0.24 per share compared to the six months ended June 30, 2016 of $0.12 per share, has 
caused  share-based  compensation,  before  capitalization,  to  increase  by  $28,495  or  25.6%  over  those 
periods.    For  the three  and  six  month  periods ended June  30,  2016 the  Corporation  capitalized  $13,479 
and  $40,547,  respectively  (2015:  $15,727  and  $35,916,  respectively)  of  share-based  compensation 
expense  for  those  employees  of  the  Corporation  directly  involved  in  exploration  and  development 
activities.
7
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
Other General and Administrative Expenses
Professional fees for the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 are comprised of legal counsel 
fees for corporate secretary services and various other corporate and joint venture matters, as well as the 
quarterly portion of annual audit and reservoir engineer fee accruals for 2016. Professional services and 
fees for 2016 have been held at consistent levels compared to 2015.  
 
The decrease in investor relations and filing fees for the six months ended June 30, 2016 compared to the 
six months ended June 30, 2015 of $46,152 or 58.9% is attributable to the hiring of a third party investor 
relations firm in 2015.  The investor relations firm contract was terminated in November 2015.  
 
Office  premises  and  insurance  expenses  for  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016  have  decreased  by 
$11,382 or 13.6% compared with the six months ended June 30, 2015 due to a reduction in office rent due 
to renegotiated lease terms effective as of September 2015 (see Commitments on page 11).   
 
Interest  and  other  expenses  are  comprised  of  bank  charges  and  interest,  as  well  as  advertising, 
promotional costs and charitable contributions, if any.  
 
Critical Accounting Policies 
Reference should be made to the Corporation’s significant accounting policies contained in note 2 to the 
Corporation’s  audited  financial  statements  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015.    These  accounting 
policies  may  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  financial  performance  and  financial  position  of  the 
Corporation. 
 
The  preparation  of  the  Corporation’s  financial  statements  requires  management  to  use  estimates  and 
assumptions  that  affect  the  reported  amounts  of  assets  and  liabilities  and  the  disclosure  of  contingent 
assets  and  liabilities  as  at  the  date  of  the  financial  statements,  and  the  amounts  of  expenses  reported 
during the period.  Such estimates and assumptions affect the calculation of depletion and depreciation, 
the  estimated  costs  associated  with  the  decommissioning  liability,  the  determination  of  the  potential 
impairment of petroleum and natural gas properties and E&E assets, and the calculations of share-based 
compensation and deferred income taxes.  Management re-evaluates its estimates and assumptions on an 
on-going basis, but actual results may differ from those estimates.  The most critical accounting policies 
used  by  the  Corporation  upon  which  estimates  and  assumptions  are  required  are  the  impairment  of 
petroleum and natural gas properties and E&E assets, the fair value of assets and liabilities, share-based 
compensation, and deferred income taxes.
8
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
Fair Value of Financial Instruments 
Non-derivative financial instruments 
Non-derivative  financial  instruments  are  comprised  of  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  accounts  receivable, 
restricted  deposits  and  accounts  payable  and  other  accrued  liabilities.    Non-derivative  financial 
instruments  are  recognized  initially  at  fair  value  including,  for  instruments  not  at  fair  value  through 
comprehensive  loss,  any  directly  attributable  transaction  costs.    Subsequent  to  initial  recognition,  non-
derivative financial instruments are measured as described below. 
 
Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of cash on hand, unrestricted term deposits held with banks, and 
other  short-term  highly  liquid  investments  with  original  maturities  of  three  months  or  less.    Bank 
overdrafts and amounts owed under lines of credit, if any, that are repayable on demand form part of the 
Corporation’s  cash  management  whereby  management  has  the  ability  and  intent  to  net  bank  overdrafts 
against  cash,  and  are  included  as  a  component  of  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  for  the  purpose  of  the 
statement of cash flows. 
 
Other  non-derivative  financial  instruments  include  accounts  receivable  and  accounts  payable  and  other 
accrued  liabilities.    Accounts  receivable  are  measured  using  the  effective  interest  rate  method,  less  any 
impairment losses.  Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities are initially recognized at the amount 
required to be paid less any required discount to reduce the payable to fair value. 
 
The  Corporation  has  adopted  the  following  accounting  classifications  for  its  financial  assets:    cash  and 
cash  equivalents  and  accounts  receivable  are  classified  as  loans  and  receivables,  and  restricted  deposits 
are classified as held to maturity.  The Corporation has no financial assets classified as available-for-sale.  
Financial  liabilities  include  accounts  payable  and  other  accrued  liabilities  and  are  classified  as  other 
financial liabilities. 
 
Derivative Financial Instruments 
The Corporation may enter into certain financial derivative contracts in order to manage the exposure to 
market risks from fluctuations in commodity prices, shares prices, interest rates or foreign exchange rates.  
These  instruments  are  not  used  for  trading  or  speculative  purposes.    Debt  instruments  such  as  a 
convertible debenture may contain an embedded derivative.  Any embedded derivatives are valued at fair 
value  at  each  reporting  period.    Transaction  costs  are  recognized  in  the  statement  of  operations  when 
incurred. 
 
New Accounting Policies 
Reference  should  be  made  to  the  changes in  accounting  policies  and  practices  under  IFRS  contained in 
note  3  to  the  Corporation’s  audited  financial  statements  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015.    In 
addition,  as  of  January  1,  2016,  the  Corporation  adopted  those  IFRS  standards  disclosed  therein  that 
became  effective  for  annual  periods  commencing  on  or  after  January  1,  2016.    The  adoption  of  those 
standards or amendments to previous standards had no impact on the amounts recorded in the  unaudited 
interim  condensed  financial  statements  for  the  three  and  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016  or  on  the 
comparative  prior  periods.    Other  upcoming  changes  in  IFRS  may  have  a  significant  impact  on  the 
financial performance and financial position of the Corporation. 
 
Share Capital 
Common Shares 
The  Corporation  has  authorized  share  capital  of  an  unlimited  number  of  common  shares  with  no  par 
value.    As  at  June  30,  2016,  and  as  at  the  date  of  this  report,  there  were  152,592,192  common  shares 
outstanding.
9
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
The Corporation has closed the following share issuances since January 1, 2015: 
 
On December 11, 2015, the Corporation closed a private placement of 12,500,000 flow-through shares at 
a price of $0.20 per share.  The flow-through shares entitle the holder to certain income tax benefits in the 
form  of  Canadian  Exploration  Expense.   The  $2,500,000  of  total  gross  proceeds  from  the  flow-through 
shares private placement was allocated between common shares of $2,125,000 (calculated at the closing 
market  price  of  $0.17  on  the  Exchange  on  the  trading  day  prior  to  the  announcement  of  the  private 
placement) and a flow-through shares premium liability of $375,000, and was fully expended on eligible 
exploration  costs  in  the  first  quarter  2016.   Using  the  look-back  rule,  despite  the  expenditures  being 
incurred in the first quarter 2016, the related resource expenditure deductions were renounced to investors 
effective  December  31,  2015.   Therefore,  the  flow-through  shares  premium  liability  was  reversed  and 
offset by the recording of an equivalent flow-through share premium income amount in the first quarter 
2016.  Share  issue  costs  of  $193,234  were  incurred  in  relation  to  the  above  issuance  of  flow-through 
shares. 
 
On  January  14,  2016,  the  Corporation  closed  a  non-brokered  private  placement  of  4,825,000  units  at  a 
price of $0.20 per unit for total gross proceeds of $965,000.  Each unit consists of one common share of 
the Corporation and one half of one share purchase warrant.  Each whole share purchase warrant entitles 
the  holder  to  purchase  an  additional  common  share  of  the  Corporation  for  a  period  of  one  year  at  an 
exercise price of $0.25 per common share.  The units were valued using the residual method calculated at 
the market price on the Exchange on the trading day prior to closing of $0.17 per common share under 
which the Corporation assigned a total value of $820,250 of the unit proceeds to the common shares, with 
the remaining $144,750 of the unit proceeds assigned to the share purchase warrants. Share issue costs of 
$38,176 were incurred in relation to the issuance of the units.  
 
In  June  2016,  the  Corporation  closed  a  non-brokered  private  placement  consisting  of  1,000,000  flow-
through  shares  at  a  price  of  $0.10  per  share  as  well  as  5,400,000  units  at  a  price  of  $0.10  per  unit  for 
combined total gross proceeds of $640,000. The flow-through shares portion of the private placement was 
closed  on  June  1,  2016  and  entitles  the  holder  to  certain  income  tax  benefits  in  the  form  of  Canadian 
Exploration Expense. The $100,000 of total gross proceeds from the flow-through shares portion of the 
private  placement  was  allocated  between  common  shares  of  $85,000  (calculated  at  the  closing  market 
price of $0.085 on the Exchange on the trading day prior to the announcement of the private placement) 
and  a  flow-through  shares  premium  liability  of  $15,000,  and  will  be  fully  expended  on  eligible 
exploration costs in the third quarter 2016. Therefore, the flow-through shares premium liability will be 
reversed in the period when the expenditures were incurred and offset by  the recording of an equivalent 
flow-through share premium income amount in the third quarter 2016. The related resource expenditure 
deductions  will  be  renounced  to  investors  effective  December  31,  2016.  On  June  27,  2016,  the 
Corporation closed the unit portion of the private placement for total gross proceeds of $540,000. Each 
unit consists of one common share of the Corporation and one half of one share purchase warrant. Each 
whole  share  purchase  warrant  entitles  the  holder  to  purchase  an  additional  common  share  of  the 
Corporation  for  a  period  of  one  year  at  an  exercise  price  of  $0.10  per  common  share.  The  units  were 
valued using the residual method calculated at the closing market price on the Exchange on the trading 
day  prior  to  the  announcement  of  the  private  placement  of  $0.085  per  common  share,  under  which  the 
Corporation  assigned  a  total  value  of  $459,000  of  the  unit  proceeds  to  the  common  shares,  with  the 
remaining  $81,000  of  the  unit  proceeds  assigned  to  the  share  purchase  warrants.  Share  issue  costs  of 
$27,046 were incurred in relation to the above combined issuance of flow-through shares and units.
10
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
Share Purchase Warrants 
As  at  June  30,  2016,  and  as  at  the  date  of  this  report,  there  were  5,112,500  share  purchase  warrants 
outstanding at a weighted average exercise price of $0.17 per share purchase warrant, with expiry dates 
ranging from January 14, 2017 to June 27, 2017.  
 
Stock Options 
As at June 30, 2016, and as at the date of this report, the Corporation had outstanding options to purchase 
7,763,000  common  shares  (being  5.09%  of  the  common  shares  outstanding)  at  a  weighted  average 
exercise price of $0.34 per common share.  From the June 30, 2016 until the date of this report there have 
been no stock options transactions.  
 
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions 
The  Corporation  had  no  off-balance  sheet  transactions  during  the  three  and  six  months  ended  June  30, 
2016 and 2015.  
 
Related Party Transactions  
Transactions  with  related  parties  are  recorded  at  exchange  amounts  for  services  provided.    During  the 
three  and  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016  and  2015,  the  transactions  the  Corporation  had  with  its 
directors, related persons or controlled entities in the normal course of business are as follows: 
 
The  Corporation  has  retained  the  law  firm  of  Gowling  WLG  (Canada)  LLP  (“Gowlings”)  to  provide 
CSRI  with  legal,  director  and  corporate  secretary  services.    A  partner  of  the  law  firm  has  been  the 
Corporate Secretary of the Corporation since September 1, 2014, and became a director of CSRI effective 
May 28, 2015.  During the three and six months ended June 30, 2016, the Corporation incurred $25,831 
and $42,865, respectively (2015: $28,048 and $34,098, respectively) of total fees and disbursements from 
Gowlings.  Such fees have been recorded at amounts agreed upon by the two parties.  The Corporation 
expects to retain the services of Gowlings from time to time.  As at  June 30, 2016 an accounts payable 
balance of $10,054 (June 30, 2015: $10,807) was outstanding. 
 
Related to the private placement closed by the Corporation on December 11, 2015 (see Common Shares 
on page 10), a non-executive director and an executive officer of the Corporation subscribed to a total of 
1,035,000 flow-through shares (8.3% of the total) for gross proceeds of $207,000.  Related to the private 
placement  closed  by  the  Corporation  on  January  14,  2016  (see  Common  Shares  on  page  10),  an 
executive  officer  of the  Corporation  subscribed  to  a  total  of  200,000  units  (4.1%  of  the  total)  for  gross 
proceeds  of  $40,000.  Related  to  the  unit  portion  of  the  private  placement  closed  by  the  Corporation  on 
June 27, 2016 (see Common Shares on Page 10) an executive officer of the Corporation subscribed to a 
total of 200,000 units (3.7% of the total) for gross proceeds of $20,000.   
 
Commitments 
The Corporation had no capital commitments as at June 30, 2016. During 2015, the Corporation’s office 
sub-lease  agreement  (that  was  originally  commenced  on  June  1,  2013  for  a  term  of  three  years)  was 
extended to September 30, 2017.  The amended sub-lease requires the Corporation to pay base annual rent 
of  $11.00  per  square  foot  (formerly  $19.00  per  square  foot)  plus  operating  costs  on  3,420  square  feet.  
The  amended  sub-lease  can  be  terminated  by  either  party  with  three  months  notice  at  any  point 
throughout the remaining term.
11
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
Going Concern 
The unaudited interim condensed financial statements for the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 
have been prepared using IFRS as they apply to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of 
assets  and  settlement  of  liabilities  in  the  normal  course  of  operations  as  they  come  due.    For  the  six 
months  ended  June  30,  2016  the  Corporation  has  reported  a  net  loss  and  comprehensive  loss  of  $0.8 
million  (2015:  $0.9  million)  and  an  accumulated  deficit  of  $51.3  million  as  at  that  date  (December  31, 
2015:  $50.5  million).    In  addition  to  covering  on-going  working  capital  requirements  and  recurring 
negative  cash  flows  from  operating  activities  (partially  resulting  from  the  current  shut-in  of  production 
effective  March 31,  2016 due  to  low  natural  gas  prices), the  Corporation  will  need  to  secure  additional 
funding for any future  exploration and development programs.   In conjunction with recent energy price 
fluctuations, the current natural gas market continues to experience low commodity prices due to excess 
supply  and  lack  of  additional  international  markets  to  sell  into.    These  circumstances  cause  material 
uncertainties  that  may  cast  significant  doubt  upon  the  Corporation’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going 
concern,  and  accordingly,  the  appropriateness  of  the  use  of  accounting  principles  applicable  to  a  going 
concern. 
 
In recognition of these circumstances, the Corporation raised a total of $4.1 million of equity via various 
non-brokered  private  placements  occurring  in  December  2015,  January  2016  and  June  2016  (see 
Common  Shares  on  page  10).    Management  has  also  undertaken  steps  to  reduce  operating  costs  and 
general administrative expenses, including but not limited to field operational efficiencies, renegotiation 
of its office lease terms and reductions in staffing levels. 
 
These undertakings, while significant, are not sufficient in and of themselves to enable the Corporation to 
fund all aspects of its forecasted operations and any future exploration and development, and accordingly, 
management  will  need  to  pursue  other  financing  alternatives  to  fund  the  Corporation  so  that  it  may 
continue  as  a  going  concern.    The  necessary  financing  may  be  secured  through  either  the  exercise  of 
existing  warrants  for  the  purchase  of  common  shares,  the  issue  of  new  equity  or  debt  instruments,  or 
entering  into  new  joint  venture  or  farm-in  arrangements;  nevertheless,  there  is  no  assurance  that  such 
initiatives would be successful. 
 
The  Corporation's  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  is  dependent  upon  its  ability  to  fund  its 
exploration and development programs as well as generate positive cash flows from operating activities.  
These  financial  statements  do  not  reflect  any  adjustments  to  the  carrying  values  and  classifications  of 
assets and liabilities, or to the reported revenues and expenses that would be necessary if the Corporation 
were  unable  to  realize  its  assets  and  settle  its  liabilities  as  a  going  concern  in  the  normal  course  of 
operations; such adjustments could be material. 
 
Business Risks 
Productivity 
A  material  risk  facing  the  Corporation  is  the  productive  capability  of  the  discovered  and  undiscovered 
shale  and  coalbed  methane  natural  gas  resources  on  the  Corporation’s  existing  land  base  at  Farrell 
Creek/Altares  and  the  Corporation’s  ability  to  extract  the  potential  natural  gas  and  natural  gas  liquids 
resources  economically.    The  Corporation  will  continue  to  utilize  the  knowledge,  experience  and 
technology  available  in  the  service  sector  to improve  the  productivity  of  the  resources  in  this emerging 
natural gas and natural gas liquids basin in northeastern British Columbia.
12
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
 
Exploration and Development 
The Corporation, along with its joint venture partner Canbriam, is exploring the resource potential of the 
geological  formations  below  the  base  of  the  Cadomin/Nikanassin  zone  with  a  focus  on  the  Montney 
Formation.    A  number  of  successful  vertical  and  horizontal  wells  have  been  drilled  into  the  Montney 
Formation in the vicinity of the Corporation’s lands and public information is now available on a number 
of these wells.  This has significantly reduced the exploration risk associated with the Montney Formation 
in  the  area.    Exploration  risk  includes  both  determining  the  existence  of  commercial  quantities  of 
hydrocarbons and the ability to recover any potential resource economically.  Recognizing the technical 
expertise,  operating  capability  and  financial  resources  needed  to  explore  these  deeper  formations,  the 
Corporation  entered  into  a  joint  venture  which  has  resulted  in  the  exploration,  development  and 
production  of  its  Deep  Rights  at  Farrell  Creek/Altares  with  the  joint  venture  partner  bearing  the  initial 
capital cost of this program. 
 
Financial Resources and Liquidity 
The Corporation’s ability to continue its operations is highly dependent upon capital markets.  Its ability 
to  develop  its  assets  and  realize  their  carrying  values  is  dependent  upon  the  continued  support  of  its 
shareholders  and  joint  venture  partner,  favorable  capital  market  conditions  and  commodity  prices, 
obtaining  additional  equity  financing,  converting  undiscovered  and  discovered  resources 
into 
economically recoverable reserves, and ultimately, generating revenues sufficient to cover operating costs 
and capital requirements.  Without the support of any one of these factors, or a number of them together, 
the Corporation’s ability to continue its operations could be compromised. 
 
To  minimize  financial  risk,  the  Corporation  pre-funds  all  capital  commitments.    Included  in  such 
estimated  capital  commitments  is  a  minimum  level  of  administrative  and  operating  costs  to  see  the 
Corporation  through  any  potential  disruption  in  the  equity  market  and  any  commodity  price  downward 
cycle. 
 
Commodity Prices 
The Corporation’s exploration and development efforts are targeted principally on natural gas and natural 
gas liquids.  There exists an efficient and sophisticated market for natural gas and natural gas liquids in 
North America which is sensitive to factors affecting  the supply of and demand for these commodities.  
Natural  gas  prices  influence  the  Corporation’s  investment  decisions,  and  the  timing  of  its  commercial 
natural  gas  production  which  will  impact  the  Corporation’s  revenue  and  cash  flow.    The  Corporation 
considers  publically  available  price  forecasts  for  natural  gas  and  natural  gas  liquids  in  its  evaluation  of 
investment economics and returns. 
 
Operating Capability 
The  Corporation  is  pursuing  large  unconventional  natural  gas  and  natural  gas  liquids  projects  that  if 
successful will require additional operating staff and experience to fully develop.  The Corporation has a 
technically  strong  team  suitable  for  its  current  operations  but  does  not  currently  possess  the  skills  and 
staff needed to conduct an efficient large scale development operation.  To mitigate the risk inherent in 
assembling the necessary operating team, the Corporation has entered into a joint venture with an operator 
with the necessary experience and skills.
13
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
 
Land Acquisition and Tenure 
Rights to explore for and extract hydrocarbons are generally acquired from the Crown or private parties 
and  require  certain  work  to  be  performed  within  a  specific  time  period  to  retain  such  mineral  rights.  
Mineral rights  acquired  from  the  Crown are  usually  obtained  through  a closed  bid  process.    In  order to 
expand its exploration activity, the Corporation must have the financial resources needed to bid on Crown 
mineral  rights  and  if  successful,  must  have  the  additional  funds  to  make  the  required  exploration 
expenditures.    The  Corporation  has  acquired  its  existing  mineral  rights  from  the  Province  of  British 
Columbia  and,  as  a  result  of  drilling  expenditures  on  its  lands  through  to  the  date  of  this  report,  has 
retained these mineral rights for terms of up to ten years.  The Corporation continues to use joint ventures 
as well as targeted drilling and development activity to reduce the risk of losing any of its mineral rights. 
 
Environment and Public Policy 
The  exploration,  development  and  production  activities  of  the  Corporation  are highly  regulated  and  the 
trend of public policy is to provide additional incentives and regulations to reduce the impact of industry 
activity on the environment.  The principal component produced during production operations that would 
impact the environment are fracture fluids.  The fracture fluids are recycled and ultimately re-injected into 
deep geologic formations at a commercial facility and in future, may be re-injected at Corporation-owned 
facilities. 
 
Reader’s Advisories 
Non-GAAP/IFRS Terminology 
This  MD&A  contains  important,  comparable  industry  benchmarks  such  as  net  working  capital  and 
operating  netbacks  which  are  not  recognized  measures  under  IFRS,  referred  to  as  Generally  Accepted 
Accounting  Principles  (“GAAP”).    Management  believes  these  measures  are  useful  for  reporting 
purposes,  but  cautions  readers that  these  measures  not  be  considered  as  alternatives  in  accordance  with 
GAAP. 
 
Net working capital is defined as total current assets less total current liabilities.  Operating netbacks are 
calculated  by  taking  petroleum  and  natural  gas  sales,  net  of  royalties  (after  adding  back  royalty  credits 
applied  to  Property,  Plant  and  Equipment  in  the  financial  statements)  less  operating  costs  from  the 
statement of loss and comprehensive loss and dividing by production for the period. 
 
Frequently-used Industry Terminology 
The Corporation uses the following frequently recurring industry terms in this MD&A:  “boe” refers to 
barrels  of  oil  equivalent,  “Mboe”  refers to thousand barrels  of  oil  equivalent,  “GJ”  refers to  gigajoules, 
“Mcf”  refers  to  thousand  cubic  feet,  “MMcf”  refers  to  million  cubic  feet,  “Bcf”  refers  to  billion  cubic 
feet,  “MMbtu”  refers  to  million  British  thermal  units,  and  “/d”  refers  to  per  day.    Disclosure  provided 
herein in respect of a boe may be misleading, particularly if used in isolation.  The Corporation uses a boe 
conversion  ratio  of  6  Mcf  of  natural  gas  to  1  barrel  of  crude  oil  equivalent.    Given  that  the  value  ratio 
based  on  the  current  price  of  crude  oil  as  compared  to  natural  gas  is  significantly  different  from  the 
energy  equivalency  of  6:1,  utilizing  a  conversion  on  a  6:1  basis  may  be  misleading  as  an  indication  of 
value.    The  Corporation  also  uses  a  natural  gas  heating  content  conversion  ratio  of  1  Mcf  to  1.05  GJ.  
These conversion ratios are based on energy equivalency conversion methods primarily applicable at the 
burner tip and do not necessarily represent a value equivalency at the wellhead.
14
Canadian Spirit Resources Inc.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
For the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016 
 
 
Forward-looking Statements 
Information provided herein contains estimates and assumptions which management is required to make 
regarding future events and may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of applicable 
securities laws.  Management’s assessment of future plans and operations, capital expenditures, methods 
of financing capital expenditures and the ability to fund financial liabilities, expected commodity prices 
and the impact on CSRI, expected increase in royalty rates, and the timing of and impact of adoption of 
new  accounting  policies  under  GAAP  may  constitute  forward-looking  statements  under  applicable 
securities  laws  and  necessarily  involve  risks  including,  without  limitation,  risks  associated  with  natural 
gas  exploration,  development,  exploitation,  production,  marketing  and  transportation,  loss  of  markets, 
volatility  of  commodity  prices,  currency  fluctuations,  imprecision  of  reserve  estimates,  environmental 
risk,  competition  from  other  producers,  inability  to  retain  drilling  rigs  and  other  services,  incorrect 
assessment  of  the  value  of  acquisitions,  failure  to  realize  the  anticipated  benefits  of  acquisitions,  the 
inability  to  fully  realize  the  benefits  of  the  acquisitions,  delays  resulting  from  or  inability  to  obtain 
required regulatory approvals and ability to access sufficient capital from internal and external sources. 
 
Although  management  believes  the  expectations  reflected  in  such  forward-looking  statements  are 
reasonable, it can give no assurance that such expectations will be realized.  The use of any of the words 
“anticipate”,  “believe”,  “continue”,  “estimate”,  “expect”,  “forecast”,  “may”,  “intend”,  “likely”,  “will”, 
“project”,  “plan”,  “should”,  “possible”,  “probable”,  “schedule”,  “position”,  “goal”,  “objective”,  and 
similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking information.  These statements are subject to 
certain risks and uncertainties and may be based on assumptions that could cause actual results to differ 
materially from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. 
 
The risks associated with these forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the following:
  Delays in oil and gas regulatory approvals; 
  CSRI’s ability to raise funds in the available equity markets; 
  Fluctuations in natural gas production levels; and 
  Volatility in market prices for natural gas.
The Corporation will endeavor to update all forward-looking statements for any material changes to the 
circumstances  or  information  and  estimates  presented  herein  as  feasible  or  as  required  by  applicable 
securities laws. 
 
Corporate Information 
Additional  information  regarding  the  Corporation  is  available  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com  or  the 
Corporation’s website at www.csri.ca.
15