
OMB APPROVAL 
OMB Number: 3235-0060 
Expires: January 31, 2008 
Estimated average burden 
hours per response: 38.0
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
Current Report
Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of Earliest Event Reported): October 21, 2005
MINES MANAGEMENT, INC. 
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
IDAHO
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation)
000-29786
(Commission File  Number)
91-0538859
(IRS Employer Identification No.)
905 W. Riverside Avenue, Suite 311, Spokane, Washington
(Address of principal executive offices)
99201 
(Zip Code)
Registrant's telephone number, including area code: (509) 838-6050
(Former Name or Former Address if Changed Since Last Report)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8K fining is intended to simultaneously satisfy the filing 
obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:
N/A
[  ]  Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17CFR230.425) 
[  ] 
Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17CFR 240.14a-12) 
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act 
[  ] 
(17 CFR 240.14d-2(b)) 
Pre-commencement communication pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act 
(17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))
[  ]
SEC 873  (6-04)
Potential persons who are to respond to the collection of information contained in this form are not required to 
respond unless the form displays a currently valid OMB control number.
Entry into a Material Definitive Agreement.
On October 21, 2005, Mines Management, Inc. (“MMI”) entered into a Securities
Item 1.01. 
 
 
Purchase Agreement with certain accredited investors pursuant to which MMI sold and such 
Purchasers bought, for an aggregate purchase price of $6,100,000, 1,016,677 shares of MMI’s 
common stock (the “Shares”) and five-year warrants to purchase 588,334 shares of MMI’s 
common stock with an exercise price of $8.50 per share (the “Warrants,” and together with the 
Shares, the “Securities”).  MMI intends to use the net proceeds of the sale of the Securities for 
general corporate purposes.  
 
 
In connection with the sale of the Securities, MMI also entered into a Registration Rights 
Agreement with the Purchasers, dated October 21, 2005, pursuant to which MMI agreed to file a 
shelf registration statement covering resales of the Shares and the shares of common stock 
issuable upon exercise of the Warrants.   
 
 
Agreement are filed with this Current Report, as Exhibits 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3, respectively. 
 
Item 3.02.
The Securities Purchase Agreement, the form of Warrant and the Registration Rights
Unregistered Sale of Equity Securities.
See Item 1.01, which is incorporated herein by reference.  The Securities issued in the
private placement were issued in reliance on the exemption from registration contained in 
Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and/or Regulation D, Rule 506 
promulgated under the Securities Act, in that the issuance did not involve a public offering.
Each investor in the private placement represented that it was an “accredited investor” as 
defined in Regulation D and that it was acquiring the Securities for investment only and not with 
a view to or for sale in connection with any distribution thereof, and appropriate legends were 
affixed to the Securities issued in the private placement. 
 
Item 9.01.
Financial Statements and Exhibits.
Description 
Securities Purchase Agreement, dated October 21, 2005, by and among 
Mines Management, Inc. and the individuals and entities identified as 
Purchasers on the signature pages thereto. 
Form of Warrant issued pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement. 
Registration Rights Agreement, dated October 21, 2005, by and among by 
and among Mines Management, Inc. and the individuals and entities 
identified on the signature pages thereto.
(c)
Exhibits.
Exhibit No. 
4.1
4.2 
4.3
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
Date:  October 24, 2005
Mines Management, Inc.
By: /s/ James H. Moore                            
James H. Moore 
Chief Financial Officer
2
Exhibit No. 
4.1
4.2 
4.3
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description 
Securities Purchase Agreement, dated October 21, 2005, by and among 
Mines Management, Inc. and the individuals and entities identified as 
Purchasers on the signature pages thereto. 
Form of Warrant issued pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement. 
Registration Rights Agreement, dated October 21, 2005, by and among by 
and among Mines Management, Inc. and the individuals and entities 
identified on the signature pages thereto.
3
Exhibit 4.1
SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT
This Securities Purchase Agreement (this “Agreement”) is dated as of October 21, 2005, 
among  Mines  Management,  Inc.,  an  Idaho  corporation  (the  “Company”),  and  each  purchaser 
identified on the signature pages hereto (each, including its successors and assigns, a “Purchaser” 
and collectively the “Purchasers”).
WHEREAS, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement and pursuant 
to Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and Rule 506 
promulgated  thereunder,  the  Company  desires  to  issue  and  sell  to  each  Purchaser,  and  each 
Purchaser,  severally  and  not  jointly,  desires  to  purchase  from  the  Company,  securities  of  the 
Company as more fully described in this Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, IN CONSIDERATION of the mutual covenants contained in this 
Agreement, and for other good and valuable consideration the receipt and adequacy of which are 
hereby acknowledged, the Company and each Purchaser agree as follows:
ARTICLE I. 
DEFINITIONS
1.1
Definitions.  In addition to the terms defined elsewhere in this Agreement, for all 
purposes of this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings indicated in this Section 1.1:
“Action” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3.1(j).
“Affiliate”  means  any  Person  that,  directly  or  indirectly  through  one  or  more 
intermediaries, controls or is controlled by or is under common control with a Person as 
such  terms  are  used  in  and  construed  under  Rule  144  under  the  Securities  Act.    With 
respect to a Purchaser, any investment fund or managed account that is managed on a 
discretionary basis by the same investment manager as such Purchaser will be deemed to 
be an Affiliate of such Purchaser.
“Claims” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3.1(n).
“Closing” means the closing of the purchase and sale of the Securities pursuant to
Section 2.1.
“Closing Date” means the Trading Day when all of the Transaction Documents 
have  been  executed  and  delivered  by  the  applicable  parties  thereto,  and  all  conditions 
precedent to (i) the Purchasers’ obligations to pay the Subscription Amount and (ii) the 
Company’s obligations to deliver the Securities have been satisfied or waived.
“Commission” means the Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Common Stock” means the common stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per 
share,  and  any  other  class  of  securities  into  which  such  securities  may  hereafter  have 
been reclassified or changed into.
1
Exhibit 4.1
“Common  Stock  Equivalents”  means  any  securities  of  the  Company  or  the 
Subsidiaries  which  would  entitle  the  holder  thereof  to  acquire  at  any  time  Common 
Stock, including, without limitation, any debt, preferred stock, rights, options, warrants or 
other instrument that is at any time convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for, or 
otherwise entitles the holder thereof to receive, Common Stock.
“Company  Counsel”  means  Davis  Graham  &  Stubbs  LLP,  1550  Seventeenth 
Street, Suite 500, Denver, Colorado 80202, Telephone (303) 892-9400, Fax (303) 893-
1379.
“Disclosure  Schedules”  means  the  Disclosure  Schedules  of  the  Company
delivered concurrently herewith.
“Discussion  Time”  shall  have  the  meaning  ascribed  to  such  term  in  Section
3.2(h).
“Effective  Date”  means  the  date  that  the  Registration  Statement  filed  by  the 
Company pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement is first declared effective by the 
Commission.
“Evaluation Date” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3.1(r).
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
“Exempt Issuance” means the issuance of (a) shares of Common Stock or options 
to employees, officers or directors of the Company pursuant to any stock or option plan 
duly adopted by a majority of the non-employee members of the Board of Directors of 
the Company or a majority of the members of a committee of non-employee directors 
established  for  such  purpose,  (b)  securities  upon  the  exercise  or  exchange  of  or 
conversion  of  any  Securities  issued  hereunder  and/or  securities  exercisable  or 
exchangeable for or convertible into shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding on 
the date of this Agreement, provided that such securities have not been amended since the 
date  of  this  Agreement  to  increase  the  number  of  such  securities  or  to  decrease  the 
exercise, exchange or conversion price of any such securities, and (c) securities issued 
pursuant to acquisitions or strategic transactions, provided any such issuance shall only 
be  to  a  Person  which  is,  itself  or  through  its  subsidiaries,  an  operating  company  in  a 
business  synergistic  with  the  business  of  the  Company  and  in  which  the  Company 
receives benefits in addition to the investment of funds, but shall not include a transaction 
in which the Company is issuing securities primarily for the purpose of raising capital or 
to an entity whose primary business is investing in securities.
“FW”  means  Feldman  Weinstein  LLP  with  offices  located  at  420  Lexington
Avenue, Suite 2620, New York, New York 10170-0002.
“GAAP” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3.1(h).
2
Exhibit 4.1
“Intellectual  Property  Rights”  shall  have  the  meaning  ascribed  to  such  term  in
Section 3.1(o).
“Legend Removal Date” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section
4.1(c).
“Liens” means a lien, charge, security interest, encumbrance, right of first refusal,
preemptive right or other restriction.
“Material  Adverse  Effect”  shall  have  the  meaning  assigned  to  such  term  in
Section 3.1(b).
“Material  Permits”  shall  have  the  meaning  ascribed  to  such  term  in  Section
3.1(m).
“Per  Share  Purchase  Price”  equals  $6.00,  subject  to  adjustment  for  reverse  and 
forward stock splits, stock dividends, stock combinations and other similar transactions 
of the Common Stock that occur after the date of this Agreement.
“Person”  means  an  individual  or  corporation, partnership,  trust,  incorporated  or 
unincorporated association, joint venture, limited liability company, joint stock company, 
government (or an agency or subdivision thereof) or other entity of any kind.
“Proceeding” means an action, claim, suit, investigation or proceeding (including, 
without limitation, an investigation or partial proceeding, such as a deposition), whether 
commenced or threatened.
“Purchaser Party” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 4.9.
“Registration Rights Agreement” means the Registration Rights Agreement, dated 
the  date  hereof,  among  the  Company  and  the  Purchasers,  in  the  form  of  Exhibit  A 
attached hereto.
“Registration Statement” means a registration statement meeting the requirements 
set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement and covering the resale by the Purchasers 
of the Shares and the Warrant Shares.
“Required  Approvals”  shall  have  the  meaning  ascribed  to  such  term  in  Section
3.1(e).
“Rule  144”  means  Rule  144  promulgated  by  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the 
Securities Act, as such Rule may be amended from time to time, or any similar rule or 
regulation hereafter adopted by the Commission having substantially the same effect as 
such Rule.
“SEC Reports” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3.1(h).
“Securities” means the Shares, the Warrants and the Warrant Shares.
3
Exhibit 4.1
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
“Shares” means the shares of Common Stock issued or issuable to each Purchaser
pursuant to this Agreement.
“Short Sales” shall include all “short sales” as defined in Rule 200 of Regulation
SHO under the Exchange Act.
“Subscription Amount” means, as to each Purchaser, the aggregate amount to be 
paid for Shares and Warrants purchased hereunder as specified below such Purchaser’s 
name  on  the  signature  page  of  this  Agreement  and  next  to  the  heading  “Subscription 
Amount”, in United States Dollars and in immediately available funds.
“Subsequent Financing Notice” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in
Section 4.13.
“Subsidiary”  means  any  subsidiary  of  the  Company  as  set  forth  on  Schedule
3.1(a).
“Trading Day” means a day on which the Common Stock is traded on a Trading
Market.
“Trading  Market”  means  the  following  markets  or  exchanges  on  which  the 
Common Stock is listed or quoted for trading on the date in question: the Nasdaq Capital 
Market,  the  American  Stock  Exchange,  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  the  Nasdaq 
National Market or the OTC Bulletin Board.
“Transaction  Documents”  means
the 
Registration  Rights  Agreement  and  any  other  documents  or  agreements  executed  in 
connection with the transactions contemplated hereunder.
this  Agreement,
the  Warrants  and
“VWAP” means, for any date, the price determined by the first of the following 
clauses  that  applies:  (a)  if  the  Common  Stock  is  then  listed  or  quoted  on  a  Trading 
Market, the daily volume weighted average price of the Common Stock for such date (or 
the nearest preceding date) on the Trading Market on which the Common Stock is then 
listed or quoted as reported by Bloomberg Financial L.P. (based on a Trading Day from 
9:30 a.m. Eastern Time to 4:02 p.m. Eastern Time); (b)  if the Common Stock is not then 
listed or quoted on a Trading Market and if prices for the Common Stock are then quoted 
on the OTC Bulletin Board, the volume weighted average price of the Common Stock for 
such date (or the nearest preceding date) on the OTC Bulletin Board; (c) if the Common 
Stock  is  not  then  listed  or  quoted  on  the  OTC  Bulletin  Board  and  if  prices  for  the 
Common Stock are then reported in the “Pink Sheets” published by the Pink Sheets, LLC 
(or a similar organization or agency succeeding to its functions of reporting prices), the 
most  recent  bid  price  per  share  of  the  Common  Stock  so  reported;  or  (d)  in  all  other 
cases,  the  fair  market  value  of  a  share  of  Common  Stock  as  determined  by  an 
independent appraiser selected in good faith by the Purchasers and reasonably acceptable 
to the Company.
4
Exhibit 4.1
“Warrants” means collectively the Common Stock purchase warrants, in the form 
of Exhibit C delivered to the Purchasers at the Closing in accordance with Section 2.2(a) 
hereof,  which  Warrants  shall  be  exercisable  immediately  and  have  a  term  of  exercise 
equal to five years.
“Warrant Shares” means the shares of Common Stock issuable upon exercise of
the Warrants.
ARTICLE II.
PURCHASE AND SALE
2.1
Closing.  On the Closing Date, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set 
forth herein, concurrent with the execution and delivery of this Agreement by the parties hereto, 
the Company agrees to sell, and each Purchaser agrees to purchase, severally and not jointly, up 
to  an  aggregate  of  $15,000,000  of  Shares  and  Warrants.    Each  Purchaser  shall  deliver  to  the 
Company  via  wire  transfer  or  a  certified  check  immediately  available  funds  equal  to  their 
Subscription Amount and the Company shall deliver to each Purchaser their respective Shares 
and Warrants as determined pursuant to Section 2.2(a) and the other items set forth in Section 2.2 
issuable at the Closing.  Upon satisfaction of the conditions set forth in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, the 
Closing  shall  occur  at  the  offices  of  FW,  or  such  other  location  as  the  parties  shall  mutually 
agree.
2.2
Deliveries.
(a)
On the Closing Date or at such other time set forth below, the Company
shall deliver or cause to be delivered to each Purchaser the following:
(i)
this Agreement duly executed by the Company;
(ii)
a  legal  opinion  of  Company  Counsel,  in  the  form  of  Exhibit  B
attached hereto;
(iii)
a  copy  of  the  irrevocable  instructions  to  the  Company’s  transfer 
agent  instructing  the  transfer  agent  to  deliver,  within  3  Trading  Days  after  the 
Closing  Date,  a  certificate  evidencing  a  number  of  Shares  equal  to  such 
Purchaser’s  Subscription  Amount  divided  by  the  Per  Share  Purchase  Price, 
registered in the name of such Purchaser;
(iv)  within 3 Trading Days after the Closing Date, a Warrant registered 
in the name of such Purchaser to purchase up to a number of shares of Common 
Stock equal to 50% of such Purchaser’s Subscription Amount divided by the Per 
Share Purchase Price, with an exercise price equal to $8.25, subject to adjustment 
therein; and
(v)
the Registration Rights Agreement duly executed by the Company.
(b)
On the Closing Date, each Purchaser shall deliver or cause to be delivered
to the Company the following:
5
(i)
this Agreement duly executed by such Purchaser;
Exhibit 4.1
(ii)
such  Purchaser’s  Subscription  Amount  by  wire  transfer  to  the
account as specified in writing by the Company; and
(iii) 
Purchaser.
the  Registration  Rights  Agreement  duly  executed  by  such
2.3
Closing Conditions.
(a)
The obligations of the Company hereunder in connection with the Closing
are subject to the following conditions being met:
(i)
the accuracy in all material respects when made and on the Closing
Date of the representations and warranties of the Purchasers contained herein;
(ii)
all  obligations,  covenants  and  agreements  of  the  Purchasers 
required  to  be  performed  at  or  prior  to  the  Closing  Date  shall  have  been 
performed; and
(iii)
the  delivery  by  the  Purchasers  of  the  items  set  forth  in  Section
2.2(b) of this Agreement.
(b)
The respective obligations of the Purchasers hereunder in connection with
the Closing are subject to the following conditions being met:
(i)
the  accuracy  in  all  material  respects  on  the  Closing  Date  of  the
representations and warranties of the Company contained herein;
(ii)
all obligations, covenants and agreements of the Company required
to be performed at or prior to the Closing Date shall have been performed;
(iii)
the  delivery  by  the  Company  of  the  items  set  forth  in  Section
2.2(a) of this Agreement;
(iv)
there shall have been no Material Adverse Effect with respect to
the Company since the date hereof; and
(v)
from the date hereof to the Closing Date, trading in the Common 
Stock  shall  not  have  been  suspended  by  the  Commission  (except  for  any 
suspension  of  trading  of  limited  duration  agreed  to  by  the  Company,  which 
suspension shall be terminated prior to the Closing), and, at any time prior to the 
Closing Date, trading in securities generally as reported by Bloomberg Financial 
Markets shall not have been suspended or limited, or minimum prices shall not 
have been established on securities whose trades are reported by such service, or 
on any Trading Market, nor shall a banking moratorium have been declared either 
by the United States or New York State authorities nor shall there have occurred 
any material outbreak or escalation of hostilities or other national or international
6
Exhibit 4.1
calamity of such magnitude in its effect on, or any material adverse change in, any 
financial  market  which,  in  each  case,  in  the  reasonable  judgment  of  each 
Purchaser,  makes  it  impracticable  or  inadvisable  to  purchase  the  Shares  at  the 
Closing.
ARTICLE III.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
3.1
Representations and Warranties of the Company.  Except as set forth under the 
corresponding section of the Disclosure Schedules which Disclosure Schedules shall be deemed 
a part hereof, the Company hereby makes the representations and warranties set forth below to 
each Purchaser:
(a)
Subsidiaries.  All of the direct and indirect subsidiaries of the Company 
are set forth on Schedule 3.1(a).  The Company owns, directly or indirectly, all of the 
capital stock or other equity interests of each Subsidiary free and clear of any Liens, and 
all the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of each Subsidiary are validly issued 
and are fully paid, non-assessable and free of preemptive and similar rights to subscribe 
for  or  purchase  securities.    If  the  Company  has  no  subsidiaries,  then  references  in  the 
Transaction Documents to the Subsidiaries will be disregarded.
(b)
Organization  and  Qualification.
The  Company  and  each  of  the 
Subsidiaries is an entity duly incorporated or otherwise organized, validly existing and in 
good standing under the laws of the jurisdiction of its incorporation or organization (as 
applicable),  with  the  requisite  power  and  authority  to  own  and  use  its  properties  and 
assets and to carry on its business as currently conducted.  Neither the Company nor any 
Subsidiary is in violation or default of any of the provisions of its respective certificate or 
articles of incorporation, bylaws or other organizational or charter documents.  Each of 
the Company and the Subsidiaries is duly qualified to conduct business and is in good 
standing as a foreign corporation or other entity in each jurisdiction in which the nature 
of the business conducted or property owned by it makes such qualification necessary, 
except where the failure to be so qualified or in good standing, as the case may be, could 
not  have  or  reasonably  be  expected  to  result  in  (i)  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the 
legality, validity or enforceability of any Transaction Document, (ii) a material adverse 
effect on the results of operations, assets, business, or condition (financial or otherwise) 
of the Company and the Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or (iii) a material adverse effect 
on  the  Company’s  ability  to  perform  in  any  material  respect  on  a  timely  basis  its 
obligations under any Transaction Document (any of (i), (ii) or (iii), a “Material Adverse 
Effect”) and, to the Company’s knowledge, no Proceeding has been instituted in any such 
jurisdiction  revoking,  limiting  or  curtailing  or  seeking  to  revoke,  limit  or  curtail  such 
power and authority or qualification.
(c)
Authorization;  Enforcement.    The  Company  has  the  requisite  corporate 
power and authority to enter into and to consummate the transactions contemplated by 
each of the Transaction Documents and otherwise to carry out its obligations hereunder 
and thereunder.  The execution and delivery of each of the Transaction Documents by the 
Company and the consummation by it of the transactions contemplated thereby have been
7
Exhibit 4.1
duly authorized by all necessary action on the part of the Company and no further action 
is  required  by  the  Company,  its  board  of  directors  or  its  stockholders  in  connection 
therewith  other  than  in  connection  with  the  Required  Approvals.    Each  Transaction 
Document  has  been  (or  upon  delivery  will  have  been)  duly  executed  by  the  Company 
and, when delivered in accordance with the terms hereof and thereof, will constitute the 
valid  and  binding  obligation  of  the  Company  enforceable  against  the  Company  in 
accordance  with  its  terms  except  (i)  as  limited  by  applicable  bankruptcy,  insolvency, 
reorganization, moratorium and other laws of general application affecting enforcement 
of  creditors’  rights  generally  and  (ii)  as  limited  by  laws  relating  to  the  availability  of 
specific performance, injunctive relief or other equitable remedies.
(d)
No Conflicts.  The execution, delivery and performance of the Transaction 
Documents by the Company, the issuance and sale of the Shares and the consummation 
by the Company of the other transactions contemplated hereby and thereby do not and 
will not (i) conflict with or violate any provision of the Company’s or any Subsidiary’s 
certificate  or  articles  of  incorporation,  bylaws  or  other  organizational  or  charter 
documents, or (ii) conflict with, or constitute a default (or an event that with notice or 
lapse of time or both would become a default) under, result in the creation of any Lien 
upon any of the properties or assets of the Company or any Subsidiary, or give to others 
any  rights  of  termination,  amendment,  acceleration  or  cancellation  (with  or  without 
notice, lapse of time or both) of, any agreement, credit facility, debt or other instrument 
(evidencing a Company or Subsidiary debt or otherwise) or other understanding to which 
the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  is  a  party  or  by  which  any  property  or  asset  of  the 
Company  or  any  Subsidiary  is  bound  or  affected,  or  (iii)  subject  to  the  Required 
Approvals, to the Company’s best knowledge, conflict with or result in a violation of any 
law, rule, regulation, order, judgment, injunction, decree or other restriction of any court 
or governmental authority to which the Company or a Subsidiary is subject (including 
federal and state securities laws and regulations), or by which any property or asset of the 
Company or a Subsidiary is bound or affected; except in the case of each of clauses (ii) 
and (iii), such as could not have or reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse 
Effect.
(e)
Filings, Consents and Approvals.  The Company is not required to obtain 
any consent, waiver, authorization or order of, give any notice to, or make any filing or 
registration with, any court or other federal, state, local or other governmental authority 
or  other  Person  in  connection  with  the  execution,  delivery  and  performance  by  the 
Company  of  the  Transaction  Documents,  other  than  (i)  filings  required  pursuant  to 
Section  4.4  of  this  Agreement,  (ii)  the  filing  with  the  Commission  of  the  Registration 
Statement,  (iii)  application(s)  to  each  applicable  Trading  Market  for  the  listing  of  the 
Shares and Warrant Shares for trading thereon in the time and manner required thereby, 
and (iv) the filing of Form D with the Commission and such filings as are required to be 
made under applicable state securities laws (collectively, the “Required Approvals”).
(f)
Issuance  of  the  Securities.    The  Shares  and  the  Warrants  are  duly 
authorized and, when issued and paid for in accordance with the applicable Transaction 
Documents, will be duly and validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable, free and clear 
of all Liens imposed by the Company other than restrictions on transfer provided for in
8
Exhibit 4.1
the Transaction Documents.  The Warrant Shares, when issued in accordance with the 
terms of the Transaction Documents, will be validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable, 
free and clear of all Liens imposed by the Company.  The Company has reserved from its 
duly authorized capital stock the maximum number of shares of Common Stock issuable 
pursuant to this Agreement and the Warrants.
(g)
Capitalization.    The  capitalization  of  the  Company  is  as  set  forth  in  the 
Company’s most recent periodic report filed with the Commission.  The Company has 
not  issued  any  capital  stock  since  its  most  recently  filed  periodic  report  under  the 
Exchange Act, other than pursuant to the exercise of employee stock options under the 
Company’s stock option plans, the issuance  of shares of Common Stock to employees 
pursuant to the Company’s employee stock purchase plan and pursuant to the conversion 
or exercise of outstanding Common Stock Equivalents.  No Person has any right of first 
refusal, preemptive right, right of participation, or any similar right to participate in the 
transactions  contemplated  by  the  Transaction  Documents.    Except  as  a  result  of  the 
purchase  and  sale  of  the  Securities  and  as  set  forth  on  Schedule  3.1(g),  there  are  no 
outstanding options, warrants, script rights to subscribe to, calls or commitments of any 
character  whatsoever  relating  to,  or  securities,  rights  or  obligations  convertible  into  or 
exercisable  or  exchangeable  for,  or  giving  any  Person  any  right  to  subscribe  for  or 
acquire,  any  shares  of  Common  Stock,  or  contracts,  commitments,  understandings  or 
arrangements by which the Company or any Subsidiary is or may become bound to issue 
additional shares of Common Stock or Common Stock Equivalents.  The issuance and 
sale of the Securities will not obligate the Company to issue shares of Common Stock or 
other securities to any Person (other than the Purchasers) and will not result in a right of 
any holder of Company securities to adjust the exercise, conversion, exchange or reset 
price under such securities. All of the outstanding shares of capital stock of the Company 
are validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable, have been issued in compliance with all 
federal  and  state  securities  laws,  and  none  of  such  outstanding  shares  was  issued  in 
violation of any preemptive rights or similar rights to subscribe for or purchase securities.  
No  further  approval  or  authorization  of  any  stockholder,  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the 
Company or others is required for the issuance and sale of the Securities.  There are no 
stockholders agreements, voting agreements or other similar agreements with respect to 
the Company’s capital stock to which the Company is a party or, to the knowledge of the 
Company, between or among any of the Company’s stockholders.
(h)
SEC Reports; Financial Statements.  The Company has filed all reports, 
schedules,  forms,  statements  and  other  documents  required  to  be  filed  by  it  under  the 
Securities  Act  and  the  Exchange  Act,  including  pursuant  to  Section  13(a)  or  15(d) 
thereof,  for  the  two  years  preceding  the  date  hereof  (or  such  shorter  period  as  the 
Company was required by law to file such material) (the foregoing materials, including 
the exhibits thereto and documents incorporated by reference therein, being collectively 
referred  to  herein  as  the  “SEC  Reports”)  on  a  timely  basis  or  has  received  a  valid 
extension  of  such  time  of  filing  and  has  filed  any  such  SEC  Reports  prior  to  the 
expiration of any such extension.  As of their respective dates, the SEC Reports complied 
in all material respects with the requirements of the Securities Act and the Exchange Act 
and the rules and regulations of the Commission promulgated thereunder, and none of the 
SEC Reports, when filed, contained any untrue statement of a material fact or omitted to
9
Exhibit 4.1
state  a  material  fact  required  to  be  stated  therein  or  necessary  in  order  to  make  the 
statements  therein,  in  the  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were  made,  not 
misleading.    The  financial  statements  of  the  Company  included  in  the  SEC  Reports 
comply in all material respects with applicable accounting requirements and the rules and 
regulations of the Commission with respect thereto as in effect at the time of filing.  Such 
financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  United  States  generally 
accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved 
(“GAAP”), except as may be otherwise specified in such financial statements or the notes 
thereto  and  except  that  unaudited  financial  statements  may  not  contain  all  footnotes 
required by GAAP, and fairly present in all material respects the financial position of the 
Company and its consolidated subsidiaries as of and for the dates thereof and the results 
of operations and cash flows for the periods then ended, subject, in the case of unaudited 
statements, to normal, immaterial, year-end audit adjustments.
(i)  Material Changes.  Since the date of the latest audited financial statements 
included within the SEC Reports, except as specifically disclosed in the SEC Reports, (i) 
there has been no event, occurrence or development that has had or that could reasonably 
be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect, (ii) the Company has not incurred any 
liabilities (contingent or otherwise) other than (A) trade payables and accrued expenses 
incurred in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice and (B) liabilities 
not required to be reflected in the Company’s financial statements pursuant to GAAP or 
required to be disclosed in filings made with the Commission, (iii) the Company has not 
altered  its  method  of  accounting,  (iv)  the  Company  has  not  declared  or  made  any 
dividend  or  distribution  of  cash  or  other  property  to  its  stockholders  or  purchased, 
redeemed or made any agreements to purchase or redeem any shares of its capital stock 
and  (v)  the  Company  has  not  issued  any  equity  securities  to  any  officer,  director  or 
Affiliate, except pursuant to existing Company stock option plans.  The Company does 
not  have  pending  before  the  Commission  any  request  for  confidential  treatment  of 
information.
(j)
Litigation.  There is no action, suit, inquiry, notice of violation, proceeding 
or  investigation  pending  or,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Company,  threatened  against  or 
affecting the Company, any Subsidiary or any of their respective properties before or by 
any  court,  arbitrator,  governmental  or  administrative  agency  or  regulatory  authority 
(federal,  state,  county,  local  or  foreign)  (collectively,  an  “Action”)  which  (i)  adversely 
affects  or  challenges  the  legality,  validity  or  enforceability  of  any  of  the  Transaction 
Documents or the Securities or (ii) could, if there were an unfavorable decision, have or 
reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.  Neither the Company nor 
any  Subsidiary,  nor  any  director  or  officer  thereof,  is  or  has  been  the  subject  of  any 
Action involving a claim of violation of or liability under federal or state securities laws 
or a claim of breach of fiduciary duty.  There has not been, and to the knowledge of the 
Company,  there  is  not  pending  or  contemplated,  any  investigation  by  the  Commission 
involving the Company or any current or former director or officer of the Company.  The 
Commission has not issued any stop order or other order suspending the effectiveness of 
any registration statement filed by the Company or any Subsidiary under the Exchange 
Act or the Securities Act.
10
Exhibit 4.1
(k)
Labor Relations.  No material labor dispute exists or, to the knowledge of 
the Company, is imminent with respect to any of the employees of the Company which 
could reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
(l)
Compliance.    Neither  the  Company  nor  any  Subsidiary  (i)  is  in  default 
under or in violation of (and no event has occurred that has not been waived that, with 
notice  or  lapse  of  time  or  both,  would  result  in  a  default  by  the  Company  or  any 
Subsidiary under), nor has the Company or any Subsidiary received notice of a claim that 
it is in default under or that it is in violation of, any indenture, loan or credit agreement or 
any  other  agreement  or  instrument  to  which  it  is  a  party  or  by  which  it  or  any  of  its 
properties is bound (whether or not such default or violation has been waived), (ii) is in 
violation of any order of any court, arbitrator or governmental body, or (iii) is or has been 
in  violation  of  any  statute,  rule  or  regulation  of  any  governmental  authority,  including 
without  limitation  all  foreign,  federal,  state  and  local  laws  applicable  to  its  business 
except in each case as could not have a Material Adverse Effect.
(m)  Regulatory  Permits.    The  Company  and  the  Subsidiaries  possess  all 
certificates, authorizations and permits issued by the appropriate federal, state, local or 
foreign  regulatory  authorities  necessary  to  conduct  their  respective  businesses  as 
described in the SEC Reports, except where the failure to possess such permits could not 
have  or  reasonably  be  expected  to  result  in  a  Material  Adverse  Effect  (“Material 
Permits”),  and  neither  the  Company  nor  any  Subsidiary  has  received  any  notice  of 
proceedings relating to the revocation or modification of any Material Permit.
(n)
Title to Assets.  Except as disclosed in Schedule 3.1(n) or as could not
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, and except for any such liens, 
encumbrances or other burdens on production that, individually or in the aggregate, would not 
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, each of the Company and its 
Subsidiaries:
(A)
owns record title to all of its fee lands and patented mining 
claims,  subject  to  the  reservations,  limitations  and  exceptions  set  forth  in  the 
patents  by  which  those  fee  lands  were  conveyed  out  of  the  United  States 
government, provided that, to the extent the Company or any of its Subsidiaries 
owns  only  the  mineral  estate  within  any  of  the  fee  lands  or  patented  mining 
claims, the Company and its Subsidiaries make no representation or warranty as 
to their rights to use the surface of such portions of those fee lands or patented 
mining claims;
(B)
subject  to  the  paramount  title  of  the  United  States,  owns 
record title to all of its unpatented mining claims and millsites (the “Claims”) and, 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries,  from  and  after  the  date 
either  the  Company  or  its  Subsidiaries  acquired  an  interest  in  the  Claims, 
(i) assessment work which was performed in accordance with industry standards 
and which was required in order to maintain the Claims has been performed and 
affidavits of the performance of such work have been timely and properly filed 
and  recorded  with  the  appropriate  governmental  agencies;  and  (ii) all  claim
11
Exhibit 4.1
maintenance fees required to maintain the Claims have been timely paid, and all 
required  filings  and  recordings  with  governmental  agencies  associated  with  the 
payment of such claim maintenance fees have been timely made. The Company 
and  its  Subsidiaries  do  not  make  and  expressly  disclaim  any  representation  or 
warranty  as  to  (i) whether  any  of  the  Claims  contains  a  discovery  of  valuable 
minerals; (ii) the absence of any patented or unpatented mining claims in conflict 
with  the  Claims;  (iii) whether  or  not  any  of  the  Claims  comprise  a  contiguous 
group of claims or are free from inferior gaps or fractions; (iv) whether or not the 
Company  or  its  Subsidiaries  or  any  of  their  respective  predecessors-in-title 
established or maintained pedis possessio rights with respect to any of the Claims; 
(v) what rights the Company or any of its Subsidiaries have to use the surface of 
any of the Claims for any purpose; or (vi) otherwise as to the validity of any of 
the Claims or the use of the same; and
(C)
owns its personal property;
in each case free and clear of all liens, encumbrances or burdens on production arising 
by, through or under the Company and its Subsidiaries.
(ii)
All leases of real and personal property of the Company and each 
of its Subsidiaries are valid and subsisting and in full force and effect, and the Company 
has not received any notices of default thereunder.
(o)
Patents and Trademarks.  The Company and the Subsidiaries have, or have 
rights to use, all patents, patent applications, trademarks, trademark applications, service 
marks, trade names, copyrights, licenses and other similar rights necessary or material for 
use in connection with their respective businesses as described in the SEC Reports and 
which  the  failure  to  so  have  could  have  a  Material  Adverse  Effect  (collectively,  the 
“Intellectual Property Rights”).  Neither the Company nor any Subsidiary has received a 
written  notice  that  the  Intellectual  Property  Rights  used  by  the  Company  or  any 
Subsidiary violates or infringes upon the rights of any Person.  To the knowledge of the 
Company, all such Intellectual Property Rights are enforceable and there is no existing 
infringement by another Person of any of the Intellectual Property Rights of others.
(p)
Insurance.  The Company and the Subsidiaries are insured by insurers of 
recognized financial responsibility against such losses and risks and in such amounts as 
are prudent and customary in the businesses in which the Company and the Subsidiaries 
are  engaged,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  directors  and  officers  insurance  coverage  at 
least  equal  to  the  aggregate  Subscription  Amount.    Neither  the  Company  nor  any 
Subsidiary has any reason to believe that it will not be able to renew its existing insurance 
coverage as and when such coverage expires or to obtain similar coverage from similar 
insurers  as  may  be  necessary  to  continue  its  business  without  a  significant  increase  in 
cost.
(q)
Transactions  With  Affiliates  and  Employees.    Except  as  set  forth  in  the 
SEC Reports, none of the officers or directors of the Company and, to the knowledge of 
the  Company,  none  of  the  employees  of  the  Company  is  presently  a  party  to  any 
transaction with the Company or any Subsidiary (other than for services as employees,
12
Exhibit 4.1
officers and directors), including any contract, agreement or other arrangement providing 
for the furnishing of services to or by, providing for rental of real or personal property to 
or  from,  or  otherwise  requiring  payments  to  or  from  any  officer,  director  or  such 
employee or, to the knowledge of the Company, any entity in which any officer, director, 
or  any  such  employee  has  a  substantial  interest  or  is  an  officer,  director,  trustee  or 
partner,  in  each  case  in  excess  of  $60,000  other  than  (i)  for  payment  of  salary  or 
consulting fees for services rendered, (ii) reimbursement for expenses incurred on behalf 
of the Company and (iii) for other employee benefits, including stock option agreements 
under any stock option plan of the Company.
(r)
Sarbanes-Oxley;  Internal  Accounting  Controls.    The  Company  is  in 
material  compliance  with  all  provisions  of  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act  of  2002  which  are 
applicable  to  it  as  of  the  Closing  Date.    The  Company  and  the  Subsidiaries  is  in  the 
process  of  implementing  a  system  of  internal  accounting  controls  sufficient  to  provide 
reasonable assurance that (i) transactions are executed in accordance with management’s 
general  or  specific  authorizations,  (ii)  transactions  are  recorded  as  necessary  to  permit 
preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  GAAP  and  to  maintain  asset 
accountability, (iii) access to assets is permitted only in accordance with management’s 
general  or  specific  authorization,  and  (iv)  the  recorded  accountability  for  assets  is 
compared with the existing assets at reasonable intervals and appropriate action is taken 
with respect to any differences.
(s)
Certain Fees.  No brokerage or finder’s fees or commissions are or will be 
payable by the Company to any broker, financial advisor or consultant, finder, placement 
agent,  investment  banker,  bank  or  other  Person  with  respect  to  the  transactions 
contemplated by the Transaction Documents.  The Purchasers shall have no obligation 
with  respect  to  any  fees  or  with  respect  to  any  claims  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  other 
Persons for fees of a type contemplated in this Section that may be due in connection 
with the transactions contemplated by the Transaction Documents.
(t)
the  accuracy  of
Private  Placement.  Assuming
the  Purchasers 
representations  and  warranties  set  forth  in  Section  3.2,  the  Securities  (assuming  no 
change in applicable law and no unlawful distribution of the Securities by the Purchasers 
or  other  parties)  will  be  issued  to  the  Purchasers  in  compliance  with  applicable 
exemptions  from  the  registration  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act.  The  issuance  and 
sale  of  the  Securities  hereunder  does  not  contravene  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the 
Trading Market.
(u)
Investment Company. The Company is not, and is not an Affiliate of, and 
immediately after receipt of payment for the Securities, will not be or be an Affiliate of, 
an “investment company” within the meaning of the Investment Company Act of 1940, 
as  amended.    The  Company  shall  conduct  its  business  in  a  manner  so  that  it  will  not 
become subject to the Investment Company Act.
(v)
Registration Rights.  Other than each of the Purchasers, no Person has any 
right  to  cause  the  Company  to  effect  the  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  of  any 
securities of the Company.
13
Exhibit 4.1
(w)
Listing and Maintenance Requirements.  The Company’s Common Stock 
is registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act, and the Company has taken 
no  action  designed  to,  or  which  to  its  knowledge  is  likely  to  have  the  effect  of, 
terminating the registration of the Common Stock under the Exchange Act nor has the 
Company  received  any  notification  that  the  Commission  is  contemplating  terminating 
such  registration.    The  Company  has  not,  in  the  12  months  preceding  the  date  hereof, 
received notice from any Trading Market on which the Common Stock is or has been 
listed or quoted to the effect that the Company is not in compliance with the listing or 
maintenance requirements of such Trading Market. The Company is, and has no reason 
to believe that it will not in the foreseeable future continue to be, in compliance with all 
such listing and maintenance requirements.
(x)
Application  of  Takeover  Protections.    The  Company  and  its  Board  of 
Directors  have  taken  all  necessary  action,  if  any,  in  order  to  render  inapplicable  any 
control  share  acquisition,  business  combination,  poison  pill  (including  any  distribution 
under a rights agreement) or other similar anti-takeover provision under the Company’s 
Certificate  of  Incorporation  (or  similar  charter  documents)  or  the  laws  of  its  state  of 
incorporation  that  is  or  could  become  applicable  to  the  Purchasers  as  a  result  of  the 
Purchasers and the Company fulfilling their obligations or exercising their rights under 
the  Transaction  Documents,  including  without  limitation  as  a  result  of  the  Company’s 
issuance of the Securities and the Purchasers’ ownership of the Securities.
(y)
Disclosure.  The Company confirms that, neither it nor any other Person 
acting on its behalf has provided any of the Purchasers or their agents or counsel with any 
information that constitutes or might constitute material, non-public information.   The 
Company  understands  and  confirms  that  the  Purchasers  will  rely  on  the  foregoing 
representations and covenants in effecting transactions in securities of the Company.  All 
disclosure  provided  to  the  Purchasers  regarding  the  Company,  its  business  and  the 
transactions contemplated hereby, including the Disclosure Schedules to this Agreement, 
furnished  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Company  with  respect  to  the  representations  and 
warranties  made  herein  are  true  and  correct  with  respect  to  such  representations  and 
warranties and do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any 
material  fact  necessary  in  order  to  make  the  statements  made  therein,  in  light  of  the 
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. The Company acknowledges 
and agrees that no Purchaser makes or has made any representations or warranties with 
respect to the transactions contemplated hereby other than those specifically set forth in 
Section 3.2 hereof.
(z)
No  Integrated  Offering.  Assuming  the  accuracy  of  the  Purchasers’ 
representations and warranties set forth in Section 3.2, neither the Company, nor any of 
its affiliates, nor any Person acting on its or their behalf has, directly or indirectly, made 
any  offers  or  sales  of  any  security  or  solicited  any  offers  to  buy  any  security,  under 
circumstances that would cause this offering of the Securities to be integrated with prior 
offerings  by  the  Company  for  purposes  of  the  Securities  Act  or  any  applicable 
shareholder  approval  provisions,  including,  without  limitation,  under  the  rules  and 
regulations of any Trading Market on which any of the securities of the Company are 
listed or designated.
14
Exhibit 4.1
(aa)
Solvency.    Based  on  the  financial  condition  of  the  Company  as  of  the 
Closing Date after giving effect to the receipt by the Company of the proceeds from the 
sale  of  the  Securities  hereunder,  (i)  the  Company’s  fair  saleable  value  of  its  assets 
exceeds the amount that will be required to be paid on or in respect of the Company’s 
existing debts and other liabilities (including known contingent liabilities) as they mature; 
(ii)  the  Company’s  assets  do  not  constitute  unreasonably  small  capital  to  carry  on  its 
business for the current fiscal year as now conducted and as proposed to be conducted 
including its capital needs taking into account the particular capital requirements of the 
business  conducted  by  the  Company,  and  projected  capital  requirements  and  capital 
availability  thereof;  and  (iii)  the  current  cash  flow  of  the  Company,  together  with  the 
proceeds the Company would receive, were it to liquidate all of its assets, after taking 
into account all anticipated uses of the cash, would be sufficient to pay all amounts on or 
in respect of its debt when such amounts are required to be paid.  The Company does not 
intend  to  incur  debts  beyond  its  ability  to  pay  such  debts  as  they  mature  (taking  into 
account the timing and amounts of cash to be payable on or in respect of its debt).  The 
Company has no knowledge of any facts or circumstances which lead it to believe that it 
will file for reorganization or liquidation under the bankruptcy or reorganization laws of 
any jurisdiction within one year from the Closing Date.  The SEC Reports set forth as of 
the dates thereof all outstanding secured and unsecured Indebtedness of the Company or 
any Subsidiary, or for which the Company or any Subsidiary has commitments.  For the 
purposes of this Agreement, “Indebtedness” shall mean (a) any liabilities for borrowed 
money or amounts owed in excess of $50,000 (other than trade accounts payable incurred 
in the ordinary course of business), (b) all guaranties, endorsements and other contingent 
obligations in respect of Indebtedness of others, whether or not the same are or should be 
reflected  in  the  Company’s  balance  sheet  (or  the  notes  thereto),  except  guaranties  by 
endorsement of negotiable instruments for deposit or collection or similar transactions in 
the ordinary course of business; and (c) the present value of any lease payments in excess 
of  $50,000  due  under  leases  required  to  be  capitalized  in  accordance  with  GAAP.  
Neither the Company nor any Subsidiary is in default with respect to any Indebtedness.
(bb)  Form S-3 Eligibility.  The Company is eligible to register the resale of the 
Securities for resale by the Purchaser on Form S-3 promulgated under the Securities Act.
(cc)  Tax  Status.    Except  for  matters  that  would  not,  individually  or  in  the 
aggregate,  have  or  reasonably  be  expected  to  result  in  a  Material  Adverse  Effect,  the 
Company and each Subsidiary has filed all necessary federal, state and foreign income 
and franchise tax returns and has paid or accrued all taxes shown as due thereon, and the 
Company has no knowledge of a tax deficiency which has been asserted or threatened 
against the Company or any Subsidiary.
(dd)  No General Solicitation.  Neither the Company nor any person acting on 
behalf of the Company has offered or sold any of the Securities by any form of general 
solicitation or general advertising.  The Company has offered the Securities for sale only 
to the Purchasers and certain other “accredited investors” within the meaning of Rule 501 
under the Securities Act.
15
Exhibit 4.1
(ee)
Foreign Corrupt Practices.  Neither the Company, nor to the knowledge of 
the Company, any agent or other person acting on behalf of the Company, has (i) directly 
or  indirectly,  used  any  funds  for  unlawful  contributions,  gifts,  entertainment  or  other 
unlawful expenses related to foreign or domestic political activity, (ii) made any unlawful 
payment to foreign or domestic government officials or employees or to any foreign or 
domestic political parties or campaigns from corporate funds, (iii) failed to disclose fully 
any contribution made by the Company (or made by any person acting on its behalf of 
which  the  Company  is  aware)  which  is    in  violation  of  law,  or  (iv)  violated  in  any 
material respect any provision of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, as amended.
(ff)  Accountants.    The  Company’s  accountants  are  set  forth  on  Schedule 
3.1(ff) of the Disclosure Schedule.  To the knowledge of the Company, such accountants, 
who  the  Company  expects  will  express  their  opinion  with  respect  to  the  financial 
statements to be included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year 
ending  December  31,  2005,  are  a  registered  public  accounting  firm  as  required  by  the 
Securities Act.
(gg)  Acknowledgment  Regarding  Purchasers’  Purchase  of  Securities.    The 
Company  acknowledges  and  agrees  that  each  of  the  Purchasers  is  acting  solely  in  the 
capacity of an arm’s length purchaser with respect to the Transaction Documents and the 
transactions contemplated hereby.  The Company further acknowledges that no Purchaser 
is acting as a financial advisor or fiduciary of the Company (or in any similar capacity) 
with respect to this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby and any advice 
given by any Purchaser or any of their respective representatives or agents in connection 
with this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby is merely incidental to the 
Purchasers’  purchase  of  the  Securities.    The  Company  further  represents  to  each 
Purchaser that the Company’s decision to enter into this Agreement has been based solely 
on the independent evaluation of the transactions contemplated hereby by the Company 
and its representatives.
(hh)  Acknowledgement Regarding Purchasers’ Trading Activity.  Anything in 
this Agreement or elsewhere herein to the contrary notwithstanding (except for Section 
4.14 hereof), it is understood and agreed by the Company (i) that none of the Purchasers 
have  been  asked  to  agree,  nor  has  any  Purchaser  agreed,  to  desist  from  purchasing  or 
selling, long and/or short, securities of the Company, or “derivative” securities based on 
securities issued by the Company or to hold the Securities for any specified term; (ii) that 
past or future open market or other transactions by any Purchaser, including Short Sales, 
and  specifically  including,  without  limitation,  Short  Sales  or  “derivative”  transactions, 
before or after the closing of this or future private placement transactions, may negatively 
impact  the  market  price  of  the  Company’s  publicly-traded  securities;  (iii)  that  any 
Purchaser, and counter parties in “derivative” transactions to which any such Purchaser is 
a  party,  directly  or  indirectly,  presently  may  have  a  “short”  position  in  the  Common 
Stock, and (iv) that each Purchaser shall not be deemed to have any affiliation with or 
control  over  any  arm’s  length  counter-party  in  any  “derivative”  transaction.    The 
Company  further  understands  and  acknowledges  that  (a)  one  or  more  Purchasers  may 
engage  in  hedging  activities  at  various  times  during  the  period  that  the  Securities  are 
outstanding,  including,  without  limitation,  during  the  periods  that  the  value  of  the
16
Exhibit 4.1
Warrant Shares deliverable with respect to Securities are being determined and (b) such 
hedging  activities  (if  any)  could  reduce  the  value  of  the  existing  stockholders'  equity 
interests  in  the  Company  at  and  after  the  time  that  the  hedging  activities  are  being 
conducted.  The Company acknowledges that such aforementioned hedging activities do 
not constitute a breach of any of the Transaction Documents.
(ii)  Manipulation  of  Price.   The  Company  has  not,  and  to  its  knowledge  no 
one acting on its behalf has, (i) taken, directly or indirectly, any action designed to cause 
or  to  result  in  the  stabilization  or  manipulation  of  the  price  of  any  security  of  the 
Company  to  facilitate  the  sale  or  resale  of  any  of  the  Securities,  (ii)  sold,  bid  for, 
purchased, or, paid any compensation for soliciting purchases of, any of the Securities 
(other than for the placement agent’s placement of the Securities), or (iii) paid or agreed 
to  pay  to  any  person  any  compensation  for  soliciting  another  to  purchase  any  other 
securities of the Company.
3.2
Representations  and  Warranties  of  the  Purchasers.    Each  Purchaser  hereby,  for 
itself  and  for  no  other  Purchaser,  represents  and  warrants  as  of  the  date  hereof  and  as  of  the 
Closing Date to the Company as follows:
(a)
Organization;  Authority.    Such  Purchaser  is  an  entity  duly  organized, 
validly existing and in good standing under the laws of the jurisdiction of its organization 
with  full  right,  corporate  or  partnership  power  and  authority  to  enter  into  and  to 
consummate the transactions contemplated by the Transaction Documents and otherwise 
to  carry  out  its  obligations  hereunder  and  thereunder.  The  execution,  delivery  and 
performance by such Purchaser of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement have 
been  duly  authorized  by  all  necessary  corporate  or  similar  action  on  the  part  of  such 
Purchaser.  Each Transaction Document to which it is a party has been duly executed by 
such  Purchaser,  and  when  delivered  by  such  Purchaser  in  accordance  with  the  terms 
hereof,  will  constitute  the  valid  and  legally  binding  obligation  of  such  Purchaser, 
enforceable  against  it  in  accordance  with  its  terms,  except  (i)  as  limited  by  general 
equitable  principles  and  applicable  bankruptcy,  insolvency,  reorganization,  moratorium 
and other laws of general application affecting enforcement of creditors’ rights generally, 
(ii) as limited by laws relating to the availability of specific performance, injunctive relief 
or  other  equitable  remedies  and  (iii)  insofar  as  indemnification  and  contribution 
provisions may be limited by applicable law.
(b)
Own  Account.    Such  Purchaser  understands  that  the  Securities  are 
“restricted  securities”  and  have  not  been  registered  under  the  Securities  Act  or  any 
applicable  state  securities  law  and  is  acquiring  the  Securities  as  principal  for  its  own 
account and not with a view to or for distributing or reselling such Securities or any part 
thereof  in  violation  of  the  Securities  Act  or  any  applicable  state  securities  law,  has  no 
present intention of distributing any of such Securities in violation of the Securities Act 
or any applicable state securities law and has no arrangement or understanding with any 
other  persons  regarding  the  distribution  of  such  Securities  (this  representation  and 
warranty  not  limiting  such  Purchaser’s  right  to  sell  the  Securities  pursuant  to  the 
Registration  Statement  or  otherwise  in  compliance  with  applicable  federal  and  state 
securities laws) in violation of the Securities Act or any applicable state securities law.
17
Exhibit 4.1
Such  Purchaser  is  acquiring  the  Securities  hereunder  in  the  ordinary  course  of  its 
business.  Such  Purchaser  does  not  have  any  agreement  or  understanding,  directly  or 
indirectly, with any Person to distribute any of the Securities.
(c)
Purchaser Status.  At the time such Purchaser was offered the Securities, it 
was, and at the date hereof it is, and on each date on which it exercises any Warrants, it 
will  be  either:  (i)  an  “accredited  investor”  as  defined  in  Rule  501(a)(1),  (a)(2),  (a)(3), 
(a)(7) or (a)(8) under the Securities Act or (ii) a “qualified institutional buyer” as defined 
in Rule 144A(a) under the Securities Act.  Such Purchaser is not required to be registered 
as a broker-dealer under Section 15 of the Exchange Act.
(d)
Experience of Such Purchaser.  Such Purchaser, either alone or together 
with its representatives, has such knowledge, sophistication and experience in business 
and  financial  matters  so  as  to  be  capable  of  evaluating  the  merits  and  risks  of  the 
prospective investment in the Securities, and has so evaluated the merits and risks of such 
investment.    Such  Purchaser  is  able  to  bear  the  economic  risk  of  an  investment  in  the 
Securities and, at the present time, is able to afford a complete loss of such investment.
(e)
General Solicitation.  Such Purchaser is not purchasing the Securities as a
result of any advertisement, article, notice or other communication regarding the 
Securities published in any newspaper, magazine or similar media or broadcast over 
television or radio or presented at any seminar or any other general solicitation or general 
advertisement.
(f)
Rule 144. Such Purchaser understands that the Securities must be held
indefinitely unless such Securities are registered under the Securities Act or an exemption 
from registration is available. Such Purchaser acknowledges that it is familiar with Rule 
144, and that such Purchaser has been advised that Rule 144 permits resales only under 
certain circumstances. Such Purchaser understands that to the extent that Rule 144 is not 
available, such Purchaser will be unable to sell any Securities without either registration 
under the Securities Act or the existence of another exemption from such registration 
requirement.
(g)
Opportunities for Additional Information. Such Purchaser acknowledges
that such Purchaser has had the opportunity to ask questions of and receive answers from, 
or obtain additional information from, the executive officers of the Company concerning 
the financial and other affairs of the Company, and to the extent deemed necessary in 
light of such Purchaser’s personal knowledge of the Company’s affairs, such Purchaser 
has asked such questions and received answers to the full satisfaction of such Purchaser, 
and such Purchaser desires to invest in the Company.
(h)
Short Sales and Confidentiality Prior To The Date Hereof.  Other than the 
transaction contemplated hereunder, such Purchaser has not directly or indirectly, nor has 
any  Person  acting  on  behalf  of  or  pursuant  to  any  understanding  with  such  Purchaser, 
executed  any  disposition,  including  Short  Sales  (but  not  including  the  location  and/or 
reservation  of  borrowable  shares  of  Common  Stock), in  the  securities  of  the  Company 
during the period commencing from the time that such Purchaser first received a term
18
Exhibit 4.1
sheet  from  the  Company  or  any  other  Person  setting  forth  the  material  terms  of  the 
transactions  contemplated  hereunder  until  the  date  hereof  (“Discussion  Time”).  
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  in  the  case  of  a  Purchaser  that  is  a  multi-managed 
investment  vehicle  whereby  separate  portfolio  managers  manage  separate  portions  of 
such  Purchaser's  assets  and  the  portfolio  managers  have  no  direct  knowledge  of  the 
investment  decisions  made  by  the  portfolio  managers  managing  other  portions  of  such 
Purchaser's assets, the representation set forth above shall only apply with respect to the 
portion of assets managed by the portfolio manager that made the investment decision to 
purchase the Securities covered by this Agreement.  Other than to other Persons party to 
this Agreement, such Purchaser has maintained the confidentiality of all disclosures made 
to  it  in  connection  with  this  transaction  (including  the  existence  and  terms  of  this 
transaction).
The Company acknowledges and agrees that each Purchaser does not make or has not 
made  any  representations  or  warranties  with  respect  to  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby 
other than those specifically set forth in this Section 3.2.
ARTICLE IV.
OTHER AGREEMENTS OF THE PARTIES
4.1
Transfer Restrictions.
(a)
The  Securities  may  only  be  disposed  of  in  compliance  with  state  and 
federal securities laws.  In connection with any transfer of Securities other than pursuant 
to an effective registration statement or Rule 144, to the Company or to an Affiliate of a 
Purchaser or in connection with a pledge as contemplated in Section 4.1(b), the Company 
may  require  the  transferor  thereof  to  provide  to  the  Company  an  opinion  of  counsel 
selected  by  the  transferor  and  reasonably  acceptable  to  the  Company,  the  form  and 
substance of which opinion shall be reasonably satisfactory to the Company, to the effect 
that  such  transfer  does  not  require  registration  of  such  transferred  Securities  under  the 
Securities Act.  As a condition of transfer, any such transferee shall agree in writing to be 
bound by the terms of this Agreement and shall have the rights of a Purchaser under this 
Agreement and the Registration Rights Agreement.
(b)
The  Purchasers  agree  to  the  imprinting,  so  long  as  is  required  by  this
Section 4.1(b), of a legend on any of the Securities in the following form:
THESE  SECURITIES  HAVE  NOT  BEEN  REGISTERED  WITH  THE 
SECURITIES  AND  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION  OR  THE  SECURITIES 
COMMISSION  OF  ANY  STATE  IN  RELIANCE  UPON  AN  EXEMPTION 
FROM  REGISTRATION  UNDER  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  OF  1933,  AS 
AMENDED (THE “SECURITIES ACT”), AND, ACCORDINGLY, MAY NOT 
BE  OFFERED  OR  SOLD  EXCEPT  PURSUANT  TO  AN  EFFECTIVE 
REGISTRATION  STATEMENT  UNDER  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  OR 
PURSUANT  TO  AN  AVAILABLE  EXEMPTION  FROM,  OR  IN  A 
TRANSACTION 
REGISTRATION 
REQUIREMENTS  OF  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  AND  IN  ACCORDANCE
SUBJECT
NOT
TO,
THE
19
Exhibit 4.1
WITH  APPLICABLE  STATE  SECURITIES  LAWS  AS  EVIDENCED  BY  A 
LEGAL  OPINION  OF  COUNSEL  TO  THE  TRANSFEROR  TO  SUCH 
EFFECT,  THE  SUBSTANCE  OF  WHICH  SHALL  BE  REASONABLY 
ACCEPTABLE  TO  THE  COMPANY.    THESE  SECURITIES  MAY  BE 
PLEDGED  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  A  BONA  FIDE  MARGIN  ACCOUNT 
WITH  A  REGISTERED  BROKER-DEALER  OR  OTHER  LOAN  WITH  A 
FINANCIAL  INSTITUTION  THAT  IS  AN  “ACCREDITED  INVESTOR”  AS 
DEFINED  IN  RULE  501(a)  UNDER  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  OR  OTHER 
LOAN SECURED BY SUCH SECURITIES.
The Company acknowledges and agrees that a Purchaser may from time to time 
pledge pursuant to a bona fide margin agreement with a registered broker-dealer or grant 
a  security  interest  in  some  or  all  of  the  Securities  to  a  financial  institution  that  is  an 
“accredited investor” as defined in Rule 501(a) under the Securities Act and who agrees 
to be bound by the provisions of this Agreement and the Registration Rights Agreement 
and,  if  required  under  the  terms  of  such  arrangement,  such  Purchaser  may  transfer 
pledged  or  secured  Securities  to  the  pledgees  or  secured  parties.    Such  a  pledge  or 
transfer would not be subject to approval of the Company and no legal opinion of legal 
counsel  of  the  pledgee,  secured  party  or  pledgor  shall  be  required  in  connection 
therewith.    Further,  no  notice  shall  be  required  of  such  pledge.    At  the  appropriate 
Purchaser’s  expense, 
the  Company  will  execute  and  deliver  such  reasonable 
documentation  as  a  pledgee  or  secured  party  of  Securities  may  reasonably  request  in 
connection  with  a  pledge  or  transfer  of  the  Securities,  including,  if  the  Securities  are 
subject to registration pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the preparation and 
filing of any required prospectus supplement under Rule 424(b)(3) under the Securities 
Act or other applicable provision of the Securities Act to appropriately amend the list of 
Selling Stockholders thereunder.
(c)
Certificates  evidencing  the  Shares  and  Warrant  Shares  shall  not  contain 
any  legend  (including  the  legend  set  forth  in  Section  4.1(b)),  (i)  while  a  registration 
statement (including the Registration Statement) covering the resale of such security is 
effective under the Securities Act, or (ii) following any sale of such Shares or Warrant 
Shares pursuant to Rule 144, or (iii) if such Shares or Warrant Shares are eligible for sale 
under Rule 144(k), or (iv) if such legend is not required under applicable requirements of 
the Securities Act (including judicial interpretations and pronouncements issued by the 
staff of the Commission).  The Company shall cause its counsel to issue a legal opinion 
to  the  Company’s  transfer  agent  promptly  after  the  Effective  Date  if  required  by  the 
Company’s transfer agent to effect the removal of the legend hereunder.  If all or any 
portion  of  a  Warrant  is  exercised  at  a  time  when  there  is  an  effective  registration 
statement to cover the resale of the Warrant Shares, such Warrant Shares shall be issued 
free  of  all  legends.    The  Company  agrees  that  following  the  Effective  Date  or  at  such 
time as such legend is no longer required under this Section 4.1(c), it will, no later than 
three  Trading  Days  following  the  delivery  by  a  Purchaser  to  the  Company  or  the 
Company’s transfer agent of a certificate representing Shares or Warrant Shares, as the 
case  may  be,  issued  with  a  restrictive  legend  (such  third  Trading  Day,  the  “Legend 
Removal Date”), make best efforts to deliver or cause to be delivered to such Purchaser a 
certificate representing such shares that is free from all restrictive and other legends.  The
20
Exhibit 4.1
(d)
Company may not make any notation on its records or give instructions to any transfer 
agent of the Company that enlarge the restrictions on transfer set forth in this Section.  
Certificates for Securities subject to legend removal hereunder shall be transmitted by the 
transfer  agent  of  the  Company  to  the  Purchasers  by  crediting  the  account  of  the 
Purchaser’s prime broker with the Depository Trust Company System.
In  addition  to  such  Purchaser’s  other  available  remedies,  the  Company 
shall pay to a Purchaser, in cash, as partial liquidated damages and not as a penalty, for 
each  $1,000  of  Shares  or  Warrant  Shares  (based  on  the  Closing  Price  of  the  Common 
Stock  on  the  date  such  Securities  are  submitted  to  the  Company’s  transfer  agent) 
delivered  for  removal  of  the  restrictive  legend  and  subject  to  Section  4.1(c),  $10  per 
Trading  Day  (increasing  to  $20  per  Trading  Day  five  (5)  Trading  Days  after  such 
damages have begun to accrue) for each Trading Day beginning two Trading Days after 
the Legend Removal Date until such certificate is delivered without a legend. Nothing 
herein  shall  limit  such  Purchaser’s  right  to  pursue  actual  damages  for  the  Company’s 
failure to deliver certificates representing any Securities as required by the Transaction 
Documents, and such Purchaser shall have the right to pursue all remedies available to it 
at law or in equity including, without limitation, a decree of specific performance and/or 
injunctive relief.
(e)
Each Purchaser, severally and not jointly with the other Purchasers, agrees 
that the removal of the restrictive legend from certificates representing Securities as set 
forth in this Section 4.1 is predicated upon the Company’s reliance that the Purchaser will 
sell any Securities pursuant to either the registration requirements of the Securities Act, 
including any applicable prospectus delivery requirements, or an exemption therefrom.
4.2
Furnishing  of  Information.    As  long  as  any  Purchaser  owns  Securities,  the 
Company  covenants  to  timely  file  (or  obtain  extensions  in  respect  thereof  and  file  within  the 
applicable  grace  period)  all  reports  required  to be  filed  by  the  Company  after  the  date  hereof 
pursuant to the Exchange Act.  As long as any Purchaser owns Securities, if the Company is not 
required  to  file  reports  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Act,  it  will  prepare  and  furnish  to  the 
Purchasers and make publicly available in accordance with Rule 144(c) such information as is 
required for the Purchasers to sell the Securities under Rule 144. The Company further covenants 
that it will take such further action as any holder of Securities may reasonably request, all to the 
extent  required  from  time  to  time  to  enable  such  Person  to  sell  such  Securities  without 
registration under the Securities Act within the limitation of the exemptions provided by Rule 
144.
4.3
Integration.  The Company shall not sell, offer for sale or solicit offers to buy or 
otherwise negotiate in respect of any security (as defined in Section 2 of the Securities Act) that 
would be integrated with the offer or sale of the Securities in a manner that would require the 
registration under the Securities Act of the sale of the Securities to the Purchasers or that would 
be integrated with the offer or sale of the Securities for purposes of the rules and regulations of 
any Trading Market such that it would require shareholder approval prior to the closing of such 
other transaction unless shareholder approval is obtained before the closing of such subsequent 
transaction.
21
Exhibit 4.1
4.4
Securities Laws Disclosure; Publicity.  The Company shall, by 8:30 a.m. Eastern 
time  on  the  Trading  Day  following  the  date  hereof,  issue  a  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K, 
reasonably  acceptable  to  each  Purchaser  disclosing  the  material  terms  of  the  transactions 
contemplated hereby, and shall attach the Transaction Documents thereto.  The Company and 
each Purchaser shall consult with each other in issuing any other press releases with respect to 
the transactions contemplated hereby, and neither the Company nor any Purchaser shall issue any 
such press release or otherwise make any such public statement without the prior consent of the 
Company,  with  respect  to  any  press  release  of  any  Purchaser,  or  without  the  prior  consent  of 
each  Purchaser,  with  respect  to  any  press  release  of  the  Company,  which  consent  shall  not 
unreasonably  be  withheld,  except  if  such  disclosure  is  required  by  law,  in  which  case  the 
disclosing party shall promptly provide the other party with prior notice of such public statement 
or communication.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company shall not publicly disclose the 
name of any Purchaser, or include the name of any Purchaser in any filing with the Commission 
or any regulatory agency or Trading Market, without the prior written consent of such Purchaser, 
except  (i)  as  required  by  federal  securities  law  in  connection  with  the  registration  statement 
contemplated  by  the  Registration  Rights  Agreement  and  (ii)  to  the  extent  such  disclosure  is 
required by law or Trading Market regulations.
4.5
Shareholder Rights Plan.  No claim will be made or enforced by the Company or, 
to the knowledge of the Company, any other Person that any Purchaser is an “Acquiring Person” 
under any shareholder rights plan or similar plan or arrangement in effect or hereafter adopted by 
the Company, or that any Purchaser could be deemed to trigger the provisions of any such plan 
or arrangement, by virtue of receiving Securities under the Transaction Documents or under any 
other  agreement  between  the  Company  and  the  Purchasers.  The  Company  shall  conduct  its 
business in a manner so that it will not become subject to the Investment Company Act.
4.6
Non-Public Information.  The Company covenants and agrees that neither it nor 
any other Person acting on its behalf will provide any Purchaser or its agents or counsel with any 
information that the Company believes constitutes material non-public information, unless prior 
thereto such Purchaser shall have executed a written agreement regarding the confidentiality and 
use of such information.  The Company understands and confirms that each Purchaser shall be 
relying on the foregoing representations in effecting transactions in securities of the Company.
4.7
Use  of  Proceeds.    Except  as  set  forth  on  Schedule  4.7  attached  hereto,  the 
Company shall use the net proceeds from the sale of the Securities hereunder for working capital 
purposes and not for the satisfaction of any portion of the Company’s debt (other than payment 
of  trade  payables  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the  Company’s  business  and  prior  practices),  to 
redeem any Common Stock or Common Stock Equivalents or to settle any outstanding litigation.
4.8
[Intentionally Omitted]
4.9
Indemnification of Purchasers.   Subject to the provisions of this Section 4.9, the 
Company  will  indemnify  and  hold  the  Purchasers  and  their  directors,  officers,  shareholders, 
members, partners, employees and agents (each, a “Purchaser Party”) harmless from any and all 
losses, liabilities, obligations, claims, contingencies, damages, costs and expenses, including all 
judgments, amounts paid in settlements, court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of 
investigation that any such Purchaser Party may suffer or incur as a result of or relating to (a) any
22
Exhibit 4.1
breach of any of the representations, warranties, covenants or agreements made by the Company 
in this Agreement or in the other Transaction Documents or (b) any action instituted against a 
Purchaser, or any of them or their respective Affiliates, by any stockholder of the Company who 
is not an Affiliate of such Purchaser, with respect to any of the transactions contemplated by the 
Transaction  Documents  (unless  such  action  is  based  upon  a  breach  of  such  Purchaser’s 
representations, warranties or covenants under the Transaction Documents or any agreements or 
understandings  such  Purchaser  may  have  with  any  such  stockholder  or  any  violations  by  the 
Purchaser of state or federal securities laws or any conduct by such Purchaser which constitutes 
fraud,  gross  negligence,  willful  misconduct  or  malfeasance).    If  any  action  shall  be  brought 
against  any  Purchaser  Party  in  respect  of  which  indemnity  may  be  sought  pursuant  to  this 
Agreement,  such  Purchaser  Party  shall  promptly  notify  the  Company  in  writing,  and  the 
Company shall have the right to assume the defense thereof with counsel of its own choosing.  
Any  Purchaser  Party  shall  have  the  right  to  employ  separate  counsel  in  any  such  action  and 
participate  in  the  defense  thereof,  but  the  fees  and  expenses  of  such  counsel  shall  be  at  the 
expense of such Purchaser Party except to the extent that (i) the employment thereof has been 
specifically authorized by the Company in writing, (ii) the Company has failed within 20 days 
after receipt of any indemnification notice to assume such defense and to employ counsel, or (iii) 
the named parties to any such Proceeding (including any impleaded parties) include both such 
Purchaser  Party  and  the  Company,  and  such  Purchaser  Party  shall  reasonably  believe  that  a 
material conflict of interest is likely to exist if the same counsel were to represent such Purchaser 
Party and the Company (in which case, if such Purchaser Party notifies the Company in writing 
that it elects to employ separate counsel at the expense of the Company, the Company shall not 
have the right to assume the defense thereof and the reasonable fees and expenses of one separate 
counsel  shall  be  at  the  expense  of  the  Company).    The  Company  will  not  be  liable  to  any 
Purchaser  Party  under  this  Agreement  (i)  for  any  settlement  by  a  Purchaser  Party  effected 
without  the  Company’s  prior  written  consent,  which  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld  or 
delayed;  or  (ii)  to  the  extent,  but  only  to  the  extent  that  a  loss,  claim,  damage  or  liability  is 
attributable to any Purchaser Party’s breach of any of the representations, warranties, covenants 
or agreements made by the Purchasers in this Agreement or in the other Transaction Documents.
4.10  Reservation of Common Stock. As of the date hereof, the Company has reserved 
and the Company shall continue to reserve and keep available at all times, free of preemptive 
rights, a sufficient number of shares of Common Stock for the purpose of enabling the Company 
to issue Shares pursuant to this Agreement and Warrant Shares pursuant to any exercise of the 
Warrants.
4.11  Listing  of  Common  Stock.    The  Company  hereby  agrees  to  use  best  efforts  to 
maintain  the  listing  of  the  Common  Stock  on  a  Trading  Market,  and  as  soon  as  reasonably 
practicable following the Closing (but not later than the earlier of the Effective Date and the first 
anniversary of the Closing Date) to list all of the Shares and Warrant Shares on such Trading 
Market. The Company further agrees, if the Company applies to have the Common Stock traded 
on any other Trading Market, it will include in such application all of the Shares and Warrant 
Shares, and will take such other action as is necessary to cause all of the Shares and Warrant 
Shares to be listed on such other Trading Market as promptly as possible.  The Company will 
take all action reasonably necessary to continue the listing and trading of its Common Stock on a 
Trading Market and will comply in all respects with the Company’s reporting, filing and other 
obligations under the bylaws or rules of the Trading Market.
23
Exhibit 4.1
4.12  Equal Treatment of Purchasers.  No consideration shall be offered or paid to any 
person  to  amend  or  consent  to  a  waiver  or  modification  of  any  provision  of  any  of  the 
Transaction Documents unless the same consideration is also offered to all of the parties to the 
Transaction  Documents.    For  clarification  purposes,  this  provision  constitutes  a  separate  right 
granted to each Purchaser by the Company and negotiated separately by each Purchaser, and is 
intended to treat for the Company the Purchasers as a class and shall not in any way be construed 
as  the  Purchasers  acting  in  concert  or  as  a  group  with  respect  to  the  purchase,  disposition  or 
voting of Securities or otherwise.
4.13  Subsequent Equity Sales.
(a)
From  the  date  hereof  until  90  days  after  the  Effective  Date,  neither  the 
Company  nor  any  Subsidiary  shall  issue  shares  of  Common  Stock  or  Common  Stock 
Equivalents without the prior written consent of the holders of at least 85% of the ten-
outstanding Shares; provided, however, the 90 day period set forth in this Section 4.13 
shall be extended for the number of Trading Days during such period in which (i) trading 
in the Common Stock is suspended by any Trading Market, or (ii) following the Effective 
Date,  the  Registration  Statement  is  not  effective  or  the  prospectus  included  in  the 
Registration Statement may not be used by the Purchasers for the resale of the Shares and 
Warrant Shares.
(b)
From  the  date  hereof  until  such  time  as  no  Purchaser  holds  any  of  the 
Securities, the Company shall be prohibited from effecting or entering into an agreement 
to effect any Subsequent Financing involving a “Variable Rate Transaction”.  The term 
“Variable  Rate  Transaction”  shall  mean  a  transaction  in  which  the  Company  issues  or 
sells  (i)  any  debt  or  equity  securities  that  are  convertible  into,  exchangeable  or 
exercisable for, or include the right to receive additional shares of Common Stock either 
(A) at a conversion, exercise or exchange rate or other price that is based upon and/or 
varies with the trading prices of or quotations for the shares of Common Stock at any 
time after the initial issuance of such debt or equity securities, or (B) with a conversion, 
exercise  or  exchange  price  that  is  subject  to  being  reset  at  some  future  date  after  the 
initial  issuance  of  such  debt  or  equity  security  or  upon  the  occurrence  of  specified  or 
contingent  events  directly  or  indirectly  related  to  the  business  of  the  Company  or  the 
market for the Common Stock or (ii) enters into any agreement, including, but not limited 
to,  an  equity  line  of  credit,  whereby  the  Company  may  sell  securities  at  a  future 
determined price.  Any Purchaser shall be entitled to obtain injunctive relief against the 
Company to preclude any such issuance, which remedy shall be in addition to any right to 
collect damages. Nothing in this provision is intended or shall be interpreted to preclude 
the Company from incurring indebtedness with or without a variable interest rate, or to 
preclude convertible instruments with conventional price-based dilution protections.
(c)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section 4.13 shall not apply in respect 
of  an  Exempt  Issuance,  except  that  no  Variable  Rate  Transaction  shall  be  an  Exempt 
Issuance.
24
Exhibit 4.1
4.14  Short Sales and Confidentiality After The Date Hereof.  Each Purchaser severally 
and not jointly with the other Purchasers covenants that neither it nor any affiliates acting on its 
behalf or pursuant to any understanding with it will execute any Short Sales during the period 
after  the  Discussion  Time  and  ending  at  the  time  that  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this 
Agreement are first publicly announced as described in Section 4.4.  Each Purchaser, severally 
and  not  jointly  with  the  other  Purchasers,  covenants  that  until  such  time  as  the  transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement are publicly disclosed by the Company as described in Section 
4.4, such Purchaser will maintain, the confidentiality of all disclosures made to it in connection 
with  this  transaction  (including  the  existence  and  terms  of  this  transaction).    Each  Purchaser 
understands  and  acknowledges,  severally  and  not  jointly  with  any  other  Purchaser,  that  the 
Commission currently takes the position that coverage of short sales of shares of the Common 
Stock  “against  the  box”  prior  to  the  Effective  Date  of  the  Registration  Statement  with  the 
Securities is a violation of Section 5 of the Securities Act, as set forth in Item 65, Section 5 under 
Section  A,  of  the  Manual  of  Publicly  Available  Telephone  Interpretations,  dated  July  1997, 
compiled by the Office of Chief Counsel, Division of Corporation Finance.  Notwithstanding the 
foregoing, no Purchaser makes any representation, warranty or covenant hereby that it will not 
engage  in  Short  Sales  in  the  securities  of  the  Company  after  the  time  that  the  transactions 
contemplated  by  this  Agreement  are  first  publicly  announced  as  described  in  Section  4.4.  
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  in  the  case  of  a  Purchaser  that  is  a  multi-managed  investment 
vehicle whereby separate portfolio managers manage separate portions of such Purchaser's assets 
and the portfolio managers have no direct knowledge of the investment decisions made by the 
portfolio  managers  managing  other  portions  of  such  Purchaser's  assets,  the  covenant  set  forth 
above shall only apply with respect to the portion of assets managed by the portfolio manager 
that made the investment decision to purchase the Securities covered by this Agreement.
4.15  Delivery of Securities After Closing.  The Company shall deliver, or cause to be 
delivered,  the  respective  Securities  purchased  by  each  Purchaser  to  such  Purchaser  within  3 
Trading Days of the Closing Date.
ARTICLE V.
MISCELLANEOUS
5.1
Termination.   This  Agreement  may  be  terminated  by  any  Purchaser,  as  to  such 
Purchaser’s  obligations  hereunder  only  and  without  any  effect  whatsoever  on  the  obligations 
between  the  Company  and  the  other  Purchasers,  by  written  notice  to  the  other  parties,  if  the 
Closing has not been consummated on or before October 25, 2005; provided, however, that no 
such termination will affect the right of any party to sue for any breach by the other party (or 
parties).
5.2
Fees and Expenses.  Except as expressly set forth in the Transaction Documents 
to the contrary, each party shall pay the fees and expenses of its advisers, counsel, accountants 
and  other  experts,  if  any,  and  all  other  expenses  incurred  by  such  party  incident  to  the 
negotiation, preparation, execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement.  The Company 
shall pay all transfer agent fees, stamp taxes and other taxes and duties levied in connection with 
the delivery of any Securities.
25
Exhibit 4.1
5.3
Entire  Agreement.    The  Transaction  Documents,  together  with  the  exhibits  and 
schedules  thereto,  contain  the  entire  understanding  of  the  parties  with  respect  to  the  subject 
matter  hereof  and  supersede  all  prior  agreements  and  understandings,  oral  or  written,  with 
respect to such matters, which the parties acknowledge have been merged into such documents, 
exhibits and schedules.
5.4
Notices.  Any and all notices or other communications or deliveries required or 
permitted to be provided hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed given and effective 
on the earliest of (a) the date of transmission, if such notice or communication is delivered via 
facsimile at the facsimile number set forth on the signature pages attached hereto prior to 5:30 
p.m.  (New  York  City  time)  on  a  Trading  Day,  (b)  the  next  Trading  Day  after  the  date  of 
transmission, if such notice or communication is delivered via facsimile at the facsimile number 
set forth on the signature pages attached hereto on a day that is not a Trading Day or later than 
5:30 p.m. (New York City time) on any Trading Day, (c) the 2nd Trading Day following the date 
of mailing, if sent by U.S. nationally recognized overnight courier service, or (d) upon actual 
receipt by the party to whom such notice is required to be given.  The address for such notices 
and communications shall be as set forth on the signature pages attached hereto.
5.5
Amendments;  Waivers.    No  provision  of  this  Agreement  may  be  waived  or 
amended except in a written instrument signed, in the case of an amendment, by the Company 
and each Purchaser or, in the case of a waiver, by the party against whom enforcement of any 
such  waiver  is  sought.    No  waiver  of  any  default  with  respect  to  any  provision,  condition  or 
requirement  of  this  Agreement  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  continuing  waiver  in  the  future  or  a 
waiver of any subsequent default or a waiver of any other provision, condition or requirement 
hereof,  nor  shall  any  delay  or  omission  of  either  party  to  exercise  any  right  hereunder  in  any 
manner impair the exercise of any such right.
5.6
Headings.  The headings herein are for convenience only, do not constitute a part 
of this Agreement and shall not be deemed to limit or affect any of the provisions hereof.  The 
language  used  in  this  Agreement  will  be  deemed  to  be  the  language  chosen  by  the  parties  to 
express their mutual intent, and no rules of strict construction will be applied against any party.
5.7
Successors and Assigns.  This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the 
benefit of the parties and their successors and permitted assigns.  The Company may not assign 
this Agreement or any rights or obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of each 
Purchaser.  Any Purchaser, in compliance with all applicable securities laws and subject to the 
restrictions set forth in the Transaction Documents, may assign any or all of its rights under this 
Agreement to any Person to whom such Purchaser assigns or transfers any Securities, provided 
such transferee agrees in writing to be bound, with respect to the transferred Securities, by the 
provisions hereof that apply to the “Purchasers”.
5.8
No Third-Party Beneficiaries.  This Agreement is intended for the benefit of the 
parties hereto and their respective successors and permitted assigns and is not for the benefit of, 
nor may any provision hereof be enforced by, any other Person, except as otherwise set forth in 
Section 4.9.
26
Exhibit 4.1
5.9
Governing Law.  All questions concerning the construction, validity, enforcement 
and  interpretation  of  the  Transaction  Documents  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  and 
enforced in accordance with the internal laws of the State of New York, without regard to the 
principles of conflicts of law thereof.  Each party agrees that all legal proceedings concerning the 
interpretations, enforcement and defense of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement and 
any  other  Transaction  Documents  (whether  brought  against  a  party  hereto  or  its  respective 
affiliates, directors, officers, shareholders, employees or agents) shall be commenced exclusively 
in the state and federal courts sitting in the City of New York. Each party hereby irrevocably 
submits to the exclusive jurisdiction of the state and federal courts sitting in the City of New 
York,  borough  of  Manhattan  for  the  adjudication  of  any  dispute  hereunder  or  in  connection 
herewith or with any transaction contemplated hereby or discussed herein (including with respect 
to the enforcement of any of the Transaction Documents), and hereby irrevocably waives, and 
agrees not to assert in any suit, action or proceeding, any claim that it is not personally subject to 
the  jurisdiction  of  any  such  court,  that  such  suit,  action  or  proceeding  is  improper  or 
inconvenient venue for such proceeding.  Each party hereby irrevocably waives personal service 
of process and consents to process being served in any such suit, action or proceeding by mailing 
a copy thereof via registered or certified mail or overnight delivery (with evidence of delivery) to 
such party at the address in effect for notices to it under this Agreement and agrees that such 
service  shall  constitute  good  and  sufficient  service  of  process  and  notice  thereof.    Nothing 
contained herein shall be deemed to limit in any way any right to serve process in any manner 
permitted  by  law.    The  parties  hereby  waive  all  rights  to  a  trial  by  jury.    If  either  party  shall 
commence an action or proceeding to enforce any provisions of the Transaction Documents, then 
the prevailing party in such action or proceeding shall be reimbursed by the other party for its 
attorneys’  fees  and  other  costs  and  expenses  incurred  with  the  investigation,  preparation  and 
prosecution of such action or proceeding.
5.10  Survival.  The representations and warranties of the Company and the Purchasers 
contained in Section 3.1(cc) and Section 3.2 shall survive for the applicable statute of limitations 
and  those  contained  in  Section  3.1,  with  the  exception  of  Section  3.1(cc),  shall  survive  the 
execution and delivery hereof and the Closing until the date two (2) years from the Closing Date.
5.11  Execution.  This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, all of 
which when taken together shall be considered one and the same agreement and shall become 
effective when counterparts have been signed by each party and delivered to the other party, it 
being  understood  that  both  parties  need  not  sign  the  same  counterpart.    In  the  event  that  any 
signature is delivered by facsimile transmission, such signature shall create a valid and binding 
obligation of the party executing (or on whose behalf such signature is executed) with the same 
force and effect as if such facsimile signature page were an original thereof.
5.12  Severability.    If  any  provision  of  this  Agreement  is  held  to  be  invalid  or 
unenforceable  in  any  respect,  the  validity  and  enforceability  of  the  remaining  terms  and 
provisions of this Agreement shall not in any way be affected or impaired thereby and the parties 
will  attempt  to  agree  upon  a  valid  and  enforceable  provision  that  is  a  reasonable  substitute 
therefor, and upon so agreeing, shall incorporate such substitute provision in this Agreement.
5.13  Rescission  and  Withdrawal  Right.    Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary 
contained  in  (and  without  limiting  any  similar  provisions  of)  the  Transaction  Documents,
27
Exhibit 4.1
whenever  any  Purchaser  exercises  a  right,  election,  demand  or  option  under  a  Transaction 
Document and the Company does not timely perform its related obligations within the periods 
therein provided, then such Purchaser may rescind or withdraw, in its sole discretion from time 
to time upon written notice to the Company, any relevant notice, demand or election in whole or 
in part without prejudice to its future actions and rights.
5.14  Replacement  of  Securities.    If  any  certificate  or  instrument  evidencing  any 
Securities is mutilated, lost, stolen or destroyed, the Company shall issue or cause to be issued in 
exchange  and  substitution  for  and  upon  cancellation  thereof,  or  in  lieu  of  and  substitution 
therefor,  a  new  certificate  or  instrument,  but  only  upon  receipt  of  evidence  reasonably 
satisfactory  to  the  Company  of  such  loss,  theft  or  destruction  and  customary  and  reasonable 
indemnity,  if  requested.    The  applicants  for  a  new  certificate  or  instrument  under  such 
circumstances  shall  also  pay  any  reasonable  third-party  costs  associated  with  the  issuance  of 
such replacement Securities.
5.15  Remedies.  In addition to being entitled to exercise all rights provided herein or 
granted by law, including recovery of damages, each of the Purchasers and the Company will be 
entitled  to  specific  performance  under  the  Transaction  Documents.    The  parties  agree  that 
monetary damages may not be adequate compensation for any loss incurred by reason of any 
breach  of  obligations  described  in  the  foregoing  sentence  and  hereby  agrees  to  waive  in  any 
action for specific performance of any such obligation the defense that a remedy at law would be 
adequate.
5.16  Payment  Set  Aside.    To  the  extent  that  the  Company  makes  a  payment  or 
payments  to  any  Purchaser  pursuant  to  any  Transaction  Document  or  a  Purchaser  enforces  or 
exercises  its  rights  thereunder,  and  such  payment  or  payments  or  the  proceeds  of  such 
enforcement  or  exercise  or  any  part  thereof  are  subsequently  invalidated,  declared  to  be 
fraudulent or preferential, set aside, recovered from, disgorged by or are required to be refunded, 
repaid or otherwise restored to the Company, a trustee, receiver or any other person under any 
law  (including,  without  limitation,  any  bankruptcy  law,  state  or  federal  law,  common  law  or 
equitable cause of action), then to the extent of any such restoration the obligation or part thereof 
originally intended to be satisfied shall be revived and continued in full force and effect as if 
such payment had not been made or such enforcement or setoff had not occurred.
5.17
Independent  Nature  of  Purchasers’  Obligations  and  Rights.    The  obligations  of 
each Purchaser under any Transaction Document are several and not joint with the obligations of 
any other Purchaser, and no Purchaser shall be responsible in any way for the performance of the 
obligations of any other Purchaser under any Transaction Document.  Nothing contained herein 
or in any Transaction Document, and no action taken by any Purchaser pursuant thereto, shall be 
deemed to constitute the Purchasers as a partnership, an association, a joint venture or any other 
kind of entity, or create a presumption that the Purchasers are in any way acting in concert or as a 
group  with  respect  to  such  obligations  or  the  transactions  contemplated  by  the  Transaction 
Documents.    Each  Purchaser  shall  be  entitled  to  independently  protect  and  enforce  its  rights, 
including  without  limitation,  the  rights  arising  out  of  this  Agreement  or  out  of  the  other 
Transaction Documents, and it shall not be necessary for any other Purchaser to be joined as an 
additional party in any proceeding for such purpose.  Each Purchaser has been represented by its 
own separate legal counsel in their review and negotiation of the Transaction Documents.  For
28
Exhibit 4.1
reasons of administrative convenience only, Purchasers and their respective counsel have chosen 
to communicate with the Company through FW.  FW does not represent the Purchasers but only 
The Shemano Group, who has acted as placement agent to the transaction.  The Company has 
elected  to  provide  all  Purchasers  with  the  same  terms  and  Transaction  Documents  for  the 
convenience  of  the  Company  and  not  because  it  was  required  or  requested  to  do  so  by  the 
Purchasers.
5.18  Liquidated  Damages.    The  Company’s  obligations  to  pay  any  partial  liquidated 
damages or other amounts owing under the Transaction Documents is a continuing obligation of 
the  Company  and  shall  not  terminate  until  all  unpaid  partial  liquidated  damages  and  other 
amounts  have  been  paid  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  instrument  or  security  pursuant  to 
which  such  partial  liquidated  damages  or  other  amounts  are  due  and  payable  shall  have  been 
canceled.
5.19  Construction. The parties agree that each of them and/or their respective counsel 
has  reviewed  and  had  an  opportunity  to  revise  the  Transaction  Documents  and,  therefore,  the 
normal  rule  of  construction  to  the  effect  that  any  ambiguities  are  to  be  resolved  against  the 
drafting party shall not be employed in the interpretation of the Transaction Documents or any 
amendments hereto.
(Signature Pages Follow)
29
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Securities Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Exhibit 4.1
MINES MANAGEMENT, INC. 
 
     /s/ James H. Moore 
By:__________________________________________ 
     Name:  James H. Moore 
     Title:  Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer 
 
With a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
[REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
SIGNATURE PAGE FOR PURCHASER FOLLOWS]
30
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Alexandra Global Master Fund Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Mikhail Filimonov 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Mikhail Filimonov 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
Email Address of Purchaser:   
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
c/o Alexandra Investment Management, LLC 
767 Third Avenue, 39th Floor 
New York, NY  10017 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $1,500,000.00 
Shares:  250,000 
Warrant Shares:  125,000 
EIN Number:  N/A
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
31
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Whalehaven Capital Fund Limited 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Arthur Jones 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Arthur Jones 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Director 
Email Address of Purchaser:  eschemenauer@consolidated.bm (Evan Schemenauer) 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
14 Par-La-Ville Road, 3rd Floor 
P.O. Box HM 2257 
Hamilton  
HM JX 
Bermuda 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
c/o Research Capital, *DTC #5029 
Suite 564, 1055 Dunsmuir St. 
Vancouver, BC 
V7X 1LA 
Canada 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $750,000 
Shares:  125,000 
Warrant Shares:  62,500 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
32
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Iroquois Master Fund Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Joshua Silver 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Joshua Silver 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Authorized Signatory 
Email Address of Purchaser:  jsilver@ICfund.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
641 Lexington Avenue, 26th Floor 
NY, NY  10022 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $350,000 
Shares:  58,333 
Warrant Shares:  29,167 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
33
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Omicron Master Trust 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Bruce Bernstein 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Bruce Bernstein 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Managing Partner 
Email Address of Purchaser:  bb@omicroncapital.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
650 Fifth Ave., 24th Fl. 
New York, New York  10019 
Tel:  212-258-2302 
Fax:  212-258-2315 
E-mail:  bd@omicroncapital.com 
Attn:  Brian Daly 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $250,002 
Shares:  41,667 
Warrant Shares:  20,834 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
34
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  SDS Capital Group SPC, Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Scott E. Derby 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Scott E. Derby 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  General Counsel 
Email Address of Purchaser:  steve@sdscapital.com/murray@sdscapital.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
SDS Capital Group SPC, Ltd. 
c/o SDS Management, LLC 
Attn:  General Counsel 
53 Forest Avenue, 2nd Floor 
Old Greenwich, CT  06870 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
SDS Capital Group SPC, Ltd. 
c/o Citigroup Global Markets Inc. 
     Equity Prime Broker 
Attn:  Freddy Rojas 
390 Greenwich, St., 5th Floor 
New York, NY  10013 
Tel:  (212) 723-4832 
Via Trackable Service Please 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $300,000 
Shares:  50,000 
Warrant Shares:  25,000 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
35
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Nite Capital LP 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Keith A. Goodman 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Keith A. Goodman 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Manager of the General Partner 
Email Address of Purchaser:  keith@nitecapital.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
Nite Capital LP 
100 East Cook Avenue, Ste. 201 
Libertyville, IL  60048 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $600,000 
Shares:  100,000 
Warrant Shares:  507,000 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
36
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  GSSF Master Fund, LP 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ E.B. Lyon IV 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  E.B. Lyon IV 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Authorized Agent 
Email Address of Purchaser:  tim@gryphonlp.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
100 Crescent Court, Suite 490 
Dallas, Texas  75201 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $600,000 
Shares:  100,000 
Warrant Shares:  50,000 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
37
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Gryphon Master Fund, L.P. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ E.B. Lyon IV 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  E.B. Lyon IV 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Authorized Agent 
Email Address of Purchaser:  tim@gryphonlp.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
100 Crescent Court, Suite 490 
Dallas, Texas  75201 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $1,200,000.00 
Shares:  200,000 
Warrant Shares:  100,000 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
38
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  Cranshire Capital, L.P. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Mitchell D. Kopin 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Mitchell D. Kopin 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  President - Downsview Capital, The General Partner 
Email Address of Purchaser:  mkopin@cranshireccapital.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
666 Dundee Rd, Suite 1901 
Northbrook, IL  60062 
 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $300,000 
Shares:  50,000 
Warrant Shares:  25,000 
EIN Number:  364055954
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
39
[PURCHASER SIGNATURE PAGES TO MGN SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT]
Exhibit 4.1
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  undersigned  have  caused  this  Securities  Purchase 
Agreement  to  be  duly  executed  by  their  respective  authorized  signatories  as  of  the  date  first 
indicated above.
Name of Purchaser:  DKR Soundshore Oasis Holding Fund Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Purchaser:  /s/ Brad Caswell 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Brad Caswell 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Director 
Email Address of Purchaser:  rnarasi@dkrcapital.com 
 
Address for Notice of Purchaser: 
 
Mailing Address: 
1281 East Main Street, 3rd Floor 
Stamford, CT  06902 
 
Address for Delivery of Securities for Purchaser (if not same as above): 
 
1281 East Main Street, 3rd Floor 
Stamford, CT  06902 
 
 
 
Subscription Amount:  $250,000 
Shares:  41,667 
Warrant Shares:  20,833 
EIN Number:  [PROVIDE THIS UNDER SEPARATE COVER]
Legal Address: 
18 Church Street 
Hamilton HM11 Bermuda
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
40
Exhibit 4.1
MINES MANAGEMENT, INC. 
DISCLOSURE SCHEDULES
The section numbers in these Disclosure Schedules correspond to the section numbers in 
the Securities Purchase Agreement, dated October 21, 2005, by and among Mines Management, 
Inc. and the purchasers identified on the signature page thereto (the “Agreement”); provided 
however, that any matter disclosed in one section or subsection of these Schedules shall be 
deemed disclosed for purposes of and incorporated into the other sections or subsections of these 
Disclosure Schedules (and shall be deemed disclosed for purposes of the representations and 
warranties related to such section(s)) where the applicability of such information to such other 
section(s) is reasonably apparent by cross reference.
41
Newhi, Inc., a Washington corporation
Schedule 3.1(a) 
Subsidiaries
Exhibit 4.1
42
Exhibit 4.1
Schedule 3.1(g) 
Capitalization
Outstanding Options 
 
1998 Stock Option Plan 
Exercise Price
Number Outstanding
$0.40
100,000
2003 Stock Option Plan: 
Exercise Price
Number Outstanding
Expiration Date
09-15-2007
Expiration Date
03-04-2008 
08-27-2008 
05-02-2009 
06-21-2009 
08-30-2009 
01-31-2010 
06-05-2010
Expiration Date
01-28-2007
$1.60 
$1.85 
$4.65 
$3.95 
$5.71 
$3.93 
$4.92
500,000 
210,000 
594,500 
20,000 
250,000 
180,000 
25,000
Service Options granted to Michael Bayback: 
Exercise Price
Number Outstanding
$4.01
214,000
Outstanding Warrants 
 
Granted in connection with February 2004 private placement: 
Exercise Price
Number Outstanding
Expiration Date
$7.25
511,000
02-18-2009
43
Exhibit 4.1
Schedule 3.1(j)
Litigation
Montana Reserves Company v. Noranda Minerals Corp. et al, filed in the Superior Court for the 
State of Washington in the County of Spokane on August 11, 2005, regarding the net proceeds 
royalty described herein on Schedule 3.1(n).
44
Exhibit 4.1
Schedule 3.1(n) 
Title to Assets
1.  Net proceeds royalty defined and created by that certain Agreement and Assignment of New 
Proceeds Royalty, dated May 13, 1993, between Noranda Minerals Corp. and Montana Reserves 
Company (“MRC”). 
 
2.  Production payments originally payable to Jascan Resources Inc. and Atlantic Goldfields Inc. 
pursuant to those certain Purchase and Sale Agreements between Jascan and MRC and Atlantic 
and MRC, dated August 16, 1988, as amended by those certain Amendments to Purchase and 
Sale Agreement between Jascan and MRC and Atlantic and MRC.
45
Exhibit 4.1
Schedule 3.1(s) 
Certain Fees
Exclusive Finder’s Agreement, dated October 10, 2005, between the Company and The 
Shemano Group, Inc. and any fee-splitting arrangements between Shemano and any other Person 
thereunder.
46
Schedule 3.1(v)
Registration Rights
Registration Rights Agreement, dated February 3, 2004, among the Company and the purchasers 
named therein.
Exhibit 4.1
47
LeMaster & Daniels, PLLC
Schedule 3.1(ff) 
Accountants
Exhibit 4.1
48
Schedule 4.7
Use of Proceeds
None.
Exhibit 4.1
49
Exhibit 4.2
NEITHER  THIS  SECURITY  NOR  THE  SECURITIES  INTO  WHICH  THIS  SECURITY  IS 
EXERCISABLE HAVE BEEN REGISTERED WITH THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 
COMMISSION  OR  THE  SECURITIES  COMMISSION  OF  ANY  STATE  IN  RELIANCE 
UPON  AN  EXEMPTION  FROM  REGISTRATION  UNDER  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  OF 
1933, AS AMENDED (THE “SECURITIES ACT”), AND, ACCORDINGLY, MAY NOT BE 
OFFERED  OR  SOLD  EXCEPT  PURSUANT  TO  AN  EFFECTIVE  REGISTRATION 
STATEMENT  UNDER  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  OR  PURSUANT  TO  AN  AVAILABLE 
EXEMPTION FROM, OR IN A TRANSACTION NOT SUBJECT TO, THE REGISTRATION 
REQUIREMENTS  OF  THE  SECURITIES  ACT  AND 
IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH 
APPLICABLE STATE SECURITIES LAWS AS EVIDENCED BY A LEGAL OPINION OF 
COUNSEL  TO  THE  TRANSFEROR  TO  SUCH  EFFECT,  THE  SUBSTANCE  OF  WHICH 
SHALL BE REASONABLY ACCEPTABLE TO THE COMPANY.  THIS SECURITY AND 
THE SECURITIES ISSUABLE UPON EXERCISE OF THIS SECURITY MAY BE PLEDGED 
IN  CONNECTION  WITH  A  BONA  FIDE  MARGIN  ACCOUNT  OR  OTHER  LOAN 
SECURED BY SUCH SECURITIES.
COMMON STOCK PURCHASE WARRANT
To Purchase __________ Shares of Common Stock of
MINES MANAGEMENT, INC.
THIS  COMMON  STOCK  PURCHASE  WARRANT  (the  “Warrant”)  certifies 
that, for value received, _____________ (the “Holder”), is entitled, upon the terms and subject to 
the limitations on exercise and the conditions hereinafter set forth, at any time on or after the date 
hereof  (the  “Initial  Exercise  Date”)  and  on  or  prior  to  the  close  of  business  on  the  fifth 
anniversary of the Initial Exercise Date (the “Termination Date”) but not thereafter, to subscribe 
for  and  purchase  from  Mines  Management,  Inc.  corporation  (the  “Company”),  up  to  ______ 
shares (the “Warrant Shares”) of Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company (the 
“Common Stock”).  The purchase price of one share of Common Stock under this Warrant shall 
be equal to the Exercise Price, as defined in Section 2(b).
Section 1.
Definitions.  Capitalized terms used and not otherwise defined herein shall 
have  the  meanings  set  forth  in  that  certain  Securities  Purchase  Agreement  (the  “Purchase 
Agreement”),  dated  October  ____,  2005,  among  the  Company  and  the  purchasers  signatory 
thereto.
Section 2.
Exercise.
a)
Exercise of Warrant.  Exercise of the purchase rights represented by this 
Warrant may be made, in whole or in part, at any time or times on or after the Initial 
Exercise Date and on or before the Termination Date by delivery to the Company of a 
duly executed facsimile copy of the Notice of Exercise Form annexed  hereto (or such 
other office or agency of the Company as it may designate by notice in writing to the 
registered Holder at the address of such Holder appearing on the books of the Company);
1
provided, however, within 5 Trading Days of the date said Notice of Exercise is delivered 
to the Company, if this Warrant is exercised in full, the Holder shall have surrendered 
this  Warrant  to  the  Company  and  the  Company  shall  have  received    payment  of  the 
aggregate  Exercise  Price  of  the  shares  thereby  purchased  by  wire  transfer  or  cashier’s 
check drawn on a United States bank.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, 
the  Holder  shall  not  be  required  to  physically  surrender  this  Warrant  to  the  Company 
until  the  Holder  has  purchased  all  of  the  Warrant  Shares  available  hereunder  and  the 
Warrant  has  been  exercised  in  full.    Partial  exercises  of  this  Warrant  resulting  in 
purchases of a portion of the total number of Warrant Shares available hereunder shall 
have  the  effect  of  lowering  the  outstanding  number  of  Warrant  Shares  purchasable 
hereunder  in  an  amount  equal  to  the  applicable  number  of  Warrant  Shares  purchased.  
The  Holder  and  the  Company  shall  maintain  records  showing  the  number  of  Warrant 
Shares  purchased  and  the  date  of  such  purchases.    The  Company  shall  deliver  any 
objection to any Notice of Exercise Form within 1 Business Day of receipt of such notice.  
In the event of any dispute or discrepancy, the records of the Holder shall be controlling 
and  determinative  in  the  absence  of  manifest  error.  The  Holder  and  any  assignee,  by 
acceptance of this Warrant, acknowledge and agree that, by reason of the provisions of 
this paragraph, following the purchase of a portion of the Warrant Shares hereunder, the 
number of Warrant Shares available for purchase hereunder at any given time may be less 
than the amount stated on the face hereof.
b)
Exercise  Price.    The  exercise  price  of  the  Common  Stock  under  this
Warrant shall be $8.25, subject to adjustment hereunder (the “Exercise Price”).
c)
Cashless Exercise.  If at any time after one year from the date of issuance 
of  this  Warrant  there  is  no  effective  Registration  Statement  registering,  or  no  current 
prospectus  available  for,  the  resale  of  the  Warrant  Shares  by  the  Holder,  then  this 
Warrant may also be exercised at such time by means of a “cashless exercise” in which 
the  Holder  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  a  certificate  for  the  number  of  Warrant  Shares 
equal to the quotient obtained by dividing [(A-B) (X)] by (A), where:
(A)  =  the  VWAP  on  the  Trading  Day  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  such
(B) =  the Exercise Price of this Warrant, as adjusted; and  
 
(X)  =  the  number  of  Warrant  Shares  issuable  upon  exercise  of  this  Warrant  in 
accordance  with  the  terms  of  this  Warrant  by  means  of  a  cash  exercise 
rather than a cashless exercise.
election;
d)
Exercise Limitations.
i.  Holder’s Restrictions.  The Company shall not effect any exercise of this 
Warrant, and a  Holder shall not have the right to exercise any portion of 
this Warrant, pursuant to Section 2(c) or otherwise, to the extent that after 
giving effect to such issuance after exercise, such Holder (together with
2
the  remaining,  nonexercised  portion  of
such Holder’s affiliates, and any other person or entity acting as a group 
together with such Holder or any of such Holder’s affiliates), as set forth 
on the applicable Notice of Exercise, would beneficially own in excess of 
4.99%  of  the  number  of  shares  of  the  Common  Stock  outstanding 
immediately  after  giving  effect  to  such  issuance.   For  purposes  of  the 
foregoing sentence, the number of shares of Common Stock beneficially 
owned by such Holder and its affiliates shall include the number of shares 
of Common Stock issuable upon exercise of this Warrant with respect to 
which the determination of such sentence is being made, but shall exclude 
the number of shares of Common Stock which would be issuable upon (A) 
exercise  of 
this  Warrant 
beneficially owned by such Holder or any of its affiliates and (B) exercise 
or  conversion  of  the  unexercised  or  nonconverted  portion  of  any  other 
securities  of  the  Company  (including,  without  limitation,  any  other  
Common  Stock  or  Warrants)  subject  to  a  limitation  on  conversion  or 
exercise analogous to the limitation contained herein beneficially owned 
by such Holder or any of its affiliates.  Except as set forth in the preceding 
sentence, for purposes of this Section 2(d)(i), beneficial ownership shall be 
calculated in accordance with Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act and the 
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, it being acknowledged by a 
Holder  that  the  Company  is  not  representing  to  such  Holder  that  such 
calculation is in compliance with Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act and 
such Holder is solely responsible for any schedules required to be filed in 
accordance therewith.   To the extent that the limitation contained in this 
Section  2(d)  applies,  the  determination  of  whether  this  Warrant  is 
exercisable (in relation to other securities owned by such Holder) and of 
which  a  portion  of  this  Warrant  is  exercisable  shall  be  in  the  sole 
discretion of a Holder, and the submission of a Notice of Exercise shall be 
deemed  to  be  each  Holder’s  determination  of  whether  this  Warrant  is 
exercisable (in relation to other securities owned by such Holder) and of 
which portion of this Warrant is exercisable, in each case subject to such 
aggregate percentage limitation, and the Company shall have no obligation 
to verify or confirm the accuracy of such determination.   In addition, a 
determination  as  to  any  group  status  as  contemplated  above  shall  be 
determined in accordance with Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act and the 
rules  and  regulations  promulgated  thereunder.    For  purposes  of  this 
Section 2(d), in determining the number of outstanding shares of Common 
Stock, a Holder may rely on the number of outstanding shares of Common 
Stock as reflected in (x) the Company’s most recent Form 10-Q or Form 
10-K, as the case may be, (y) a more recent public announcement by the 
Company  or  (z)  any  other  notice  by  the  Company  or  the  Company’s 
Transfer  Agent  setting  forth  the  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock 
outstanding.  Upon the written or oral request of a Holder, the Company 
shall  within  two  Trading  Days  confirm  orally  and  in  writing  to  such 
Holder the number of shares of Common Stock then outstanding.  In any 
case,  the  number  of  outstanding  shares  of  Common  Stock  shall  be
3
determined after giving effect to the conversion or exercise of securities of 
the Company, including this Warrant, by such Holder or its affiliates since 
the date as of which such number of outstanding shares of Common Stock 
was reported.  The provisions of this Section 2(d) may be waived by such 
Holder, at the election of such Holder, upon not less than 61 days’ prior 
notice  to  the  Company,  and  the  provisions  of  this  Section  2(d)  shall 
continue to apply until such 61st day (or such later date, as determined by 
such Holder, as may be specified in such notice of waiver). The provisions 
of this paragraph shall be implemented in a manner otherwise than in strict 
conformity with the terms of this Section 2(d) to correct this paragraph (or 
any  portion  hereof)  which  may  be  defective  or  inconsistent  with  the 
intended  4.99%  beneficial  ownership  limitation  herein  contained  or  to 
make  changes  or  supplements  necessary  or  desirable  to  properly  give 
effect  to  such  4.99%  limitation.  The  limitations  contained  in  this 
paragraph shall apply to a successor holder of this Warrant. The holders of 
Common Stock of the Company shall be third party beneficiaries of this 
Section 2(d) and the Company may not waive this Section 2(d) without the 
consent of holders of a majority of its Common Stock.
ii.
Trading Market Restrictions.  If the Company has not obtained 
Shareholder  Approval  (as  defined  below),  then  the  Company  may  not 
issue upon exercise of this Warrant a number of shares of Common Stock, 
which,  when  aggregated  with  any  shares  of  Common  Stock  issued  (A) 
pursuant to the Purchase Agreement and (B) upon prior exercise of this or 
any  other  Warrant  issued  pursuant  to  the  Purchase  Agreement,  would 
exceed 19.999% of the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding 
on the Trading Day immediately preceding the Closing Date (such number 
of shares, the “Issuable Maximum”).  If on any attempted exercise of this 
Warrant,  the  issuance  of  Warrant  Shares  would  exceed  the  Issuable 
Maximum and the Company shall not have previously obtained the vote of 
shareholders to approve the issuance of shares of Common Stock in excess 
of the Issuable Maximum pursuant to the terms hereof (the “Shareholder 
Approval”),  then  the  Company  shall  issue  to  the  Holder  requesting  a 
Warrant exercise the Holder’s pro-rata portion of such number of Warrant 
Shares as may be issued below the Issuable Maximum and, with respect to 
the  remainder  of  the  aggregate  number  of  Warrant  Shares,  this  Warrant 
shall not be exercisable until and unless Shareholder Approval has been 
obtained.  The Holder’s pro-rata portion of the Issuable Maximum shall be 
the number of Warrant Shares initially issuable hereunder divided by the 
number of Warrant Shares initially issuable upon exercise of all Warrants 
issued pursuant to the Purchase Agreement. If any of such Warrants have 
been fully exercised prior to any adjustment to the Exercise Price, then the 
pro-rata portion shall be the number of Warrant Shares issuable under this 
Warrant divided by the number of Warrant Shares issuable upon exercise 
of all other outstanding Warrants.
e)
Mechanics of Exercise.
4
i.  Authorization  of  Warrant  Shares.    The  Company  covenants 
that  all  Warrant  Shares  which  may  be  issued  upon  the  exercise  of  the 
purchase  rights  represented  by  this  Warrant  will,  upon  exercise  of  the 
purchase  rights  represented  by  this  Warrant,  be  duly  authorized,  validly 
issued,  fully  paid  and  nonassessable  and  free  from  all  taxes,  liens  and 
charges in respect of the issue thereof (other than taxes in respect of any 
transfer occurring contemporaneously with such issue).
through
the  Depository  Trust  Company
ii.  Delivery of Certificates Upon Exercise.  Certificates for shares 
purchased  hereunder  shall  be  transmitted  by  the  transfer  agent  of  the 
Company  to  the  Holder  by  crediting  the  account  of  the  Holder’s  prime 
broker  with 
its  Deposit 
Withdrawal  Agent  Commission  (“DWAC”)  system  if  the  Company  is  a 
participant  in  such  system,  and  otherwise  by  physical  delivery  to  the 
address specified by the Holder in the Notice of Exercise within 3 Trading 
Days from the delivery to the Company of the Notice of Exercise Form, 
surrender  of  this  Warrant  (if  required)  and  payment  of  the  aggregate 
Exercise Price as set forth above (“Warrant Share Delivery Date”).  This 
Warrant shall be deemed to have been exercised on the date the Exercise 
Price is received by the Company.  The Warrant Shares shall be deemed to 
have  been  issued,  and  Holder  or  any  other  person  so  designated  to  be 
named therein shall be deemed to have become a holder of record of such 
shares for all purposes, as of the date the Warrant has been exercised by 
payment to the Company of the Exercise Price and all taxes required to be 
paid  by  the  Holder,  if  any,  pursuant  to  Section  2(e)(vii)  prior  to  the 
issuance of such shares, have been paid.
iii.  Delivery  of  New  Warrants  Upon  Exercise.    If  this  Warrant 
shall have been exercised in part, the Company shall, at the request of a 
Holder  and  upon  surrender  of  this  Warrant  certificate,  at  the  time  of 
delivery  of  the  certificate  or  certificates  representing  Warrant  Shares, 
deliver  to  Holder  a  new  Warrant  evidencing  the  rights  of  Holder  to 
purchase  the  unpurchased  Warrant  Shares  called  for  by  this  Warrant, 
which  new  Warrant  shall  in  all  other  respects  be  identical  with  this 
Warrant.
iv.  Rescission Rights.    If  the  Company  fails  to  cause  its  transfer 
agent to transmit to the Holder a certificate or certificates representing the 
Warrant  Shares  pursuant  to  this  Section  2(e)(iv)  by  the  Warrant  Share 
Delivery Date, then the Holder will have the right to rescind such exercise.
v.  Compensation  for  Buy-In  on  Failure  to  Timely  Deliver 
Certificates Upon Exercise.  In addition to any other rights available to the 
Holder, if the Company fails to cause its transfer agent to transmit to the 
Holder  a  certificate  or  certificates  representing  the  Warrant  Shares 
pursuant to an exercise on or before the Warrant Share Delivery Date, and 
if after such date the Holder is required by its broker to purchase (in an
5
open market transaction or otherwise) shares of Common Stock to deliver 
in  satisfaction  of  a  sale  by  the  Holder  of  the  Warrant  Shares  which  the 
Holder  anticipated  receiving  upon  such  exercise  (a  “Buy-In”),  then  the 
Company shall (1) pay in cash to the Holder the amount by which (x) the 
Holder’s  total  purchase  price  (including  brokerage  commissions,  if  any) 
for  the  shares  of  Common  Stock  so  purchased  exceeds  (y)  the  amount 
obtained  by  multiplying  (A)  the  number  of  Warrant  Shares  that  the 
Company  was  required  to  deliver  to  the  Holder  in  connection  with  the 
exercise at issue times (B) the price at which the sell order giving rise to 
such purchase obligation was executed, and (2) at the option of the Holder, 
either  reinstate  the  portion  of  the  Warrant  and  equivalent  number  of 
Warrant Shares for which such exercise was not honored or deliver to the 
Holder  the  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  that  would  have  been 
issued  had  the  Company  timely  complied  with  its  exercise  and  delivery 
obligations  hereunder.    For  example,  if  the  Holder  purchases  Common 
Stock  having  a  total  purchase  price  of  $11,000  to  cover  a  Buy-In  with 
respect  to  an  attempted  exercise  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  with  an 
aggregate  sale  price  giving  rise  to  such  purchase  obligation  of  $10,000, 
under clause (1) of the immediately preceding sentence the Company shall 
be  required  to  pay  the  Holder  $1,000.  The  Holder  shall  provide  the 
Company written notice indicating the amounts payable to the Holder in 
respect  of  the  Buy-In,  together  with  applicable  confirmations  and  other 
evidence  reasonably  requested  by  the  Company.    Nothing  herein  shall 
limit  a  Holder’s  right  to  pursue  any  other  remedies  available  to  it 
hereunder,  at  law  or  in  equity  including,  without  limitation,  a  decree  of 
specific  performance  and/or 
the 
Company’s  failure  to  timely  deliver  certificates  representing  shares  of 
Common Stock upon exercise of the Warrant as required pursuant to the 
terms hereof.
injunctive  relief  with  respect
to
vi.  No  Fractional  Shares  or  Scrip.    No  fractional  shares  or  scrip 
representing  fractional  shares  shall  be  issued  upon  the  exercise  of  this 
Warrant.  As to any fraction of a share which Holder would otherwise be 
entitled  to  purchase  upon  such  exercise,  the  Company  shall  pay  a  cash 
adjustment  in  respect  of  such  final  fraction  in  an  amount  equal  to  such 
fraction multiplied by the Exercise Price.
vii.  Charges,  Taxes  and  Expenses.    Issuance  of  certificates  for 
Warrant Shares shall be made without charge to the Holder for any issue 
or  transfer  tax  or  other  incidental  expense  in  respect  of  the  issuance  of 
such  certificate,  all  of  which  taxes  and  expenses  shall  be  paid  by  the 
Company, and such certificates shall be issued in the name of the Holder 
or  in  such  name  or  names  as  may  be  directed  by  the  Holder;  provided, 
however, that in the event certificates for Warrant Shares are to be issued 
in  a  name  other  than  the  name  of  the  Holder,  this  Warrant  when 
surrendered  for  exercise  shall  be  accompanied  by  the  Assignment  Form 
attached  hereto  duly  executed  by  the  Holder;  and  the  Company  may
6
require,  as  a  condition  thereto,  the  payment  of  a  sum  sufficient  to 
reimburse it for any transfer tax incidental thereto.
viii.  Closing of Books.  The Company will not close its stockholder 
books or records in any manner which prevents the timely exercise of this 
Warrant, pursuant to the terms hereof.
Section 3.
Certain Adjustments.
a)
Stock  Dividends  and  Splits.  If  the  Company,  at  any  time  while  this 
Warrant  is  outstanding:  (A)  pays  a  stock  dividend  or  otherwise  make  a  distribution  or 
distributions  on  shares  of  its  Common  Stock  or  any  other  equity  or  equity  equivalent 
securities payable in shares of Common Stock (which, for avoidance of doubt, shall not 
include any shares of Common Stock issued by the Company pursuant to this Warrant), 
(B) subdivides outstanding shares of Common Stock into a larger number of shares, (C) 
combines (including by way of reverse stock split) outstanding shares of Common Stock 
into  a  smaller  number  of  shares,  or  (D)  issues  by  reclassification  of  shares  of  the 
Common  Stock  any  shares  of  capital  stock  of  the  Company,  then  in  each  case  the 
Exercise  Price  shall  be  multiplied  by  a  fraction  of  which  the  numerator  shall  be  the 
number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  (excluding  treasury  shares,  if  any)  outstanding 
immediately  before  such  event  and  of  which  the  denominator  shall  be  the  number  of 
shares  of  Common  Stock  outstanding  immediately  after  such  event  and  the  number  of 
shares  issuable  upon  exercise  of  this  Warrant  shall  be  proportionately  adjusted.    Any 
adjustment made pursuant to this Section 3(a) shall become effective immediately after 
the record date for the determination of stockholders entitled to receive such dividend or 
distribution and shall become effective immediately after the effective date in the case of 
a subdivision, combination or re-classification.
b)
Subsequent  Equity  Sales.  If  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  thereof,  as 
applicable,  at  any  time  while  this  Warrant  is  outstanding,  shall  offer,  sell,  grant  any 
option to purchase or offer, sell or grant any right to reprice its securities, or otherwise 
dispose of or issue (or announce any offer, sale, grant or any option to purchase or other 
disposition) any Common Stock or Common Stock Equivalents entitling any Person to 
acquire  shares  of  Common  Stock,  at  an  effective  price  per  share  less  than  the  then 
Exercise Price (such lower price, the “Base Share Price” and such issuances collectively, 
a  “Dilutive  Issuance”),  as  adjusted  hereunder  (if  the  holder  of  the  Common  Stock  or 
Common Stock Equivalents so issued shall at any time, whether by operation of purchase 
price adjustments, reset provisions, floating conversion, exercise or exchange prices or 
otherwise, or due to warrants, options or rights per share which is issued in connection 
with such issuance, be entitled to receive shares of Common Stock at an effective price 
per share which is less than the Exercise Price, such issuance shall be deemed to have 
occurred for less than the Exercise Price on such date of the Dilutive Issuance), then the 
Exercise Price shall be reduced and only reduced to equal the Base Share Price and the 
number of Warrant Shares issuable hereunder shall be increased such that the aggregate 
Exercise Price payable hereunder, after taking into account the decrease in the Exercise 
Price,  shall  be  equal  to  the  aggregate  Exercise  Price  prior  to  such  adjustment,  subject 
always  to  the  limitations  set  forth  in  Section  2(d)(ii),  which  such  limitations  shall
7
constitute a “hard floor” on possible reductions in the Exercise Price.  Such adjustment 
shall be made whenever such Common Stock or Common Stock Equivalents are issued.  
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no adjustments shall be made, paid or issued under this 
Section 3(b) in respect of an Exempt Issuance.  The Company shall notify the Holder in 
writing, no later than the Trading Day following the issuance of any Common Stock or 
Common  Stock  Equivalents  subject  to  this  section,  indicating  therein  the  applicable 
issuance price, or of applicable reset price, exchange price, conversion price and other 
pricing terms (such notice the “Dilutive Issuance Notice”).  For purposes of clarification, 
whether or not the Company provides a Dilutive Issuance Notice pursuant to this Section 
3(b),  upon  the  occurrence  of  any  Dilutive  Issuance,  after  the  date  of  such  Dilutive 
Issuance  the  Holder  is  entitled  to  receive  a  number  of  Warrant  Shares  based  upon  the 
Base  Share  Price  regardless  of  whether  the  Holder  accurately  refers  to  the  Base  Share 
Price in the Notice of Exercise.
c)
Pro  Rata  Distributions.    If  the  Company,  at  any  time  prior  to  the 
Termination Date, shall distribute to all holders of Common Stock (and not to Holders of 
the Warrants) evidences of its indebtedness or assets (including cash and cash dividends) 
or rights or warrants to subscribe for or purchase any security other than the Common 
Stock (which shall be subject to Section 3(b)), then in each such case the Exercise Price 
shall  be  adjusted  by  multiplying  the  Exercise  Price  in  effect  immediately  prior  to  the 
record date fixed for determination of stockholders entitled to receive such distribution by 
a fraction of which the denominator shall be the VWAP determined as of the record date 
mentioned above, and of which the numerator shall be such VWAP on such record date 
less the then per share fair market value at such record date of the portion of such assets 
or  evidence  of  indebtedness  so  distributed  applicable  to  one  outstanding  share  of  the 
Common Stock as determined by the Board of Directors in good faith.  In either case the 
adjustments  shall  be  described  in  a  statement  provided  to  the  Holder  of  the  portion  of 
assets or evidences of indebtedness so distributed or such subscription rights applicable to 
one  share  of  Common  Stock.    Such  adjustment  shall  be  made  whenever  any  such 
distribution  is  made  and  shall  become  effective  immediately  after  the  record  date 
mentioned above.
time  while
this  Warrant
d)
Fundamental  Transaction.  If,  at  any
is 
outstanding, (A) the Company effects any merger or consolidation of the Company with 
or into another Person, (B) the Company effects any sale of all or substantially all of its 
assets in one or a series of related transactions, (C) any tender offer or exchange offer 
(whether by the Company or another Person) is completed pursuant to which holders of 
Common Stock are permitted to tender or exchange their shares for other securities, cash 
or property, or (D) the Company effects any reclassification of the Common Stock or any 
compulsory  share  exchange  pursuant  to  which  the  Common  Stock  is  effectively 
converted into or exchanged for other securities, cash or property (in any such case, a 
“Fundamental  Transaction”),  then,  upon  any  subsequent  exercise  of  this  Warrant,  the 
Holder  shall  have  the  right  to  receive,  for  each  Warrant  Share  that  would  have  been 
issuable  upon  such  exercise  immediately  prior  to  the  occurrence  of  such  Fundamental 
Transaction, at the option of the Holder, (a) upon exercise of this Warrant, the number of 
shares of Common Stock of the successor or acquiring corporation or of the Company, if 
it  is  the  surviving  corporation,  and  any  additional  consideration  (the  “Alternate
8
Consideration”)  receivable  upon  or  as  a  result  of  such  reorganization,  reclassification, 
merger,  consolidation  or  disposition  of  assets  by  a  Holder  of  the  number  of  shares  of 
Common Stock for which this Warrant is exercisable immediately prior to such event or 
(b) if the Company is acquired in an all cash transaction, cash equal to the value of this 
Warrant as determined in accordance with the Black-Scholes option pricing formula.  For 
purposes  of  any  such  exercise,  the  determination  of  the  Exercise  Price  shall  be 
appropriately adjusted to apply to such Alternate Consideration based on the amount of 
Alternate  Consideration  issuable  in  respect  of  one  share  of  Common  Stock  in  such 
Fundamental Transaction, and the Company shall apportion the Exercise Price among the 
Alternate  Consideration  in  a  reasonable  manner  reflecting  the  relative  value  of  any 
different components of the Alternate Consideration.  If holders of Common Stock are 
given any choice as to the securities, cash or property to be received in a Fundamental 
Transaction,  then  the  Holder  shall  be  given  the  same  choice  as  to  the  Alternate 
Consideration it receives upon any exercise of this Warrant following such Fundamental 
Transaction.    To  the  extent  necessary  to  effectuate  the  foregoing  provisions,  any 
successor  to  the  Company  or  surviving  entity  in  such  Fundamental  Transaction  shall 
issue  to  the  Holder  a  new  warrant  consistent  with  the  foregoing  provisions  and 
evidencing the Holder’s right to exercise such warrant into Alternate Consideration. The 
terms of any agreement pursuant to which a Fundamental Transaction is effected shall 
include  terms  requiring  any  such  successor  or  surviving  entity  to  comply  with  the 
provisions of this Section 3(d) and insuring that this Warrant (or any such replacement 
security)  will  be  similarly  adjusted  upon  any  subsequent  transaction  analogous  to  a 
Fundamental Transaction.
e)
Calculations.  All  calculations  under  this  Section  3  shall  be  made  to  the 
nearest cent or the nearest 1/100th of a share, as the case may be. For purposes of this 
Section 3, the number of shares of Common Stock deemed to be issued and outstanding 
as of a given date shall be the sum of the number of shares of Common Stock (excluding 
treasury shares, if any) issued and outstanding.
f)
Voluntary Adjustment By Company. If such adjustment would not violate 
the rules of the Trading Market, the Company may at any time during the term of this 
Warrant reduce the then current Exercise Price to any amount and for any period of time 
deemed appropriate by the Board of Directors of the Company.
g)
Notice to Holders.
i.  Adjustment to Exercise Price. Whenever the Exercise Price is 
adjusted pursuant to this Section 3, the Company shall promptly mail to 
each Holder a notice setting forth the Exercise Price after such adjustment 
and setting forth a brief statement of the facts requiring such adjustment. If 
the  Company  issues  a  variable  rate  security,  despite  the  prohibition 
thereon in the Purchase Agreement, the Company shall be deemed to have 
issued  Common  Stock  or  Common  Stock  Equivalents  at  the  lowest 
possible  conversion  or  exercise  price  at  which  such  securities  may  be 
converted  or  exercised  in  the  case  of  a  Variable  Rate  Transaction  (as 
defined in the Purchase Agreement).
9
ii.  Notice to Allow Exercise by Holder. If (A) the Company shall 
declare a dividend (or any other distribution) on the Common Stock; (B) 
the Company shall declare a special nonrecurring cash dividend on or a 
redemption  of  the  Common  Stock;  (C)  the  Company  shall  authorize  the 
granting  to  all  holders  of  the  Common  Stock  rights  or  warrants  to 
subscribe for or purchase any shares of capital stock of any class or of any 
rights;  (D)  the  approval  of  any  stockholders  of  the  Company  shall  be 
required  in  connection  with  any  reclassification  of  the  Common  Stock, 
any consolidation or merger to which the Company is a party, any sale or 
transfer  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  assets  of  the  Company,  of  any 
compulsory share exchange whereby the Common Stock is converted into 
other  securities,  cash  or  property;  (E)  the  Company  shall  authorize  the 
voluntary  or  involuntary  dissolution,  liquidation  or  winding  up  of  the 
affairs of the Company; then, in each case, the Company shall cause to be 
mailed to the Holder at its last address as it shall appear upon the Warrant 
Register of the Company, at least 20 calendar days prior to the applicable 
record or effective date hereinafter specified, a notice stating (x) the date 
on  which  a  record  is  to  be  taken  for  the  purpose  of  such  dividend, 
distribution,  redemption,  rights  or  warrants,  or  if  a  record  is  not  to  be 
taken, the date as of which the holders of the Common Stock of record to 
be entitled to such dividend, distributions, redemption, rights or warrants 
are  to  be  determined  or  (y)  the  date  on  which  such  reclassification, 
consolidation,  merger,  sale,  transfer  or  share  exchange  is  expected  to 
become  effective  or  close,  and  the  date  as  of  which  it  is  expected  that 
holders of the Common Stock of record shall be entitled to exchange their 
shares  of  the  Common  Stock  for  securities,  cash  or  other  property 
deliverable upon such reclassification, consolidation, merger, sale, transfer 
or  share  exchange;  provided  that  the  failure  to  mail  such  notice  or  any 
defect therein or in the mailing thereof shall not affect the validity of the 
corporate  action  required  to  be  specified  in  such  notice.    The  Holder  is 
entitled to exercise this Warrant during the 20-day period commencing on 
the date of such notice to the effective date of the event triggering such 
notice.
Section 4.
Transfer of Warrant.
a)
Transferability.  Subject to compliance with any applicable securities laws 
and  the  conditions  set  forth  in  Sections  5(a)  and  4(d)  hereof  and  to  the  provisions  of 
Section  4.1  of  the  Purchase  Agreement,  this  Warrant  and  all  rights  hereunder  are 
transferable, in whole or in part, upon surrender of this Warrant at the principal office of 
the Company, together with a written assignment of this Warrant substantially in the form 
attached hereto duly executed by the Holder or its agent or attorney and funds sufficient 
to pay any transfer taxes payable upon the making of such transfer.  Upon such surrender 
and, if required, such payment, the Company shall execute and deliver a new Warrant or 
Warrants  in  the  name  of  the  assignee  or  assignees  and  in  the  denomination  or 
denominations specified in such instrument of assignment, and shall issue to the assignor 
a new Warrant evidencing the portion of this Warrant not so assigned, and this Warrant
10
shall promptly be cancelled.  A Warrant, if properly assigned, may be exercised by a new 
holder for the purchase of Warrant Shares without having a new Warrant issued.
b)
New  Warrants.  This  Warrant  may  be  divided  or  combined  with  other 
Warrants upon presentation hereof at the aforesaid office of the Company, together with a 
written notice specifying the names and denominations in which new Warrants are to be 
issued, signed by the Holder or its agent or attorney.  Subject to compliance with Section 
4(a),  as  to  any  transfer  which  may  be  involved  in  such  division  or  combination,  the 
Company  shall  execute  and  deliver  a  new  Warrant  or  Warrants  in  exchange  for  the 
Warrant or Warrants to be divided or combined in accordance with such notice.
c)
Warrant Register. The Company shall register this Warrant, upon records 
to be maintained by the Company for that purpose (the “Warrant Register”), in the name 
of the record Holder hereof from time to time.  The Company may deem and treat the 
registered  Holder  of  this  Warrant  as  the  absolute  owner  hereof  for  the  purpose  of  any 
exercise hereof or any distribution to the Holder, and for all other purposes, absent actual 
notice to the contrary.
d)
Transfer  Restrictions.  If,  at  the  time  of  the  surrender  of  this  Warrant  in 
connection  with  any  transfer  of  this  Warrant,  the  transfer  of  this  Warrant  shall  not  be 
registered  pursuant  to  an  effective  registration  statement  under  the  Securities  Act  and 
under  applicable  state  securities  or  blue  sky  laws,  the  Company  may  require,  as  a 
condition of allowing such transfer (i) that the Holder or transferee of this Warrant, as the 
case may be, furnish to the Company a written opinion of counsel (which opinion shall be 
in  form,  substance  and  scope  customary  for  opinions  of  counsel  in  comparable 
transactions) to the effect that such transfer may be made without registration under the 
Securities Act and under applicable state securities or blue sky laws, (ii) that the holder or 
transferee execute and deliver to the Company an investment letter in form and substance 
acceptable  to  the  Company  and  (iii)  that  the  transferee  be  an  “accredited  investor”  as 
defined in Rule 501(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(7), or (a)(8) promulgated under the Securities 
Act or a qualified institutional buyer as defined in Rule 144A(a) under the Securities Act.
Section 5.  Miscellaneous.
a)
Title to Warrant.  Prior to the Termination Date and subject to compliance 
with applicable laws and Section 4 of this Warrant, this Warrant and all rights hereunder 
are transferable, in whole or in part, at the office or agency of the Company by the Holder 
in person or by duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of this Warrant together with the 
Assignment  Form  annexed  hereto  properly  endorsed.    The  transferee  shall  sign  an 
investment letter in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Company.
b)
No Rights as Shareholder Until Exercise.  This Warrant does not entitle 
the Holder to any voting rights or other rights as a shareholder of the Company prior to 
the exercise hereof.  Upon the surrender of this Warrant and the payment of the aggregate 
Exercise  Price  (or  by  means  of  a  cashless  exercise),  the  Warrant  Shares  so  purchased 
shall be and be deemed to be issued to such Holder as the record owner of such shares as 
of the close of business on the later of the date of such surrender or payment.
11
c)
Loss,  Theft,  Destruction  or  Mutilation  of  Warrant.  The  Company 
covenants that upon receipt by the Company of evidence reasonably satisfactory to it of 
the loss, theft, destruction or mutilation of this Warrant or any stock certificate relating to 
the  Warrant  Shares,  and  in  case  of  loss,  theft  or  destruction,  of  indemnity  or  security 
reasonably  satisfactory  to  it  (which,  in  the  case  of  the  Warrant,  shall  not  include  the 
posting  of  any  bond),  and  upon  surrender  and  cancellation  of  such  Warrant  or  stock 
certificate,  if  mutilated,  the  Company  will  make  and  deliver  a  new  Warrant  or  stock 
certificate of like tenor and dated as of such cancellation, in lieu of such Warrant or stock 
certificate.
d)
Saturdays,  Sundays,  Holidays,  etc.    If  the  last  or  appointed  day  for  the 
taking of any action or the expiration of any right required or granted herein shall be a 
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, then such action may be taken or such right may be 
exercised on the next succeeding day not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
e)
Authorized Shares.
The Company covenants that during the period the Warrant is outstanding, 
it  will  reserve  from  its  authorized  and  unissued  Common  Stock  a  sufficient 
number  of  shares  to  provide  for  the  issuance  of  the  Warrant  Shares  upon  the 
exercise  of  any  purchase  rights  under  this  Warrant.    The  Company  further 
covenants  that  its  issuance  of  this  Warrant  shall  constitute  full  authority  to  its 
officers who are charged with the duty of executing stock certificates to execute 
and issue the necessary certificates for the Warrant Shares upon the exercise of 
the  purchase  rights  under  this  Warrant.    The  Company  will  take  all  such 
reasonable action as may be necessary to assure that such Warrant Shares may be 
issued as provided herein without violation of any applicable law or regulation, or 
of any requirements of the Trading Market upon which the Common Stock may 
be listed.
Except  and  to  the  extent  as  waived  or  consented  to  by  the  Holder,  the 
Company  shall  not  by  any  action,  including,  without  limitation,  amending  its 
certificate  of  incorporation  or  through  any  reorganization,  transfer  of  assets, 
consolidation,  merger,  dissolution,  issue  or  sale  of  securities  or  any  other 
voluntary action, avoid or seek to avoid the observance or performance of any of 
the terms of this Warrant, but will at all times in good faith assist in the carrying 
out of all such terms and in the taking of all such actions as may be necessary or 
appropriate  to  protect  the  rights  of  Holder  as  set  forth  in  this  Warrant  against 
impairment.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Company will 
(a) not increase the par value of any Warrant Shares above the amount payable 
therefor upon such exercise immediately prior to such increase in par value, (b) 
take all such action as may be necessary or appropriate in order that the Company 
may validly and legally issue fully paid and nonassessable Warrant Shares upon 
the exercise of this Warrant, and (c) use commercially reasonable efforts to obtain 
all such authorizations, exemptions or consents from any public regulatory body 
having jurisdiction thereof as may be necessary to enable the Company to perform 
its obligations under this Warrant.
12
Before  taking  any  action  which  would  result  in  an  adjustment  in  the 
number of Warrant Shares for which this Warrant is exercisable or in the Exercise 
Price, the Company shall obtain all such authorizations or exemptions thereof, or 
consents thereto, as may be necessary from any public regulatory body or bodies 
having jurisdiction thereof.
f)
Jurisdiction.  All  questions  concerning
the  construction,  validity, 
enforcement and interpretation of this Warrant shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions of the Purchase Agreement.
g)
Restrictions.  The Holder acknowledges that the Warrant Shares acquired 
upon  the  exercise  of  this  Warrant,  if  not  registered,  will  have  restrictions  upon  resale 
imposed by state and federal securities laws.
h)
Nonwaiver and Expenses.  No course of dealing or any delay or failure to 
exercise any right hereunder on the part of Holder shall operate as a waiver of such right 
or otherwise prejudice Holder’s rights, powers or remedies, notwithstanding the fact that 
all  rights  hereunder  terminate  on  the  Termination  Date.    If  the  Company  willfully  and 
knowingly  fails  to  comply  with  any  provision  of  this  Warrant,  which  results  in  any 
material damages to the Holder, the Company shall pay to Holder such amounts as shall 
be  sufficient  to  cover  any  costs  and  expenses  including,  but  not  limited  to,  reasonable 
attorneys’ fees, including those of appellate proceedings, incurred by Holder in collecting 
any amounts due pursuant hereto or in otherwise enforcing any of its rights, powers or 
remedies hereunder.
i)
Notices.  Any notice, request or other document required or permitted to 
be given or delivered to the Holder by the Company shall be delivered in accordance with 
the notice provisions of the Purchase Agreement.
j)
Limitation  of  Liability.    No  provision  hereof,  in  the  absence  of  any 
affirmative action by Holder to exercise this Warrant or purchase Warrant Shares, and no 
enumeration herein of the rights or privileges of Holder, shall give rise to any liability of 
Holder for the purchase price of any Common Stock or as a stockholder of the Company, 
whether such liability is asserted by the Company or by creditors of the Company.
k)
Remedies.    Holder,  in  addition  to  being  entitled  to  exercise  all  rights 
granted by law, including recovery of damages, will be entitled to specific performance 
of its rights under this Warrant.  The Company agrees that monetary damages would not 
be  adequate  compensation  for  any  loss  incurred  by  reason  of  a  breach  by  it  of  the 
provisions  of  this  Warrant  and  hereby  agrees  to  waive  the  defense  in  any  action  for 
specific performance that a remedy at law would be adequate.
l)
Successors  and  Assigns.    Subject  to  applicable  securities  laws,  this 
Warrant and the rights and obligations evidenced hereby shall inure to the benefit of and 
be binding upon the successors of the Company and the successors and permitted assigns 
of Holder.  The provisions of this Warrant are intended to be for the benefit of all Holders
13
from time to time of this Warrant and shall be enforceable by any such Holder or holder 
of Warrant Shares.
m)
Amendment.  This Warrant may be modified or amended or the provisions
hereof waived with the written consent of the Company and the Holder.
n)
Severability.  Wherever possible, each provision of this Warrant shall be 
interpreted in such manner as to be effective and valid under applicable law, but if any 
provision  of  this  Warrant  shall  be  prohibited  by  or  invalid  under  applicable  law,  such 
provision  shall  be  ineffective  to  the  extent  of  such  prohibition  or  invalidity,  without 
invalidating the remainder of such provisions or the remaining provisions of this Warrant.
o)
Headings.  The headings used in this Warrant are for the convenience of
reference only and shall not, for any purpose, be deemed a part of this Warrant.
********************
14
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused this Warrant to be executed
by its officer thereunto duly authorized.
Dated:  October _, 2005
MINES MANAGEMENT, INC.
By:__________________________________________ 
     Name: 
     Title:
15
TO:  MINES MANAGEMENT, INC.
NOTICE OF EXERCISE
(1) The  undersigned  hereby  elects  to  purchase  ________  Warrant  Shares  of  the  Company 
pursuant to the terms of the attached Warrant (only if exercised in full), and tenders herewith payment of the 
exercise price in full, together with all applicable transfer taxes, if any.
(2) Payment shall take the form of (check applicable box):
[  ] in lawful money of the United States; or (if available)
[ ] the cancellation of such number of Warrant Shares as is necessary, in accordance 
with the formula set forth in subsection 2(c), to exercise this Warrant with respect to 
the maximum number of Warrant Shares purchasable pursuant to the cashless exercise 
procedure set forth in subsection 2(c).
(3) Please issue a certificate or certificates representing said Warrant Shares in the name of
the undersigned or in such other name as is specified below:
_______________________________
_______________________________ 
 
_______________________________ 
 
_______________________________
The Warrant Shares shall be delivered to the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation D promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. 
 
[SIGNATURE OF HOLDER] 
 
Name of Investing Entity: ________________________________________________________________________ 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Investing Entity: _________________________________________________ 
Name of Authorized Signatory: ___________________________________________________________________ 
Title of Authorized Signatory: ____________________________________________________________________ 
Date: ________________________________________________________________________________________
(4)    Accredited  Investor.    The  undersigned  is  an  “accredited  investor”  as  defined  in
assigned to
ASSIGNMENT FORM
(To assign the foregoing warrant, execute 
this form and supply required information.  
Do not use this form to exercise the warrant.)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the foregoing Warrant and all rights evidenced thereby are hereby
Dated:  ______________, _______
_______________________________________________ whose address is 
 
_______________________________________________________________. 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature Guaranteed:  ___________________________________________ 
 
 
NOTE:  The signature to this Assignment Form must correspond with the name as it appears on the face of 
the Warrant, without alteration or enlargement or any change whatsoever, and must be guaranteed by a bank 
or trust company.  Officers of corporations and those acting in a fiduciary or other representative capacity 
should file proper evidence of authority to assign the foregoing Warrant.
Holder’s Signature:  _____________________________
_____________________________
_____________________________
Holder’s Address:
REGISTRATION RIGHTS AGREEMENT
Exhibit 4.3
This Registration Rights Agreement (this “Agreement”) is made and entered into 
as of October 21, 2005, among Mines Management, Inc., an Idaho corporation (the “Company”), 
and the purchasers signatory hereto (each such purchaser is a “Purchaser” and collectively, the 
“Purchasers”).
This Agreement is made pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, dated as
of the date hereof among the Company and the Purchasers (the “Purchase Agreement”).
The Company and the Purchasers hereby agree as follows:
1.
Definitions.    Capitalized  terms  used  and  not  otherwise  defined  herein  that  are 
defined in the Purchase Agreement shall have the meanings given such terms in the Purchase 
Agreement.  As used in this Agreement, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
“Advice” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 6(d).
“Effectiveness  Date”  means,  with  respect  to  the  initial  Registration  Statement 
required to be filed hereunder, the 90th calendar day following the date hereof (the 150th 
calendar day in the case of a “full review” by the Commission); provided, however, in the 
event the Company is notified by the Commission that the Registration Statement will 
not be reviewed or is no longer subject to further review and comments, the Effectiveness 
Date Registration Statement shall be the fifth Trading Day following the date on which 
the Company is so notified if such date precedes the dates required above.
“Effectiveness Period” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 2(a).
“Event” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 2(b).
“Event Date” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 2(b).
“Filing  Date”  means,  with  respect  to  the  Registration  Statement  required
hereunder, the 30th calendar day following the date hereof.
“Holder” or “Holders” means the holder or holders, as the case may be, from time
to time of Registrable Securities.
“Indemnified Party” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 5(c).
“Indemnifying Party” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 5(c).
“Losses” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 5(a).
“Plan of Distribution” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 2(a).
1
Exhibit 4.3
“Proceeding” means an action, claim, suit, investigation or proceeding (including, 
without limitation, an investigation or partial proceeding, such as a deposition), whether 
commenced or threatened.
“Prospectus”  means  the  prospectus  included  in  the  Registration  Statement 
(including,  without  limitation,  a  prospectus  that  includes  any  information  previously 
omitted from a prospectus filed as part of an effective registration statement in reliance 
upon Rule 430A promulgated under the Securities Act), as amended or supplemented by 
any prospectus supplement, with respect to the terms of the offering of any portion of the 
Registrable Securities covered by the Registration Statement, and all other amendments 
and supplements to the Prospectus, including post-effective amendments, and all material 
incorporated by reference or deemed to be incorporated by reference in such Prospectus.
“Registrable  Securities”  means  all  of  (i)  the  Shares  issuable,  (ii)  the  Warrant 
Shares issuable and (iii) any shares of Common Stock issued or issuable upon any stock 
split, dividend or other distribution, recapitalization or similar event with respect to the 
foregoing.
“Registration  Statement”  means  the  registration  statement  required  to  be  filed 
hereunder,  including  the  Prospectus,  amendments  and  supplements  to  such  registration 
statement  or  Prospectus,  including  pre-  and  post-effective  amendments,  all  exhibits 
thereto,  and  all  material  incorporated  by  reference  or  deemed  to  be  incorporated  by 
reference in such registration statement.
“Rule  415”  means  Rule  415  promulgated  by  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the 
Securities Act, as such Rule may be amended from time to time, or any similar rule or 
regulation hereafter adopted by the Commission having substantially the same purpose 
and effect as such Rule.
“Rule  424”  means  Rule  424  promulgated  by  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the 
Securities Act, as such Rule may be amended from time to time, or any similar rule or 
regulation hereafter adopted by the Commission having substantially the same purpose 
and effect as such Rule.
“Selling Shareholder Questionnaire” shall have the meaning set forth in Section
3(a).
2.
Shelf Registration.
(a)
On or prior to the Filing Date, the Company shall prepare and file with the 
Commission  a  “Shelf”  Registration  Statement  covering  the  resale  of  the  Registrable 
Securities for an offering to be made on a continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415.  The 
Registration Statement shall be on Form S-3 (except if the Company is not then eligible 
to  register  for  resale  the  Registrable  Securities  on  Form  S-3,  in  which  case  such 
registration  shall  be  on  another  appropriate  form  in  accordance  herewith)  and  shall 
contain (unless otherwise directed by the Holders) substantially the “Plan of Distribution” 
attached hereto as Annex A.  Subject to the terms of this Agreement, the Company shall 
use its best efforts to cause the Registration Statement to be declared effective under the
2
Exhibit 4.3
Securities Act as promptly as possible after the filing thereof, but in any event prior to the 
Effectiveness  Date,  and  shall  use  its  best  efforts  to  keep  such  Registration  Statement 
continuously effective under the Securities Act until all Registrable Securities covered by 
such Registration Statement have been sold or may be sold without volume restrictions 
pursuant  to  Rule  144(k)  as  determined  by  the  counsel  to  the  Company  pursuant  to  a 
written opinion letter to such effect, addressed and acceptable to the Company’s transfer 
agent  and  the  affected  Holders    (the  “Effectiveness  Period”).    The  Company  shall 
telephonically request effectiveness of the Registration Statement as of 5:00 pm Eastern 
Time  on  a  Trading  Day.      The  Company  shall  immediately  notify  the  Holders  via 
facsimile of the effectiveness of the Registration Statement on the same Trading Day that 
the Company telephonically confirms effectiveness with the Commission, which shall be 
the date requested for effectiveness of the Registration Statement.  Failure to so notify the 
Holder  within  2  Trading  Days  of  such  notification  shall  be  deemed  an  Event  under 
Section 2(b). The Company shall, on the Trading Day after the Effective Date (as defined 
in the Purchase Agreement), file a Form 424(b)(5) with the Commission.
(b)
If: (i) a Registration Statement is not filed on or prior to its Filing Date (if 
the Company files a Registration Statement without affording the Holders the opportunity 
to review and comment on the same as required by Section 3(a), the Company shall not 
be  deemed  to  have  satisfied  this  clause  (i)),  or  (ii)  the  Company  fails  to  file  with  the 
Commission a request for acceleration in accordance with Rule 461 promulgated under 
the  Securities  Act,  within  five  Trading  Days  of  the  date  that  the  Company  is  notified 
(orally  or  in  writing,  whichever  is  earlier)  by  the  Commission  that  a  Registration 
Statement  will  not  be  “reviewed,”  or  not  subject  to  further  review,  or  (iii)  prior  to  its 
Effectiveness Date, the Company fails to file a pre-effective amendment and otherwise 
respond in writing to comments made by the Commission in respect of such Registration 
Statement within 10 calendar days after the receipt of comments by or notice from the 
Commission that such amendment is required in order for a Registration Statement to be 
declared effective, or (iv) a Registration Statement filed or required to be filed hereunder 
is  not  declared  effective  by  the  Commission  by  its  Effectiveness  Date,  or  (v)  after  the 
Effectiveness  Date,  a  Registration  Statement  ceases  for  any  reason  to  remain 
continuously  effective  as  to  all  Registrable  Securities  for  which  it  is  required  to  be 
effective, or the Holders are not permitted to utilize the Prospectus therein to resell such 
Registrable Securities for 10 consecutive calendar days but no more than an aggregate of 
15 calendar days during any 12-month period (which need not be consecutive Trading 
Days) (any such failure or breach being referred to as an “Event”, and for purposes of 
clause (i) or (iv) the date on which such Event occurs, or for purposes of clause (ii) the 
date on which such five Trading Day period is exceeded, or for purposes of clause (iii) 
the date which such 10 calendar day period is exceeded, or for purposes of clause (v) the 
date  on  which  such  10  or  15  calendar  day  period,  as  applicable,  is  exceeded  being 
referred to as “Event Date”), then in addition to any other rights the Holders may have 
hereunder  or  under  applicable  law,  on  each  such  Event  Date  and  on  each  monthly 
anniversary of each such Event Date (if the applicable Event shall not have been cured by 
such date) until the applicable Event is cured, the Company shall pay to each Holder an 
amount in cash, as partial liquidated damages and not as a penalty, equal to 2% of the 
aggregate purchase price paid by such Holder pursuant to the Purchase Agreement for 
any Registrable Securities then held by such Holder.  If the Company fails to pay any
3
Exhibit 4.3
partial liquidated damages pursuant to this Section in full within seven days after the date 
payable,  the  Company  will  pay  interest  thereon  at  a  rate  of  18%  per  annum  (or  such 
lesser maximum amount that is permitted to be paid by applicable law) to the Holder, 
accruing daily from the date such partial liquidated damages are due until such amounts, 
plus all such interest thereon, are paid in full. The partial liquidated damages pursuant to 
the terms hereof shall apply on a daily pro-rata basis for any portion of a month prior to 
the cure of an Event.
3.
Registration Procedures
In  connection  with  the  Company’s  registration  obligations  hereunder,  the
Company shall:
(a)
Not less than five (5) Trading Days prior to the filing of the Registration 
Statement or any related Prospectus or any amendment or supplement thereto (including 
any  document  that  would  be  incorporated  or  deemed  to  be  incorporated  therein  by 
reference), the Company shall, (i) furnish to each Holder copies of all such documents 
proposed to be filed, which documents (other than those incorporated or deemed to be 
incorporated by reference) will be subject to the review of such Holders, and (ii) cause its 
officers and directors, counsel and independent certified public accountants to respond to 
such inquiries as shall be necessary, in the reasonable opinion of respective counsel to 
conduct  a  reasonable  investigation  within  the  meaning  of  the  Securities  Act.  The 
Company  shall  not  file  the  Registration  Statement  or  any  such  Prospectus  or  any 
amendments or supplements thereto to which the Holders of a majority of the Registrable 
Securities shall reasonably object in good faith, provided that, the Company is notified of 
such objection in writing no later than four (4) Trading Days after the Holders have been 
so furnished copies of such documents. Each Holder agrees to furnish to the Company a 
completed Questionnaire in the form attached to this Agreement as Annex B (a “Selling 
Shareholder Questionnaire”) not less than two (2) Trading Days prior to the Filing Date 
or by the end of the fourth Trading Day following the date on which such Holder receives 
draft materials in accordance with this Section.
(b)
(i)  Prepare  and  file  with  the  Commission  such  amendments,  including 
post-effective  amendments,  to  the  Registration  Statement  and  the  Prospectus  used  in 
connection  therewith  as  may  be  necessary  to  keep  the  Registration  Statement 
continuously  effective  as  to  the  applicable  Registrable  Securities  for  the  Effectiveness 
Period and prepare and file with the Commission such additional Registration Statements, 
if  any,  in  order  to  register  for  resale  under  the  Securities  Act  all  of  the  Registrable 
Securities;  (ii)  cause  the  related  Prospectus  to  be  amended  or  supplemented  by  any 
required  Prospectus  supplement  (subject  to  the  terms  of  this  Agreement),  and  as  so 
supplemented or amended to be filed pursuant to Rule 424; (iii) respond as promptly as 
reasonably possible to any comments received from the Commission with respect to the 
Registration Statement or any amendment thereto and as promptly as reasonably possible 
provide  the  Holders  true  and  complete  copies  of  all  correspondence  from  and  to  the 
Commission relating to a Registration Statement; and (iv) comply in all material respects 
with  the  provisions  of  the  Securities  Act  and  the  Exchange  Act  with  respect  to  the 
disposition of all Registrable Securities covered by the Registration Statement during the
4
Exhibit 4.3
applicable  period  in  accordance  (subject  to  the  terms  of  this  Agreement)  with  the 
intended  methods  of  disposition  by  the  Holders  thereof  set  forth  in  such  Registration 
Statement as so amended or in such Prospectus as so supplemented.
(c)
[Reserved].
(d)
Notify the Holders (which notice shall, pursuant to clauses (ii) through (vi) 
hereof, be accompanied by an instruction to suspend the use of the Prospectus until the 
requisite changes have been made) as promptly as reasonably possible (and, in the case of 
(i)(A) below, not less than five (5) Trading Days prior to such filing) and (if requested by 
any  such  Person)  confirm  such  notice  in  writing  no  later  than  one  (1)  Trading  Day 
following  the  day  (i)(A)  when  a  Prospectus  or  any  Prospectus  supplement  or  post-
effective amendment to the Registration Statement is proposed to be filed; (B) when the 
Commission notifies the Company whether there will be a “review” of such Registration 
Statement  and  whenever  the  Commission  comments  in  writing  on  such  Registration 
Statement (the Company shall provide true and complete copies thereof and all written 
responses  thereto  to  each  of  the  Holders);  and  (C)  with  respect  to  the  Registration 
Statement or any post-effective amendment, when the same has become effective; (ii) of 
any request by the Commission or any other Federal or state governmental authority for 
amendments or supplements to the Registration Statement or Prospectus or for additional 
information;  (iii)  of  the  issuance  by  the  Commission  or  any  other  federal  or  state 
governmental authority of any stop order suspending the effectiveness of the Registration 
Statement  covering  any  or  all  of  the  Registrable  Securities  or  the  initiation  of  any 
Proceedings for that purpose; (iv) of the receipt by the Company of any notification with 
respect to the suspension of the qualification or exemption from qualification of any of 
the Registrable Securities for sale in any jurisdiction, or the initiation or threatening of 
any Proceeding for such purpose; (v) of the occurrence of any event or passage of time 
that makes the financial statements included in the Registration Statement ineligible for 
inclusion therein or any statement made in the Registration Statement or Prospectus or 
any document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated therein by reference untrue in 
any  material  respect  or  that  requires  any  revisions  to  the  Registration  Statement, 
Prospectus or other documents so that, in the case of the Registration Statement or the 
Prospectus, as the case may be, it will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact 
or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the 
statements  therein,  in  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were  made,  not 
misleading; and (vi) the occurrence or existence of any pending corporate development 
with respect to the Company that the Company believes may be material and that, in the 
determination of the Company, makes it not in the best interest of the Company to allow 
continued availability of the Registration Statement or Prospectus; provided that any and 
all of such information shall remain confidential to each Holder until such information 
otherwise becomes public, unless disclosure by a Holder is required by law; provided, 
further, notwithstanding each Holder’s agreement to keep such information confidential, 
the Holders make no acknowledgement that any such information is material, non-public 
information.
(e)
Use  its  best  efforts  to  avoid  the  issuance  of,  or,  if  issued,  obtain  the 
withdrawal of (i) any order suspending the effectiveness of the Registration Statement, or
5
Exhibit 4.3
(ii) any suspension of the qualification (or exemption from qualification) of any of the 
Registrable Securities for sale in any jurisdiction, at the earliest practicable moment.
(f)
Furnish to each Holder, without charge, at least one conformed copy of the 
Registration Statement and each amendment thereto, including financial statements and 
schedules, all documents incorporated or deemed to be incorporated therein by reference 
to the extent requested by such Person, and all exhibits to the extent requested by such 
Person (including those previously furnished or incorporated by reference) promptly after 
the  filing  of  such  documents  with  the  Commission  except  where  such  documents  are 
available on EDGAR.
(g)
Promptly  deliver  to  each  Holder,  without  charge,  as  many  copies  of  the 
Prospectus or Prospectuses (including each form of prospectus) and each amendment or 
supplement thereto as such Persons may reasonably request in connection with resales by 
the  Holder  of  Registrable  Securities.    Subject  to  the  terms  of  this  Agreement,  the 
Company  hereby  consents  to  the  use  of  such  Prospectus  and  each  amendment  or 
supplement thereto by each of the selling Holders in connection with the offering and sale 
of  the  Registrable  Securities  covered  by  such  Prospectus  and  any  amendment  or 
supplement thereto, except after the giving on any notice pursuant to Section 3(d).
(h)
If NASDR Rule 2710 requires any broker-dealer to make a filing prior to 
executing  a  sale  by  a  Holder,  the  Company  shall  (i)  make  an  Issuer  Filing  with  the 
NASDR, 
to  NASDR  Rule 
2710(b)(10)(A)(i), (ii) respond within five (5) Trading Days to any comments received 
from NASDR in connection therewith, and (iii) pay the filing fee required in connection 
therewith.
Inc.  Corporate  Financing  Department  pursuant
(i)
Prior  to  any  resale  of  Registrable  Securities  by  a  Holder,  use  its 
commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  register  or  qualify  or  cooperate  with  the  selling 
Holders  in  connection  with  the  registration  or  qualification  (or  exemption  from  the 
Registration or qualification) of such Registrable Securities for the resale by the Holder 
under the securities or Blue Sky laws of such jurisdictions within the United States as any 
Holder  reasonably  requests  in  writing,  to  keep  each  registration  or  qualification  (or 
exemption  therefrom)  effective  during  the  Effectiveness  Period  and  to  do  any  and  all 
other acts or things reasonably necessary to enable the disposition in such jurisdictions of 
the  Registrable  Securities  covered  by  each  Registration  Statement;  provided,  that  the 
Company  shall  not  be  required  to  qualify  generally  to  do  business  in  any  jurisdiction 
where it is not then so qualified, subject the Company to any material tax in any such 
jurisdiction where it is not then so subject or file a general consent to service of process 
in any such jurisdiction.
(j)
If  requested  by  the  Holders,  cooperate  with  the  Holders  to  facilitate  the 
timely preparation and delivery of certificates representing Registrable Securities to be 
delivered to a transferee pursuant to the Registration Statement, which certificates shall 
be free, to the extent permitted by the Purchase Agreement, of all restrictive legends, and 
to enable such Registrable Securities to be in such denominations and registered in such 
names as any such Holders may request.
6
Exhibit 4.3
(k)
Upon  the  occurrence  of  any  event  contemplated  by  this  Section  3,  as 
promptly  as  reasonably  possible  under  the  circumstances  taking  into  account  the 
Company’s good faith assessment of any adverse consequences to the Company and its 
stockholders  of  the  premature  disclosure  of  such  event,  prepare  a  supplement  or 
amendment,  including  a  post-effective  amendment,  to  the  Registration  Statement  or  a 
supplement  to  the  related  Prospectus  or  any  document  incorporated  or  deemed  to  be 
incorporated  therein  by  reference,  and  file  any  other  required  document  so  that,  as 
thereafter delivered, neither the Registration Statement nor such Prospectus will contain 
an untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated 
therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under 
which  they  were  made,  not  misleading.    If  the  Company  notifies  the  Holders  in 
accordance with clauses (ii) through (vi) of Section 3(d) above to suspend the use of any 
Prospectus  until  the  requisite  changes  to  such  Prospectus  have  been  made,  then  the 
Holders shall suspend use of such Prospectus.  The Company will use its best efforts to 
ensure that the use of the Prospectus may be resumed as promptly as is practicable.  The 
Company  shall  be  entitled  to  exercise  its  right  under  this  Section  3(k)  to  suspend  the 
availability  of  the  Registration  Statement  and  Prospectus,  subject  to  the  payment  of 
partial liquidated damages pursuant to Section 2(b), for a period not to exceed sixty (60) 
days (which need not be consecutive days) in any twelve (12) month period.
(l)
Comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the Commission.
(m)
The Company may require each selling Holder to furnish to the Company 
a certified statement as to the number of shares of Common Stock beneficially owned by 
such Holder and, if required by the Commission, the person thereof that has voting and 
dispositive  control  over  the  Shares.  During  any  periods  that  the  Company  is  unable  to 
meet  its  obligations  hereunder  with  respect  to  the  registration  of  the  Registrable 
Securities  solely  because  any  Holder  fails  to  furnish  such  information  within  three 
Trading Days of the Company’s request, any liquidated damages that are accruing at such 
time shall be tolled and any Event that may otherwise occur solely because of such delay 
shall be suspended, until such information is delivered to the Company.
4.
Registration Expenses.  All fees and expenses incident to the performance of or 
compliance with this Agreement by the Company shall be borne by the Company whether or not 
any  Registrable  Securities  are  sold  pursuant  to  the  Registration  Statement.    The  fees  and 
expenses referred to in the foregoing sentence shall include, without limitation, (i) all registration 
and  filing  fees  (including,  without  limitation,  fees  and  expenses  (A)  with  respect  to  filings 
required  to  be  made  with  the  Trading  Market  on  which  the  Common  Stock  is  then  listed  for 
trading, (B) in compliance with applicable state securities or Blue Sky laws reasonably agreed to 
by the Company in writing (including, without limitation, fees and disbursements of counsel for 
the  Company  in  connection  with  Blue  Sky  qualifications  or  exemptions  of  the  Registrable 
Securities and determination of the eligibility of the Registrable Securities for investment under 
the laws of such jurisdictions as requested by the Holders) and (C) if not previously paid by the 
Company in connection with an Issuer Filing, with respect to any filing that may be required to 
be made by any broker through which a Holder intends to make sales of Registrable Securities 
with NASD Regulation, Inc. pursuant to the NASD Rule 2710, so long as the broker is receiving 
no  more  than  a  customary  brokerage  commission  in  connection  with  such  sale,  (ii)  printing
7
Exhibit 4.3
expenses  (including,  without  limitation,  expenses  of  printing  certificates  for  Registrable 
Securities and of printing prospectuses if the printing of prospectuses is reasonably requested by 
the holders of a majority of the Registrable Securities included in a Registration Statement), (iii) 
messenger,  telephone  and  delivery  expenses,  (iv)  fees  and  disbursements  of  counsel  for  the 
Company, (v) Securities Act liability insurance, if the Company so desires such insurance, and 
(vi)  fees  and  expenses  of  all  other  Persons  retained  by  the  Company  in  connection  with  the 
consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.  In addition, the Company 
shall be responsible for all of its internal expenses incurred in connection with the consummation 
of  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement  (including,  without  limitation,  all  salaries 
and expenses of its officers and employees performing legal or accounting duties), the expense 
of  any  annual  audit  and  the  fees  and  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with  the  listing  of  the 
Registrable  Securities  on  any  securities  exchange  as  required  hereunder.  In  no  event  shall  the 
Company be responsible for any broker or similar commissions or, except to the extent provided 
for in the Transaction Documents, any legal fees or other costs of the Holders.
5.
Indemnification
(a)
Indemnification  by  the  Company.    The  Company  shall,  notwithstanding 
any  termination  of  this  Agreement,  indemnify  and  hold  harmless  each  Holder,  the 
officers,  directors,  agents,  brokers  (including  brokers  who  offer  and  sell  Registrable 
Securities as principal as a result of a pledge or any failure to perform under a margin call 
of  Common  Stock),  investment  advisors  and  employees  of  each  of  them,  each  Person 
who controls any such Holder (within the meaning of Section 15 of the Securities Act or 
Section 20 of the Exchange Act) and the officers, directors, agents and employees of each 
such  controlling  Person,  to  the  fullest  extent  permitted  by  applicable  law,  from  and 
against  any  and  all  losses,  claims,  damages,  liabilities,  costs  (including,  without 
limitation, reasonable attorneys’ fees) and expenses (collectively, “Losses”), as incurred, 
arising  out  of  or  relating  to  any  untrue  or  alleged  untrue  statement  of  a  material  fact 
contained in a Registration Statement, any Prospectus or any form of prospectus or in any 
amendment or supplement thereto or in any preliminary prospectus, or arising out of or 
relating  to  any  omission  or  alleged  omission  of  a  material  fact  required  to  be  stated 
therein or necessary to make the statements therein (in the case of any Prospectus or form 
of prospectus or supplement thereto, in light of the circumstances under which they were 
made) not misleading, except to the extent, but only to the extent, that (i) such untrue 
statements  or  omissions  are  based  solely  upon  information  regarding  such  Holder 
furnished in writing to the Company by such Holder expressly for use therein, or to the 
extent that such information relates to such Holder or such Holder’s proposed method of 
distribution of Registrable Securities and was reviewed and expressly approved in writing 
by such Holder expressly for use in a Registration Statement, such Prospectus or such 
form of Prospectus or in any amendment or supplement thereto (it being understood that 
the Holder has approved Annex A hereto for this purpose), or (ii) as a result of the failure 
of  the  Holder  to  deliver  a  Prospectus,  as  amended  or  supplemented,  to  a  purchaser  in 
connection with an offer or sale, or (iii) in the case of an occurrence of an event of the 
type specified in Section 3(d)(ii)-(vi), the use by such Holder of an outdated or defective 
Prospectus after the Company has notified such Holder in writing that the Prospectus is 
outdated or defective and prior to the receipt by such Holder of the Advice contemplated 
in Section 6(d).  The Company shall notify the Holders promptly of the institution, threat
8
Exhibit 4.3
or  assertion  of  any  Proceeding  arising  from  or  in  connection  with  the  transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement of which the Company is aware.
(b)
Indemnification by Holders. Each Holder shall, severally and not jointly, 
indemnify and hold harmless the Company, its directors, officers, agents and employees, 
each  Person  who  controls  the  Company  (within  the  meaning  of  Section  15  of  the 
Securities Act and Section 20 of the Exchange Act), and the directors, officers, agents or 
employees of such controlling Persons, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, 
from and against all Losses, as incurred, to the extent arising out of or based solely upon: 
(x)  such  Holder’s  failure  to  comply  with  the  prospectus  delivery  requirements  of  the 
Securities Act or (y) any untrue or alleged untrue statement of a material fact contained in 
any  Registration  Statement,  any  Prospectus,  or  any  form  of  prospectus,  or  in  any 
amendment or supplement thereto or in any preliminary prospectus, or arising out of or 
relating  to  any  omission  or  alleged  omission  of  a  material  fact  required  to  be  stated 
therein or necessary to make the statements therein not misleading (i) to the extent, but 
only to the extent, that such untrue statement or omission is contained in any information 
so furnished in writing by such Holder to the Company specifically for inclusion in such 
Registration  Statement  or  such  Prospectus  or  (ii)  to  the  extent  that  (1)  such  untrue 
statements  or  omissions  are  based  solely  upon  information  regarding  such  Holder 
furnished in writing to the Company by such Holder expressly for use therein, or to the 
extent that such information relates to such Holder or such Holder’s proposed method of 
distribution of Registrable Securities and was reviewed and expressly approved in writing 
by such Holder expressly for use in a Registration Statement (it being understood that the 
Holder has approved Annex A hereto for this purpose), such Prospectus or such form of 
Prospectus or in any amendment or supplement thereto or (2) in the case of an occurrence 
of an event of the type specified in Section 3(d)(ii)-(vi), the use by such Holder of an 
outdated or defective Prospectus after the Company has notified such Holder in writing 
that the Prospectus is outdated or  defective and prior to the receipt by such Holder of the 
Advice contemplated in Section 6(d).  In no event shall the liability of any selling Holder 
hereunder be greater in amount than the dollar amount of the net proceeds received by 
such  Holder  upon  the  sale  of  the  Registrable  Securities  giving  rise  to  such 
indemnification obligation.
(c)
Conduct  of  Indemnification  Proceedings.  If  any  Proceeding  shall  be 
brought or asserted against any Person entitled to indemnity hereunder (an “Indemnified 
Party”), such Indemnified Party shall promptly notify the Person from whom indemnity 
is sought (the “Indemnifying Party”) in writing, and the Indemnifying Party shall have 
the right to assume the defense thereof, including the employment of counsel reasonably 
satisfactory to the Indemnified Party and the payment of all fees and expenses incurred in 
connection with defense thereof; provided, that the failure of any Indemnified Party to 
give such notice shall not relieve the Indemnifying Party of its obligations or liabilities 
pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  except  (and  only)  to  the  extent  that  it  shall  be  finally 
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction (which determination is not subject to 
appeal or further review) that such failure shall have prejudiced the Indemnifying Party.
An Indemnified Party shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any such 
Proceeding and to participate in the defense thereof, but the fees and expenses of such
9
Exhibit 4.3
counsel  shall  be  at  the  expense  of  such  Indemnified  Party  or  Parties  unless:    (1)  the 
Indemnifying  Party  has  agreed  in  writing  to  pay  such  fees  and  expenses;  (2)  the 
Indemnifying  Party  shall  have  failed  within  twenty  (20)  days  of  receiving  an 
indemnification notice to assume the defense of such Proceeding and to employ counsel 
reasonably  satisfactory  to  such  Indemnified  Party  in  any  such  Proceeding;  or  (3)  the 
named  parties  to  any  such  Proceeding  (including  any  impleaded  parties)  include  both 
such  Indemnified  Party  and  the  Indemnifying  Party,  and  such  Indemnified  Party  shall 
reasonably believe that a material conflict of interest is likely to exist if the same counsel 
were to represent such Indemnified Party and the Indemnifying Party (in which case, if 
such Indemnified Party notifies the Indemnifying Party in writing that it elects to employ 
separate counsel at the expense of the Indemnifying Party, the Indemnifying Party shall 
not have the right to assume the defense thereof and the reasonable fees and expenses of 
one  separate  counsel  shall  be  at  the  expense  of  the  Indemnifying  Party).    The 
Indemnifying Party shall not be liable for any settlement of any such Proceeding effected 
without  its  written  consent,  which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld.    No 
Indemnifying  Party  shall,  without  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Indemnified  Party, 
effect  any  settlement  of  any  pending  Proceeding  in  respect  of  which  any  Indemnified 
Party  is  a  party,  unless  such  settlement  includes  an  unconditional  release  of  such 
Indemnified  Party  from  all  liability  on  claims  that  are  the  subject  matter  of  such 
Proceeding.
Subject to the terms of this Agreement, all reasonable fees and expenses of the 
Indemnified  Party  (including  reasonable  fees  and  expenses  to  the  extent  incurred  in 
connection  with  investigating  or  preparing  to  defend  such  Proceeding  in  a  manner  not 
inconsistent with this Section) shall be paid to the Indemnified Party, as incurred, within 
ten Trading Days of written notice thereof to the Indemnifying Party; provided, that the 
Indemnified  Party  shall  promptly  reimburse  the  Indemnifying  Party  for  that  portion  of 
such fees and expenses applicable to such actions for which such Indemnified Party is not 
entitled  to  indemnification  hereunder,  determined  based  upon  the  relative  faults  of  the 
parties.
(d)
Contribution.    If  the  indemnification  under  Section  5(a)  or  5(b)  is 
unavailable to an Indemnified Party or insufficient to hold an Indemnified Party harmless 
for  any  Losses,  then  each  Indemnifying  Party  shall  contribute  to  the  amount  paid  or 
payable  by  such  Indemnified  Party,  in  such  proportion  as  is  appropriate  to  reflect  the 
relative  fault  of  the  Indemnifying  Party  and  Indemnified  Party  in  connection  with  the 
actions, statements or omissions that resulted in such Losses as well as any other relevant 
equitable considerations. The relative fault of such Indemnifying Party and Indemnified 
Party  shall  be  determined  by  reference  to,  among  other  things,  whether  any  action  in 
question, including any untrue or alleged untrue statement of a material fact or omission 
or  alleged  omission  of  a  material  fact,  has  been  taken  or  made  by,  or  relates  to 
information supplied by, such Indemnifying Party or Indemnified Party, and the parties’ 
relative  intent,  knowledge,  access  to  information  and  opportunity  to  correct  or  prevent 
such action, statement or omission.  The amount paid or payable by a party as a result of 
any  Losses  shall  be  deemed  to  include,  subject  to  the  limitations  set  forth  in  this 
Agreement, any reasonable attorneys’ or other reasonable fees or expenses incurred by 
such party in connection with any Proceeding to the extent such party would have been
10
Exhibit 4.3
indemnified for such fees or expenses if the indemnification provided for in this Section 
was available to such party in accordance with its terms.
The  parties  hereto  agree  that  it  would  not  be  just  and  equitable  if  contribution 
pursuant  to  this  Section  5(d)  were  determined  by  pro  rata  allocation  or  by  any  other 
method of allocation that does not take into account the equitable considerations referred 
to  in  the  immediately  preceding  paragraph.    Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this 
Section 5(d), no Holder shall be required to contribute, in the aggregate, any amount in 
excess of the amount by which the proceeds actually received by such Holder from the 
sale of the Registrable Securities subject to the Proceeding exceeds the amount of any 
damages that such Holder has otherwise been required to pay by reason of such untrue or 
alleged untrue statement or omission or alleged omission, except in the case of fraud by 
such Holder.
The  indemnity  and  contribution  agreements  contained  in  this  Section  are  in 
addition  to  any  liability  that  the  Indemnifying  Parties  may  have  to  the  Indemnified 
Parties.
6.
Miscellaneous
(a)
Remedies.  In the event of a breach by the Company or by a Holder, of 
any of their obligations under this Agreement, each Holder or the Company, as the case 
may be, in addition to being entitled to exercise all rights granted by law and under this 
Agreement, including recovery of damages, will be entitled to specific performance of its 
rights  under  this  Agreement.    The  Company  and  each  Holder  agree  that  monetary 
damages would not provide adequate compensation for any losses incurred by reason of a 
breach by it of any of the provisions of this Agreement and hereby further agrees that, in 
the event of any action for specific performance in respect of such breach, it shall waive 
the defense that a remedy at law would be adequate.
(b)
No  Piggyback  on  Registrations.    Except  as  set  forth  in  the  Purchase 
Agreement, neither the Company nor any of its security holders (other than the Holders 
in  such  capacity  pursuant  hereto  and  Warrant  Shares  issuable  by  the  Company  to  The 
Shemano  Group,  Inc.)  may  include  securities  of  the  Company  in  the  Registration 
Statement  other  than  the  Registrable  Securities.    Except  as  set  forth  in  the  Purchase 
Agreement, no Person has any right to cause the Company to effect the registration under 
the  Securities  Act  of  any  securities  of  the  Company.    The  Company  shall  not  file  any 
other  registration  statements  until  the  Registration  Statement  required  hereunder  is 
declared effective by the Commission, provided that this Section 6(b) shall not prohibit 
the Company from filing amendments to registration statements already filed.
(c)
Compliance.  Each Holder covenants and agrees that it will comply with 
the  prospectus  delivery  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act  as  applicable  to  it  in 
connection with sales of Registrable Securities pursuant to the Registration Statement.
(d)
Discontinued Disposition.  Each Holder agrees by its acquisition of such 
Registrable Securities that, upon receipt of a notice from the Company of the occurrence
11
Exhibit 4.3
of any event of the kind described in Section 3(d), such Holder will forthwith discontinue 
disposition  of  such  Registrable  Securities  under  the  Registration  Statement  until  such 
Holder’s  receipt  of  the  copies  of  the  supplemented  Prospectus  and/or  amended 
Registration Statement or until it is advised in writing (the “Advice”) by the Company 
that  the  use  of  the  applicable  Prospectus  may  be  resumed,  and,  in  either  case,  has 
received copies of any additional or supplemental filings that are incorporated or deemed 
to  be  incorporated  by  reference  in  such  Prospectus  or  Registration  Statement.    The 
Company will use its best efforts to ensure that the use of the Prospectus may be resumed 
as promptly as it practicable.  The Company agrees and acknowledges that any periods 
during  which  the  Holder  is  required  to  discontinue  the  disposition  of  the  Registrable 
Securities hereunder shall be subject to the provisions of Section 2(b).
(e)
Piggy-Back Registrations.  If at any time during the Effectiveness Period 
there is not an effective Registration Statement covering all of the Registrable Securities 
and the Company shall determine to prepare and file with the Commission a registration 
statement relating to an offering for its own account or the account of others under the 
Securities Act of any of its equity securities, other than on Form S-4 or Form S-8 (each as 
promulgated  under  the  Securities  Act)  or  their  then  equivalents  relating  to  equity 
securities to be issued solely in connection with any acquisition of any entity or business 
or equity securities issuable in connection with the stock option or other employee benefit 
plans, then the Company shall send to each Holder a written notice of such determination 
and, if within fifteen days after the date of such notice, any such Holder shall so request 
in  writing,  the  Company  shall  include  in  such  registration  statement  all  or  any  part  of 
such  Registrable  Securities  such  Holder  requests  to  be  registered  subject  to  any 
customary required underwriter cutbacks; provided, however, that, the Company shall not 
be  required  to  register  any  Registrable  Securities  pursuant  to  this  Section  6(e)  that  are 
eligible for resale pursuant to Rule 144(k) promulgated under the Securities Act or that 
are the subject of a then effective Registration Statement.
(f)
Amendments  and  Waivers.  The  provisions  of  this  Agreement,  including 
the  provisions  of  this  sentence,  may  not  be  amended,  modified  or  supplemented,  and 
waivers or consents to departures from the provisions hereof may not be given, unless the 
same  shall  be  in  writing  and  signed  by  the  Company  and  each  Holder  of  the  then 
outstanding Registrable Securities.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a waiver or consent 
to depart from the provisions hereof with respect to a matter that relates exclusively to the 
rights of Holders and that does not directly or indirectly affect the rights of other Holders 
may  be  given  by  Holders  of  all  of  the  Registrable  Securities  to  which  such  waiver  or 
consent  relates;  provided,  however,  that  the  provisions  of  this  sentence  may  not  be 
amended,  modified,  or  supplemented  except  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
immediately preceding sentence.
(g)
Notices.  Any  and  all  notices  or  other  communications  or  deliveries 
required  or  permitted  to  be  provided  hereunder  shall  be  delivered  as  set  forth  in  the 
Purchase Agreement.
(h)
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and 
be  binding  upon  the  successors  and  permitted  assigns  of  each  of  the  parties  and  shall
12
Exhibit 4.3
inure to the benefit of each Holder. The Company may not assign its rights or obligations 
hereunder without the prior written consent of all of the Holders of the then-outstanding 
Registrable Securities. Each Holder may assign their respective rights hereunder in the 
manner and to the Persons as permitted under the Purchase Agreement.
(i)
No  Inconsistent  Agreements.  Neither  the  Company  nor  any  of  its 
subsidiaries  has  entered,  as  of  the  date  hereof,  nor  shall  the  Company  or  any  of  its 
subsidiaries, on or after the date of this Agreement, enter into any agreement with respect 
to its securities, that would have the effect of impairing the rights granted to the Holders 
in this Agreement or otherwise conflicts with the provisions hereof.  Except as set forth in 
the Purchase Agreement, neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has previously 
entered  into  any  agreement  granting  any  registration  rights  with  respect  to  any  of  its 
securities to any Person that have not been satisfied in full.
(j)
Execution  and  Counterparts.    This  Agreement  may  be  executed  in  any 
number  of  counterparts,  each  of  which  when  so  executed  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an 
original and, all of which taken together shall constitute one and the same Agreement.  In 
the event that any signature is delivered by facsimile transmission, such signature shall 
create  a  valid  binding  obligation  of  the  party  executing  (or  on  whose  behalf  such 
signature  is  executed)  the  same  with  the  same  force  and  effect  as  if  such  facsimile 
signature were the original thereof.
(k)
Governing  Law.    All  questions  concerning  the  construction,  validity, 
enforcement and interpretation of this Agreement shall be determined with the provisions 
of the Purchase Agreement.
(l)
Cumulative Remedies.  The remedies provided herein are cumulative and
not exclusive of any remedies provided by law.
(m)
Severability.  If  any  term,  provision,  covenant  or  restriction  of  this 
Agreement  is  held  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to  be  invalid,  illegal,  void  or 
unenforceable, the remainder of the terms, provisions, covenants and restrictions set forth 
herein shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or 
invalidated, and the parties hereto shall use their commercially reasonable efforts to find 
and employ an alternative means to achieve the same or substantially the same result as 
that contemplated by such term, provision, covenant or restriction.  It is hereby stipulated 
and  declared  to  be  the  intention  of  the  parties  that  they  would  have  executed  the 
remaining  terms,  provisions,  covenants  and  restrictions  without  including  any  of  such 
that may be hereafter declared invalid, illegal, void or unenforceable.
(n)
Headings.    The  headings  in  this  Agreement  are  for  convenience  of
reference only and shall not limit or otherwise affect the meaning hereof.
(o)
Independent Nature of Holders’ Obligations and Rights.  The obligations 
of  each  Holder  hereunder  are  several  and  not  joint  with  the  obligations  of  any  other 
Holder hereunder, and no Holder shall be responsible in any way for the performance of 
the obligations of any other Holder hereunder.  Nothing contained herein or in any other
13
Exhibit 4.3
agreement  or  document  delivered  at  any  closing,  and  no  action  taken  by  any  Holder 
pursuant hereto or thereto, shall be deemed to constitute the Holders as a partnership, an 
association, a joint venture or any other kind of entity, or create a presumption that the 
Holders  are  in  any  way  acting  in  concert  with  respect  to  such  obligations  or  the 
transactions contemplated by this Agreement.  Each Holder shall be entitled to protect 
and  enforce  its  rights,  including  without  limitation  the  rights  arising  out  of  this 
Agreement,  and  it  shall  not  be  necessary  for  any  other  Holder  to  be  joined  as  an 
additional party in any proceeding for such purpose.
*************************
14
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  parties  have  executed  this  Registration  Rights
Agreement as of the date first written above.
Mines Management, Inc.  
 
            /s/ James H. Moore 
By:__________________________________________ 
     Name:  James H. Moore 
     Title:    Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS FOLLOWS]
Exhibit 4.3
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Name of Holder:  Alexandra Global Master Fund Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Mikhail Filimonov 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Mikhail Filimonov 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
16
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
Name of Holder:  Whalehaven Capital Fund Limited 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Arthur Jones 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Arthur Jones 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Director
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
17
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
Name of Holder:  Iroquois Master Fund Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Joshua Silver 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Joshua Silver 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Authorized Signatory
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
18
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
Name of Holder:  Omicron Master Trust 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Bruce Bernstein 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Bruce Bernstein 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Managing Partner
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
19
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
Name of Holder:  SDS Capital Group SPC, Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Scott E. Derby 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Scott E. Derby 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  General Counsel
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
20
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
21
Name of Holder:  Nite Capital LP 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Keith A. Goodman 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Keith A. Goodman 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Manager of the General Partner
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
Name of Holder:  GSSF Master Fund, L.P. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ E.B. Lyon IV 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  E.B. Lyon IV 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Authorized Agent
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
22
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
Name of Holder:  Gryphon Master Fund, L.P. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ E.B. Lyon IV 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  E.B. Lyon IV 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Authorized Agent
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
23
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Exhibit 4.3
24
Name of Holder:  Cranshire Capital, L.P. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Mitchell D. Kopin 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Mitchell D. Kopin 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  President – Downsview Capital, General Partner
[SIGNATURE PAGES CONTINUE]
Exhibit 4.3
[SIGNATURE PAGE OF HOLDERS TO MGN RRA]
Name of Holder:  DKR Soundshore Oasis Holding Fund Ltd. 
Signature of Authorized Signatory of Holder:  /s/ Brad Caswell 
Name of Authorized Signatory:  Brad Caswell 
Title of Authorized Signatory:  Director
25
Exhibit 4.3
ANNEX A
Plan of Distribution
Each Selling Stockholder (the “Selling Stockholders”) of the common stock (“Common 
Stock”)  of  Mines  Management,  Inc.,  an  Idaho  corporation  (the  “Company”)  and  any  of  their 
pledgees,  assignees  and  successors-in-interest  may,  from  time  to  time,  sell  any  or  all  of  their 
shares of Common Stock on the Trading Market or any other stock exchange, market or trading 
facility on which the shares are traded or in private transactions.  These sales may be at fixed or 
negotiated prices.  A Selling Stockholder may use any one or more of the following methods 
when selling shares:
•  ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer
solicits purchasers;
•  block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent but
may position and resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the 
transaction;
•  purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its
account;
•  an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
•  privately negotiated transactions;
•  settlement of short sales entered into after the effective date of the registration
statement of which this prospectus is a part;
•  broker-dealers may agree with the Selling Stockholders to sell a specified number
of such shares at a stipulated price per share;
•  a combination of any such methods of sale;
•
through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, 
whether through an options exchange or otherwise; or
•  any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
The Selling Stockholders may also sell shares under Rule 144 under the Securities Act of
1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), if available, rather than under this prospectus.
Broker-dealers  engaged  by
for  other 
brokers-dealers  to  participate  in  sales.    Broker-dealers  may  receive  commissions  or  discounts 
from the Selling Stockholders (or, if any broker-dealer acts as agent for the purchaser of shares, 
from the purchaser) in amounts to be negotiated, but, except as set forth in a supplement to this 
Prospectus,  in  the  case  of  an  agency  transaction  not  in  excess  of  a  customary  brokerage
the  Selling  Stockholders  may  arrange
26
Exhibit 4.3
commission in compliance with NASDR Rule 2440; and in the case of a principal transaction a 
markup or markdown in compliance with NASDR IM-2440.
In  connection  with  the  sale  of  the  Common  Stock  or  interests  therein,  the  Selling 
Stockholders  may  enter  into  hedging  transactions  with  broker-dealers  or  other  financial 
institutions,  which  may  in  turn  engage  in  short  sales  of  the  Common  Stock  in  the  course  of 
hedging  the  positions  they  assume.    The  Selling  Stockholders  may  also  sell  shares  of  the 
Common  Stock  short  and  deliver  these  securities  to  close  out  their  short  positions,  or  loan  or 
pledge the Common Stock to broker-dealers that in turn may sell these securities.  The Selling 
Stockholders  may  also  enter  into  option  or  other  transactions  with  broker-dealers  or  other 
financial  institutions  or  the  creation  of  one  or  more  derivative  securities  which  require  the 
delivery to such broker-dealer or other financial institution of shares offered by this prospectus, 
which  shares  such  broker-dealer  or  other  financial  institution  may  resell  pursuant  to  this 
prospectus (as supplemented or amended to reflect such transaction).
The Selling Stockholders and any broker(cid:31)dealers or agents that are involved in selling 
the  shares  may  be  deemed  to  be  “underwriters”  within  the  meaning  of  the  Securities  Act  in 
connection with such sales.  In such event, any commissions received by such broker(cid:31)dealers or 
agents  and  any  profit  on  the  resale  of  the  shares  purchased  by  them  may  be  deemed  to  be 
underwriting commissions or discounts under the Securities Act.  Each Selling Stockholder has 
informed  the  Company  that  it  does  not  have  any  written  or  oral  agreement  or  understanding, 
directly  or  indirectly,  with  any  person  to  distribute  the  Common  Stock.  In  no  event  shall  any 
broker-dealer  receive  fees,  commissions  and  markups  which,  in  the  aggregate,  would  exceed 
eight percent (8%).
The  Company  is  required  to  pay  certain  fees  and  expenses  incurred  by  the  Company 
incident  to  the  registration  of  the  shares.    The  Company  has  agreed  to  indemnify  the  Selling 
Stockholders against certain losses, claims, damages and liabilities, including liabilities under the 
Securities Act.
Because Selling Stockholders may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of 
the Securities Act, they will be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities 
Act.  In addition, any securities covered by this prospectus which qualify for sale pursuant to 
Rule 144 under the Securities Act may be sold under Rule 144 rather than under this prospectus.  
Each  Selling  Stockholder  has  advised  us  that  they  have  not  entered  into  any  written  or  oral 
agreements, understandings or arrangements with any underwriter or broker-dealer regarding the 
sale of the resale shares.  There is no underwriter or coordinating broker acting in connection 
with the proposed sale of the resale shares by the Selling Stockholders.
We agreed to keep this prospectus effective until the earlier of (i) the date on which the 
shares may be resold by the Selling Stockholders without registration and without regard to any 
volume limitations by reason of Rule 144(e) under the Securities Act or any other rule of similar 
effect or (ii) all of the shares have been sold pursuant to the prospectus or Rule 144 under the 
Securities Act or any other rule of similar effect.  The resale shares will be sold only through 
registered  or  licensed  brokers  or  dealers  if  required  under  applicable  state  securities  laws.  In 
addition, in certain states, the resale shares may not be sold unless they have been registered or
27
Exhibit 4.3
qualified for sale in the applicable state or an exemption from the registration or qualification 
requirement is available and is complied with.
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, any person engaged in 
the distribution of the resale shares may not simultaneously engage in market making activities 
with respect to the Common Stock for the applicable restricted period, as defined in Regulation 
M, prior to the commencement of the distribution.  In addition, the Selling Stockholders will be 
subject to applicable provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder, 
including  Regulation  M,  which  may  limit  the  timing  of  purchases  and  sales  of  shares  of  the 
Common Stock by the Selling Stockholders or any other person.  We will make copies of this 
prospectus available to the Selling Stockholders and have informed them of the need to deliver a 
copy of this prospectus to each purchaser at or prior to the time of the sale.
28
Exhibit 4.3
Annex B
Mines Management, Inc.
Selling Securityholder Notice and Questionnaire
The  undersigned  beneficial  owner  of  common  stock,  par  value  $0.01  per  share  (the 
“Common Stock”), of Mines Management, Inc. corporation (the “Company”), (the “Registrable 
Securities”)  understands  that  the  Company  has  filed  or  intends  to  file  with  the  Securities  and 
Exchange  Commission  (the  “Commission”)  a  registration  statement  on  Form  S-3  (the 
“Registration Statement”) for the registration and resale under Rule 415 of the Securities Act of 
1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), of the Registrable Securities, in accordance with the 
terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of October ___, 2005 (the “Registration 
Rights  Agreement”),  among  the  Company  and  the  Purchasers  named  therein.    A  copy  of  the 
Registration Rights Agreement is available from the Company upon request at the address set 
forth below.  All capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed 
thereto in the Registration Rights Agreement.
Certain  legal  consequences  arise  from  being  named  as  a  selling  securityholder  in  the 
Registration Statement and the related prospectus.  Accordingly, holders and beneficial owners 
of Registrable Securities are advised to consult their own securities law counsel regarding the 
consequences of being named or not being named as a selling securityholder in the Registration 
Statement and the related prospectus.
NOTICE
The undersigned beneficial owner (the “Selling Securityholder”) of Registrable Securities 
hereby elects to include the Registrable Securities owned by it and listed below in Item 3 (unless 
otherwise specified under such Item 3) in the Registration Statement.
29
The undersigned hereby provides the following information to the Company and represents and 
warrants that such information is accurate:
1.
Name.
QUESTIONNAIRE
Exhibit 4.3
(a)
Full Legal Name of Selling Securityholder
(b)
Full  Legal  Name  of  Registered  Holder  (if  not  the  same  as  (a)  above)  through 
which Registrable Securities Listed in Item 3 below are held:
(c)
Full  Legal  Name  of  Natural  Control  Person  or  Publicly  Traded  Entity  (which 
means a natural person or publicly traded entity that directly or indirectly alone or 
with  others  has  power  to  vote  or  dispose  of  the  securities  covered  by  the 
questionnaire):
2.  Address for Notices to Selling Securityholder:
Telephone: 
Fax: 
Contact Person:
3.  Beneficial Ownership of Registrable Securities:
(a)
Type and Number of Registrable Securities beneficially owned:
30
Exhibit 4.3
4.  Broker-Dealer Status:
(a)
Are you a broker-dealer?
(b)
Yes   (cid:31)
No   (cid:31)
If  “yes”  to  Section  4(a),  did  you  receive  your  Registrable  Securities  as 
compensation for investment banking services to the Company.
Yes   (cid:31)
No   (cid:31)
Note:  If  no,  the  Commission’s  staff  has  indicated  that  you  should  be  identified  as  an
underwriter in the Registration Statement.
(c)
Are you an affiliate of a broker-dealer?
(d)
Yes   (cid:31)
No   (cid:31)
If  you  are  an  affiliate  of  a  broker-dealer,  do  you  certify  that  you  bought  the 
Registrable Securities in the ordinary course of business, and at the time of the 
purchase  of  the  Registrable  Securities  to  be  resold,  you  had  no  agreements  or 
understandings, directly or indirectly, with any person to distribute the Registrable 
Securities?
Yes   (cid:31)
No   (cid:31)
Note:  If  no,  the  Commission’s  staff  has  indicated  that  you  should  be  identified  as  an
underwriter in the Registration Statement.
5.  Beneficial Ownership of Other Securities of the Company Owned by the Selling
Securityholder.
Except  as  set  forth  below  in  this  Item  5,  the  undersigned  is  not  the  beneficial  or 
registered owner of any securities of the Company other than the Registrable Securities 
listed above in Item 3.
(a)
Type  and  Amount  of  Other  Securities  beneficially  owned  by  the  Selling 
Securityholder:
31
Exhibit 4.3
6.  Relationships with the Company:
Except  as  set  forth  below,  neither  the  undersigned  nor  any  of  its  affiliates,  officers, 
directors or principal equity holders (owners of 5% of more of the equity securities of the 
undersigned) has held any position or office or has had any other material relationship 
with the Company (or its predecessors or affiliates) during the past three years.
State any exceptions here:
The undersigned agrees to promptly notify the Company of any inaccuracies or changes 
in  the  information  provided  herein  that  may  occur  subsequent  to  the  date  hereof  at  any  time 
while the Registration Statement remains effective.
By  signing  below,  the  undersigned  consents  to  the  disclosure  of  the  information 
contained herein in its answers to Items 1 through 6 and the inclusion of such information in the 
Registration Statement and the related prospectus and any amendments or supplements thereto.  The 
undersigned  understands  that  such  information  will  be  relied  upon  by  the  Company  in 
connection  with  the  preparation  or  amendment  of  the  Registration  Statement  and  the  related 
prospectus.
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF  the  undersigned,  by  authority  duly  given,  has  caused  this 
Notice and Questionnaire to be executed and delivered either in person or by its duly authorized 
agent.
Beneficial Owner:
Dated:  
 
 
 
 
 
PLEASE  FAX  A  COPY  OF  THE  COMPLETED  AND  EXECUTED  NOTICE  AND 
QUESTIONNAIRE, AND RETURN THE ORIGINAL BY OVERNIGHT MAIL, TO:
By:  
  Name: 
 
Title:
Davis Graham & Stubbs LLP  
1550 Seventeenth Street, Suite 500 
Denver, Colorado 80202 
Attn:  Katelin Oakley, Esq.
32