
VVC EXPLORATION CORPORATION
2369 Kingston Road, PO Box 28059 Terry Town, Scarborough, ON   M1N 4E7
Telephone: (416) 619-5304
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND GENERAL MEETING
NOTICE  IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that  an  annual  general  and  special  meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  shareholders 
of  VVC  EXPLORATION  CORPORATION  (“VVC”  or  the  “Company”)  will  be  held  on  Wednesday,  August  31, 
2016  at  10:00  a.m.  (Montreal  Time)  at  the  Marriott  Fairfield  Inn  &  Suites  –  Montréal  Airport,  Toscana  II  Room, 
700 Michel Jasmin Avenue, Dorval, Québec, H9P 1C5 
The purposes of the Meeting are: 
a)
fiscal  year  ended
the
the
for
b)
c)
the  Company
To  receive  and  consider 
financial  statements  of 
January 31, 2016, together with the auditors’ report thereon;
To elect directors of the Company for the ensuing year;
To  appoint  MNP  LLP,  Chartered  Accountants,  as  auditors  of  the  Company  for  the  ensuing  year  and
authorize the directors to fix their remuneration; and
To transact such other business as may properly be brought before the Meeting.
d)
The  record  date  for  determination  of  the  shareholders  entitled  to  receive  notice  of  and  to  vote  at  the  Meeting  is 
July 28, 2016 (the “Record Date”). 
Shareholders are entitled to vote at the Meeting in person or by proxy. Only the shareholders whose names have 
been  entered in the registers of the Company as at the close of business on the Record Date will be entitled to 
receive notice of and vote at the Meeting. 
Whether or not you intend to attend the Meeting, please vote your common shares of VVC (your “Shares”) by proxy, 
using the enclosed form of proxy or via the website indicated on same, as more particularly set out in the section of 
the Circular entitled “Voting Process – Registered Shareholders”. Proxies may also be deposited with the scrutineer 
at the Meeting, following the instructions set out in the Circular. 
Voting rights attached to the Shares represented by a proxy in the enclosed form or submitted online will be voted in 
accordance  with the instructions indicated thereon. If no instructions are given, the voting rights attached to 
such  Shares  will  be  exercised  by  those  persons  designated  in  the  form  of  proxy  and  will  be  voted  IN 
FAVOUR of all the following matters: (i) the election of the proposed directors, (ii) the appointment of the 
Company’s auditors for the ensuing year and the directors’ authorization to fix their remuneration, and (iii)  
the approval and ratification of the Company’s current stock option plan. 
If you are a non-registered shareholder, please follow the instructions provided by your broker or other intermediary 
to vote your Shares (see the section of the Circular entitled “Voting Process – Non-Registered Shareholders”).
DATED at Montréal, Québec, the 28th day of July, 2016.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
Michel Lafrance 
Secretary-Treasurer
- ii -