
' ' BANKS ENERGY INC.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
TO BE HELD ON FRIDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2005
AND
INFORMATION CIRCULAR
With Respect to a Proposed Amalgamation of
V BANKS ENERGY INC.
. and .
38659 YUKON INC.,
A Wholly-Owned Subsidiary of
ARAPAI-IOE ENERGY CORPORATION
September 7, 2005

This Information Circular is furnished in connection with the solicitation by the management of
Banks Energy Inc. of proxies to be voted at an Annual and Special General Meeting of Shareholders of
Banks Energy Inc. to be held on October 14, 2005 at 10:00 am, at Suite 800 » 885 West Georgia Street,
Vancouver, B.C., V6C 31-11.

All information herein with respect to Arapahoe Energy Corporation and 38659 Yukon Inc. has

7 been provided by Ampahoe Energy Corporation. Banks Energy Incl and its directors and ofﬁces have

relied upon Arapahoe Energy Corporation with respect to such information.
Except as otherwise speciﬁed in this Information Circular, the information set out herein is given as at
September 7, 2005.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
n
n
.-
—
-
.-
.-
‘-
‘-
n
n
-_
m-
.-

r
u
u
u

' ii


n
n
n
IE-
n
.I-
n
.2-
.1-
.1-
n
-i-
a
E-
.3-
APPENDICES
'
iii


BANKS ENERGY INC.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the 2005 Annual and Special General Meeting of BANKS ENERGY
INC. (“Barrks” or the “Company”) will be held at Suite 800 — 885 West Georgia Street, Vancouver, British
Columbia on Friday, October 14, 2005 at 10:00 am. (Paciﬁc Time) for the following purposes:
1. To receive and consider the report of the Directors;
2. To receive and consider the audited ﬁnancial statements of the Company for the ﬁnancial year ended April
30, 2005 and the report of the auditor thereon; ’
3. To appoint an auditor for the Company for the ensuing year and to authorize the directors to fix the
remuneration to be paid to the auditor;
4. To ﬁx the number of directors and elect directors or” the Company;
5. To consider and, if thought ﬁt, to pass an ordinary resolution of disinterested shareholders re—approving
and ratifying the Company‘s 2003 Stock Option Plan, as amended;
6. To consider and, if thought ﬁt1 to pass with or without variation, a special resolution approving:
(a) The amalgamation of 38659 Yukon Inc. ("Solace") and the Company (the “Amalgamation”) as
provided for in and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the amalgamation agreement, dated as
of August 9, 2005 among Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Arapahoe”), Subco and the Company, as
amended, (the “Amalgamation Agreement"), is hereby approved and authorized with such restrictions or
conditions as may be required by the TSX Venture Exchange (the “Exchange”), subject to the approval of:
the Exchange, all as more particularly described in the management proxy and information circular of
Banks dated September 7, 2005 (the “Information Circular"); and
(b) The Amalgamation Agreement, substantially in the form attached to the Circular as Appendix A; and
7. To transact such other business as may properly come before the meeting or any adjournment or
adjournments thereof.
Accompanying this Notice is an Information Circular and a form of Proxy, together with the audited ﬁnancial
statements for the ﬁnancial year ended April 30, 2005. The accompanying Information Circular contains
information relating to the matters to be addressed at the Meeting and is incorporated into this Notice.

7 A shareholder entitled to attend and vote at the Meeting or an intermediary holding shares on behalf of an
unregistered shareholder is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and vote in his. her or its smad. Shareholders
who are unable to attend the Meeting in person are requested to complete, sign and return the accompanying
form of proxy in accordance with the instructions set out in the proxy and in the Information Circular
accompanying this N otioe.

DATED at Vancouver, British Columbia this 7th day of September, 2005.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF BANKS ENERGY INC.
(signed)“D. Barry Lee"
D. Barry Lee
President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
iv


NOTICE TO UNITED STATES SHAREHOLDERS

The Arapahoer Shares issuable in connection with the Amalgamation have not been
approved or disapproved by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”)
or the securities regulatory authority of any state of the United State, nor has the SEC or the
securities regulatory authority of any state passed upon the accuracy or adequacy of this
Information Circular.

This Information Circular relates to an amalgamation of two Canadian companies, and is subject
to Canadian disclosure requirements that are different from those of the United States. Financial
statements included in this Information Circular have been prepared in accordance with Canadian
generally accepted accounting standards that may not be comparable to the ﬁnancial statements of Us.
companies The Arapahoe Shares will not be listed for trading on any US. stock exchange.

It may be difﬁcult for you to enforce yotu‘ rights and any claim you may have arising under the
US. federal securities laws, as Arapahoe is located in Canada, and all of its ofﬁcers and directors are
residents of Canada. You may not be able to sue Arapahoe or its oﬁficers or directors in a non-US. court
for violations of the US. federal securities laws. It may be difﬁcult to compel Arapahoe and its affiliates
to subject themselves to at us. court’s judgment.

You should be aware that the acquisition of the Arapahoe Shares may have tax consequences
both in the United States and in Canada. The consequences for holders who are resident in, or citizens of,
the United States are not described in this Information Circular. You are advised to consult your tax
advisers to determine the particular tax consequences to you of acquiring the Arapahoe Shares.

FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS ’
This Information Circular contains statements that constitute forward-looking statements within
the meaning of securities laws including Section 273 of the United States Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, and Section 21e of the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended These
statements are made under the ‘safe harbour’ provisions of the United States Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and, as such, Involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties
and other factors that may cause the actual results to be materially different from the results
implied herein. Banks can give no assurances that its representations will be achieved or that it will
update them at any time in the future.

V


INFORMATION CIRCULAR
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
The following is a glossary of certain terms used in this Information Circular including the
Summary hereof and in Appendices A, B and C. Terms and abbreviations used in the other Appendices
to this Information Circuiar are deﬁned separately and the terms and abbreviations deﬁned below are not
used therein, except where otherwise indicated.
“Amalco” means the continuing entity formed by the amalgamation of Banks and Subco, and to be
known as “Arapahoe Energy Holdings Ltd";
“Amalco Common Shares” means common shares in the capital of Amalco;
“Amalgamation” means the proposed amalgamation of Banks and Subco under the YBCA pursuant to
the Amalgamation Agreement;
“Amalgamation Agreement" means that amalgamation agreement dated as of August 9, 2005 among
Banks, Arapahoe and Subco providing for the Amalgamation, as amended by amending agreements dated
September 1. 2005 and September 9, 2005;
“Arapahoe Parties” means collectively Arapahoe and Subco;
“Arapahoe” means Arapahoe Energy Corporation, a corporation incorporated under the laws of the
Province of Alberta;
“Arapahoe Directors" means the board of directors of Arapahoe; r
“Arapahoe Options” means options to purchase Arapahoe Shares;
“Arapahoe Shares" or “Arapahoe Common Shares" means common shares in the capital of Arapahoe,
as presently constitutﬁ;
“Arapahoe Transfer Agent" means Computer-share Trust Company of Canada;
. “Arapahoe Warrants" means the 1,132,322 purchase warrants of Arapahoe currently issued and
outstanding, each of which entitles the holder thereof to purchase one Arapahoe Common Share;
7 “Banks” or the “Company” means Banks Energy Inc., a corporation continued under the laws of the
Yukon Territory;
“Banks Governing Documents” means the certiﬁcate and articles of incorporation and by-laws of
Banks;
“Banks Pro-Amalgamation Options" means the 2,610,000 stock options of Banks currently issued and
outstanding pursuant to the Banks Stock Option Plan, each of which entitles the holder thereof to
purchase one Banks Common Share;
“Banks Principals” means the holders of the Banks Shares listed in Schedule “C” to the Amalgamation
Agreement;
“Banks Shareholder” or “Shareholder” means a holder of Common Shares of Banks;
Vi


“Banks Stock Option Plan” or “Stock Option Plan” means the 2003 Stock Option Plan (Amended)
approved by Banks shareholders at the annual general meeting of shareholders held on June 1, 2004,
under which options to purchase Banks Shares may be issued in accordance with the policies of the
TSXV; V 7
“Banks Transfer Agent” means Computershare Trust Company of Canada;
“Banks Warrants" means the 8,193,000 share purchase warrants of Banks currently issued and
outstanding, each of which entitles the holder thereof to purchase one Banks Common Share;
“Beneﬁcial Shareholders” means Shareholders who do not hold Common Shares in their own names;
“Board of Directors” means the board of directors of Banks;
“Business Day” means any day on which commercial banks are generally open for business other than a
Saturday, Sunday or a day observed as a holiday (i) in Calgary, Alberta under the laws of the Province of
Alberta; or (ii) under the federal laws of Canada;
“Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation” means a certiﬁcate of amalgamation issued by the Registrar pursuant to
the YBCA in respect of the Amalgamation;
“Common Shares” means the common shares of Banks, as presently constituted;
‘Depositary" means Computershare Trust Company of Canada, at its principal ofﬁces in Calgary,
Alberta, or such other agent as may be designated for the purpose of receiving the deposit of certiﬁcates
formerly representing Common Shares; 7
“Dissent Rights” means the rights of dissent in respect of the Special Resolution provided pursuant to
the YBCA;
“Dissenting Shareholders" means registered holders of Common Shares who validly exercise the
dissent rights under the YBCA and thereby become entitled to receive the fair value of their Common
Shares;
“Effective Date” means the date shown on the Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation to be issued under the
YBCA in respect of the Amalgamation;

7 “Effective Time" means 12:01 am. (Calgary time) on the Effective Date;
“Exchange” or “TSXV” means the TSX Venture Exchange;
“Governmental Entity" means any: (i) national, federal, provincial, state, regional, municipal, local or
other government, governmental or public department, central bank. court, tribunal, arbitral body,
commission, board, bureau or agency, domestic or foreign; (ii) subdivision, agent, commission, board or
authority of any of the foregoing; or (iii) quasi—governmental or private body exercising any regulatory,
expropriation or taxing authority under or for the account of any of the foregoing;
“Information Circular” means this management proxy circular, together with all appendices hereto and
including the Summary hereof, distributed by Banks in connection with the Meeting;
“Laws” means all statutes, regulations, statutory rules, orders, judgments, decrees and terms and
conditions of any grant of approval, permission, authority, permit or license of any court, Governmental

vii


Entity (including the TSXV), statutory body or self—regulatory authority and the term “applicable” with
respect of such Laws and in the context that refers to one or more Persons, means that such Laws apply
to such Person or Persons or its or their business, undertaking, property or securities and emanate from a
Governmental Entity having jurisdiction over the Person or Persons or its or their business, undertaking,
property or securities
“Letter of Transmittal” means the letter of transmittal forwarded to holders of Common Shares;
“Lock-up Agreements" means agreements substantially in the form attached to the Amalgamation
Agreement as Schedule “D” pursuant to which. among other things, the Banks Principals agree to
irrevocably vote the Banks Shares owned by them, directly or indirectly, or over which they exercise
control or direction, in favour of the Banks Amalgamation Resolution and to otherwise support the
Amalgamation;
“Material Adverse Change" means any change (or any condition, event or development involving a
prospective change) in the business, operations, results of operations, assets, capitalization, ﬁnancial
condition, prospects, licenses, permits, concessions, rights, liabilities or privileges, whether contractual
or otherwise, of Banks, Arapahoe or Subco, as the case may be, that is, or could reasonably be expected
to be, materially adverse to the business of Banks, Arapahoe or Subco, as the case may be, and their
subsidiaries considered as a whole, which represents a negative change of $100,000, other than a change:
(a) that relates to or arises out of a rmtrar that has, prior to the date hereof, been publicly disclosed or
otherwise disclosed in writing to the other party hereto; (b) that relates to or arises out of conditions
affecting the oil and gas industry as a whole; (c) that relates to or arises out of general economic,
ﬁnancial, currency exchange, securities or commodity market conditions in Canada or elsewhere; or (d)
that relates to or arises out of any change in the market price of crude oil, natural gas or related
hydrocarbons;
‘Material Adverse Effect", when used in connection with Banks, Arapahoe or Subco, means any
change, effect, event or occurrence with respect to its condition (ﬁnancial or otherwise), properties,
assets, liabilities, obligations (whether absolute, accrued, conditional or otherwise), businesses,
prospects, operations or results of operations or those of its subsidiaries, that is, or would be reasonably
expected to be, material and adverse to the current or future business, operations, regulatory status,
financial condition or results of operations of Banks, Arapahoe or Subco, as the case may be, and their
respective subsidiaries taken as a whole, which represents a negative change of $100,000, but shall, for
greater certainty, exclude (a) any decrease in the trading price or value of the common shares of either
Banks or Arapahoe immediately following and reasonably attributable to the announcement of the
Amalgamation or (b) any change, effect, event or occm-rence relating to the North American economy as
r a whole or securities markets in general;
“Meeting” or “Banks Meeting” means the annual and special general meeting of the Banks
Shareholders to be held on October 14, 2005 and any adjournment thereof, called to consider, among
other things, the Amalgamation;
“Notice of Meeting" means the notice of the Meeting which accompanies this Information Circular;
“Person” or “person” includes any individual, ﬁrm, partnership, joint venture, venture capital fund,
limited liability company, unlimited liability company, association, trust, trustee, executor, administrator,
legal personal represenmtive, estate, group, body corporate, corporation, turincorporated association or
organization, Governmental Entity, syndicate or other entity, whether or not having legal status;
“Proxy” means the form of proxy which accompanies this Information Circular;
viii


“Record Date” means September 1, 2005;

“Registrar” means the Registrar of Corporations appointed pursuant to section 263 of the YBCA;

“Shareholder” or “Banks Shareholder" means a holder of Common Shares of the Company;

“Special Resolution" means the special resolution to be voted upon at the Meeting of the Banks

Shareholders approving the Amalgamation Agreement and the Amalgamation, the text of which is set out

in Appendix “H” to this Information Circular;

“Subco” means 38659 Yukon Ltd., a wholly—owned subsidiary of Arapahoe;

"8an Common Shares" means common shares in the capital of Subco;

“Take-over Proposal" means a proposal or offer (other than by Arapahoe), whether or not subject to a

due diligence condition and whether or not in writing, to acquire in any manner, directly or indirectly,

beneﬁcial ownership of all or a material portion of the assets of Banks or to acquire in any manner,

directly or indirectly, beneﬁcial ownership of or control or direction over more than 20% of the

outstanding Common Shares, Whether by an arrangement, amalgamation, merger, consolidation or other

business combination, by means of a sale or exchange of shares, sale of assets, tender offer or exchange

offer or similar transaction involving Banks, including without limitation any single or multi—step

transaction or series of related transactions that is structured to permit such third party to acquire

beneﬁcial ownership of all or a material portion of the assets of Banks or to acquire in any manner,

directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the outstanding Common Shares (in all cases other than the

transactions contemplated by the Amalgamation Agreement);

"Tax" and ‘Taxes" means, with respect to any Person, all income taxes (including any tax on or based,

upon net income, gross income, income as specially defined, earnings, proﬁts or selected items of

income, earnings or proﬁts) and all capital taxes, gross receipts taxes, environmental taxes, sales taxes,

use taxes, ad valorem taxes, value added taxes, transfer taxes, franchise taxes, license taxes, withholding

taxes (including source withholdings in respect of income taxes, Canada Pension Plan and employment

insurance premiums), payroll taxes, employment taxes, pension plan premiums, excise, severance, social

security premiums, workers’ compensation premiums, unemployment insurance or compensation

premiums, stamp taxes, occupation taxes, premium taxes, property taxes, windfall proﬁts taxes,

alternative or add-on minimum taxes, goods and services tax, customs duties or other taxes, fees, imports,

assessments or charges of any kind whatsoever, together with any interest and any penalties or additional

amounts imposed by any taxing authority (domestic or foreign) on such entity, and any interest, penalties,
7 additional taxes and additions to tax imposed with respect to the foregoing;

“Tax Act" means the Income Tax Act (Canada), as amended, including the regulations promulgated

thereunder;

“Trinity” means Trinity Ventures Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Banks;

“TSXV” or “Exchange” means the TSX Venture Exchange;

“U.S." or “United States" means the United States of America, any state thereof, and the District of

Columbia;

“US. Securities Act” means the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended; and

“YBCA” means the Business Corporations Act (Yukon) R.S.Y. 2000, C10, as amended.

ix


Words importing the singular number, where the context requires, include the plural and vice
Versa and words importing any gender include all genders.
All dollar amounts herein are in Canadian dollars, unless otherwise stated.
ABBREVIATIONS
Oil and Natural Gas Liguids Natural gas
Bbl - barrel Mcf - thousand cubic feet
Bbls - barrels Mmcf » million cubic feet
Mbbls - thousand barrels Mcfld - thousand cubic feet per day
Mstb - 1,000 stock tank barrels Mmcfld - million cubic feet per day
Bbls/d - barrels per day MNBTU - million British Thermal Units
BOED or boed - barrels of oil equivalent per day Bcf — billion cubic feet
MBOE or mboe - 1,000 barrels of oil equivalent GI - gigajonle
NGLS - natural gas liquids Glld - gigajoule per day
other
ARTC - Alberta Royalty Tax Credit
Ha - hectare
m3 - cubic metres
WTI » West Texas Intermediate
API - the measure of the density or gravity of liquid petroleum products derived from a speciﬁc gravity
CONVERSION
The following table sets forth certain standard conversions from Standard Imperial Units to the
International System of Units (or menic units).
To Com-1 From mm_
0-405
0-159
35-494
Bbls oil
' 0.305
2-471
0-621
28-174
3281
BOE or boe - A barrel of oil equivalent is converted from a quantity of natural gas and crude oil on the
basis of 1 BOB for 6 Mcf of natural gas (this conversion factor is a current industry
standard and is not necessaﬁly based upon either energy or price equivalents)
X


(As at September 7, 2005. except as indicated)
SUMNIARY
‘ The following is a summary of certain information contained elsewhere in this Information
Circular. This summary is provided for convenience of reference only and is qualified in its
entirety by the more detailed information and ﬁnancial statements appearing elsewhere in this
Information Circular and in the Appendices hereto.
The Companies

Banks is a publicly-traded company the common shares of which are listed on the TSXV. Banks
is engaged in the acquisition of, exploration for and development and production of crude oil and natural
gas, primarily in western Saskatchewan. See Appendix D - Information Concerning Banks Energy Inc.

Arapahoe is a publicly-traded company the common shares of which are listed on the TSXV.
Arapahoe is engaged in the business of the acquisition, exploration and development of crude oil and
natural gas properties, primarily in the province of Alberta. See Appendix C » Information Concerning
Arapahoe Energy Corporation.

Subco, which is incorporated under the YBCA. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Arapahoe, has
no assets and conducts no operations, and was organized solely for the purpose of the Amalgamation.
The Meeting

The Meeting will be held on October 14, 2005 at 10:00 am. (Paciﬁc Time) at the ofﬁces of
Clark Wilson LLP, Suite 800, 885 West Georgia Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the purpose;
among other things, of considering and, if deemed advisable. passing, without variation, the Special
Resolution approving the Amalgaman‘on Agreement and the Amalgamation. Pursuant to the YBCA. the

_ Special Resolution requires approval by a majority of not less than 2/3 of the votes cast by Shareholders

present in person or by proxy at the Meeting. In addition, pursuant to Ontario Securities Commission
Policy 61-501, the Special Resolution must be approved by a majority of the votes cast by “related
parties" who will receive a “collateral beneﬁt” (as those terms are deﬁned therein) as a result of the
Amalgamation. See “Procedure for the Amalgamation to Become Effective — Banks Shareholder
Approval”.
The Amalgamation I

r The Amalgamation involves Banks, Arapahoe and Subco. Pursuant to the Amalgamation, Banks
and Subco will amalgamate and continue as one corporation, under the name “Arapahoe Energy
Holdings Ltd.”, which amalgamated company (“Arnalco”) will be wholly-owned by Arapahoe.

On the Effective Date of the Amalgamation, each Banks Shareholder (other than Dissenting
Shareholders) will receive 0.50 Arapahoe Shares in exchange for each one (1) Common Share.

Completion of the Amalgamation is subject to compliance with the terms and conditions set forth
in the Amalgamation Agreement which is attached to this Infonnation Circular as Appendix A. The
respective obligations of Banks and Arapahoe to complete the Amalgamation are subject to a number of
conditions which must be satisﬁed or waived in order for the Amalgamation to become effective.

1


Beneﬁts of the Amalgamation
‘ The directors and management of Banks believe that the Amalgamation is in the best interests of

Banks and its Shareholders and that the Amalgamation provides a number of beneﬁts, including the

opportunity to participate in a combined company which:

I will have a larger production base with an improved distribution of asset value among various
properties and exposure to a broader base of assets and drilling opportunities;

I will have a signiﬁcant inventory of lands at its disposal for the creation of new prospects with
approximately 49,529 net acres of undeveloped lands in areas that provide synergy in operations of
the two companies; V

I will provide an opportunity for shareholders to participate in a company under the leadership of a
proven management team, and a board of directors comprised of an experienced team of industry
professionals;

I will have greater human resources, enabling it to more effectively undertake the development,
exploration and production of oil and natural gas opportunities;

I will eliminate certain redundant general and administrative costs between Arapahoe and Banks; and

I will have increased market capitalization that is anticipated to receive greater market mention,
resulting in improved liquidity for shareholders and an increased ability to secure ﬁnancing

In addition, the transaction will generally provide for a tax deferred rollover of Common Shares
into Arapahoe Shares (see “Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations"). ’

On a pro-forma basis, assuming the successful completion of the Amalgamation, the combined
entity on a consolidated basis will have a production base of approximately 360 boed. The
Amalgamation is consistent with Banks' and Arapahoe’s strategy to continue to expand their land
positions and to build growth opportunities in central Alberta and western Saskatchewan. The combined
company will also hold approximately 49,529 net acres of undeveloped land with an inventory of
petroleum and natural gas prospects focused in Alberta and western Saskatchewan. On a pro-forma
basis, combined loss carry-forwards and tax pools will be approximately $7.5 million.

Effect of the Amalgamation upon Shareholders

r If the Amalgamation proceeds, Banks Shareholders (other than Dissenting Shareholders) will
become holders of Arapahoe Shares. Banks Shareholders shall receive, in exchange for each one (1)
Common Share held by such Banks Shareholder at the Effective Date, 050 of one Arapahoe Share. The
Amalgamation of Banks and Subco pursuant to the Amalgamation Agreement will result in the
continuing amalgamated corporation (“Amalco”) becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Arapahoe,
with the articles and by-laws of Amalco being the same as those of Subco. Following completion of the
Amalgamation, the Common Shares of Banks will no longer trade on the TSXV. Arapahoe will continue
as a publicly-traded TSXV-listed company with its current management team.

The consideration of 0.50 of one Arapahoe Share for each Common Share of Banks was
determined based on a number of factors including, without limitation, the evaluations of the reserves
owned by each of the companies, the undeveloped land holdings and future prospects of each company,
the associated tax pools of each company, the ﬁnancial assets and liabilities of each of Banks and
Arapahoe and the pro-forma structure of the merged company, a comparison of the recent trading prices

2


of the Common Shares of Banks and the Aparahoe Shares, and the relative present and anticipated future
values of the Common Shares and the Arapahoe Shares.

Arapahoe has reserved and allotted to holders of Banks Pro-Amalgamation Options and Banks
Warrants the number 'of Arapahoe Shares as may be issuable upon the exercise thereof following the
completion of the Amalgamation. Upon the exercise of the Banks I’m-Amalgamation Options and Banks
Warrants in accordance with their respective terms, the Arapahoe Shares will he issued as fully paid and
non-assessable shares.

As of the date hereof, Arapahoe has 22,820,849 Arapahoe Shares outstanding. As at Arapahoe's
financial quarter ended June 30, 2005, Arapahoe had debt of approximately $1,073,000, cash and cash-
based securities of $4,348,000, and other non-cash working capital of approximately $525,000. Upon
completion of the Amalgamation, Arapahoe will have approximately 37,936,253 Arapahoe Shares
outstanding, cash and cash-based securities of approximately $4,372,000 and debt of approximately
$25 14,000. See “Pro—Format Information”.

Fairness Opinion

Banks has received an opinion from Woodstone Capital Inc. (“Woodstone”) dated August 10,
2005 that the consideration offered under the Amalgamation Agreement is fair, from a financial
viewpoint, to the Banks Shareholders. Woodstone’s fairness opinion is subject to the qualiﬁcations and
limitations set out therein See “Details of the Amalgamation - Reasons for and Background to the
Amalgamation — Fairness Opinion". A copy of the fairness opinion is attached hereto as Appendix F.
Recommendation of the Board of Directors of Banks

The Board of Directors has unanimously determined that the Amalgamation is fair from a,
ﬁnancial point of View to the Shareholders and in the best interest of Banks and the Shareholders,
and has authorized the submiss'on of the Amalgamation Agreement and the Amalgamation to the
Shareholders for their approval. The Board of Directors of Banks unanimously recommends that
Shareholders vote in favour of the Amalgamation Agreement and the Amalgamation.

Procedure for the Amalgamation to Become Effective

The Amalgamation is proposed to be carried out pursuant to Sections 184 and 185 of the YBCA.

The following procedural steps must be taken in order for the Amalgamation to become effective:
. (a) the Amalgamation and the Amalgamation Agreement must be approved by the Banks
Shareholders;
(b) all conditions precedent to the Amalgamation, as set forth in the Amalgamation
Agreement, must be satisﬁed or waived by the appropriate party; and
(c) the Articles of Amalgamation in the form prescribed by the YBCA must be ﬁled with the
Registrar. The Special Resolution is required to be approved by at least 2/3 of the votes
cast by the Shareholders present in person or represented by Proxy at the Meeting.
Pursuant to TSXV Policy 5.9, Banks is required to exclude the votes attached to
Common Shares held by certain of the Banks Principals. See “Procedure for the
Amalgamation to Become Effective — Banks Shareholder Approval".
3


Non-Completion Fees

Under the Amalgamation Agreement, Banks has agreed to pay Arapahoe a fee of $500,000 if
Banks receives an unsolicited take-over offer or merger proposal from a third party which it wishes to
accept. See “Arapahoe Non-Completion Fee".
Exchange of Banks Share Certiﬁcates

Upon completion of the Amalgamation, Banks Shareholders (other than Dissenting
Shareholders) will be deemed to be holders of Arapahoe Shares as of the Effective Date and former
registered Banks Shareholders will be entered into the register of holders of Arapahoe Shares without
further act or formality. A Letter of Transmittal for the surrender of certiﬁcates representing Common
Shares for use in exchanging those certiﬁcates for Arapahoe Share certiﬁcates is enclosed with this
Information Circular. The Letter of Transmittal contains complete instructions on how Banks
Shareholders are to exchange their Common Share certiﬁcates. Registered Banks Shareholders (other
than Dissenting Shareholders) should read and follow these instructions. The Letter of Transmittal, when
properly completed and returned together with a certiﬁcate or certiﬁcates representing Common Shares
and all other required documents, will enable each registered Banks Shareholder (other than Dissenting
Shareholders) to obtain the certiﬁcates representing the number of Arapahoe Shares recein under the
Amalgamation,

Pursuant to the terms of the Amalgamation, any certiﬁcates formerly representing Common
Shares that are not deposited with the Depositary together with a duly completed Letter of Transmittal
and any other documents the Depositary reasonably requires, on or before the sixth anniversary of the
Effective Date, will cease to represent a right or claim of any kind or nature and the right of the holder of
such Common Shares to receive Arapahoe Shares will be deemed to be surrendered to Arapahoe together
with all interest, dividends or distributions thereon held for such Banks Shareholder. »
Lock-Up Agreements and Intention of Certain Banks Shareholders

The Banks Principals (who are listed in Schedule C to the Amalgamation Agreement), hold an
aggregate of 2,937,611 Common Shares and Banks Pro-Amalgamation Options entitling them to acquire
an aggregate of 1,985,000 additional Common Shares which, if exercised, would collectively represent
approximately 16% of the issued and outSIanding Common Shares of Banks. The Banks Principals have
entered into Lock-Up Agreements with Arapahoe pursuant to which the Banks Principals have agreed to
vote in favour of the Special Resolution and to otherwise support the Amalgamation, subject to the
provisions of the Lock-Up Agreements
Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences

The following portion of this summary is applicable solely to persons who are resident or
deemed to be resident in Canada for the purposes of the Tax Act and whose Common Shares are capital
property to them.
Disposition of Cowman Sharexfor Arapaho: Shams

A holder of Common Shares who acquires Arapahoe Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation will
be deemed to have disposed of the holder’s Common Shares, but will realize neither a capital gain nor a
capital loss on the disposition of such Common Shares. The Arapahoe Shares received by a holder of
Common Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation will be deemed to have been acquired at a cost equal to

. the aggregate adjusted cost base of the Common Shares held by the holder immediately prior to the
Amalgamation. The adjusted cost base of the Arapahoe Shares acquired by a holder of Common Shares
4


pursuant to the Amalgamation must be determined by averaging such cost with the adjusted cost base of
any other Common Shares then held by the holder as capital property.
Dissenting Shareholders

Dissenting Shareholders who receive the fair value of their Common Shares will be considered to
have disposed of their Common Shares on the date of the Amalgamation To the extent that Dissenting
Shareholders are considered to dispose of their shares to Banks, and the amount ultimately paid to a
Dissenting Shareholder exceeds the paid-up capital of their Common Shares, this amount will be
excluded from the former holder’s proceeds of disposition for the purposes of computing any taxable
capital gain or, generally speaking, any allowable capital loss on disposition and will be deemed to he a
taxable dividend paid by Banks to such Dissenting Shareholder. The deemed dividend will he treated in
the same manner as if the Dissenting Shareholder had received a regular taxable dividend from Banks. In
certain circumstances, corporations or trusts or partnerships which have corporations as beneﬁciaries or
partners, may be denied a capital loss in respect of their Common Shares of Banks to the extent that any
dividends have, or have been deemed to have, been received thereon. CRA also considers that, in certain
circumstances, Dissenting Shareholders should be considered to have disposed of their Common Shares
to the amalgamated corporation for proceeds of disposition equal to the amount paid to them, other than
interest, if any. In view of the uncertainties under the relevant legislation as to whether amounts paid to a
Dissenting Shareholder would be treated entirely as proceeds of disposition, or in part as the payment of
a deemed dividend, Dissenting Shareholders should consult with their own tax advisors in this respect.

Shareholders should consult their own legal and tax advisers as to the tax consequences of
the Amalgamation to determine the particular tax consequences thereof to them.

See “The Amalgamation - Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences”.

United States tax considerations applicable to Shareholders resident in the United States
are not disclosed in this summary or elsewhere in'the Information Circular. Shareholders resident
in the United States are urged to consult their own income tax advisors as to the consequence of the
Amalgamation to them.

Right to Dissent

A Banks Shareholder is entitled to dissent in respect of the Amalgamation in accordance with
Section 193 of the YBCA. Strict compliance with the provisions of Section 193 is required in order to
exercise the right to dissent Provided the Amalgamation becomes effective, each Dissenting Shareholder
will be entitled to be paid the fair value of his or her Conunon Shares in respect of which such
Shareholder dissents in accordance with Section 193 of the YBCA. Persons who are beneﬁcial owners
of Common Shares registered in the name of a broker, custodian, nominee or other intermediary
who wish to dissent should be aware that only the registered holders of such Common Shares are
entitled to dissent. Accordingly, a beneﬁcial owe: of Common Shares desiring to exercise his or her
right to dissent must make arrangements for the Cormnon Shares beneﬁcially owned by such person to be
registered in his or her name prior to the time the written objection of the Special Resolution is required
to be received by Banks, or, alternatively, make arrangements for the registered holder of its Common
Shares to dissent on his or her behalf. See Appendix E attached hereto for the full text of Section 193 and
see “Dissenting Shareholders”.

The Amalgamation Agreement provides that it is a condition of completion of the
Amalgamation that holders of not more than 2.5% of the outstanding Common Shares exercise
their right of dissent. This condition may be waived by Ampahoe in its discretion.

5


Pro-Formal Information

The pro-forma information in relation to the selected combined ﬁnancial, production and
operational information for Arapahoe, Subco and Banks, assuming completion of the Amalgamation, for
the periods indicated, are set forth in the “Pro-Fonna Information” portion of this Information Circular
and in Appendix D - Pro=Forn1a Financial Statements.
Timing

If the Special Resolution is approved as required and the other conditions precedent to the
Amalgamation speciﬁed in the Amalgamation Agreement are satisﬁed or waived, Banks expects that the
Effective Date will be on or about October 12, 2005.
Stock Exchange Listings

The outstanding Common Shares and the outstanding Arapahoe Shares are listed and posted for
trading on the TSXV. Subject to acceptance by the TSXV, the Arapahoe Shares issued to the Banks
Shareholders will be listed and posted for trading on the TSXV in substitution of the common shares of
Banks.
Risk Factors

The businesses of Banks and Arapahoe are subject to the risks encountered generally in the oil
and gas industry, such as the marketabth of, and prices of oil and gas, competition with companies
having greater resources, exploration risks, the regulation of the oil and gas industry by various levels of
government and environmental regulation. See “Other Matters - Risk Factors". 7

6


PART I
INTRODUCTION
This Information Circular is furnished in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the management
of Banks for use at the Meeting at the time and place and for the purposes set forth in the accompanying
Notice of Meeting. .
Unless otherwise stated, the information contained in this Information Circular is given as at September
7, 2005.
All summaries of, and references to, the Amalgamation and the Amalgamation Agreement in this
Information Circular are qualiﬁed in their entirety by reference to the complete text of the Amalgamation
Agreean a copy of which is attached at Appendix A to this Information Circular. You are urged to
carefully read the full text of the Amalgamation Agreement.
Information relating to Arapahoe and Subco set forth in the Appendices hereto and elsewhere in this
Information Circular, has either been provided by the management of Arapahoe, or taken from or based
upon publicly available documents or records on ﬁle with Canadian securities regulatory authorities or
public sources. Although Banks has no knowledge that would indicate that any statements contained
herein provided by the management of Arapahoe, or taken from or based on such public documents and
records are untrue or incomplete. Banks does not assume any responsibility for the acctn'acy or
completeness of the information provided by the management of Arapahoe, or taken from or based upon
such public documents and records, or for any failure by Arapahoe to disclose events which may occur or
effect the signiﬁcance or accuracy or any such information but which are uulmown to Banks.
No person has been authorized by Banks to give any information or make any representations in
connection with the Amalgamation other than those contained in this Information Circular and, if given
or made, any such information or representation must not be relied upon as having been authorized by
Banks.
PART II
GENERAL PROXY INFORMATION
SOLICITATION 0F PROXIES
THIS INFORMATION CIRCULAR IS FURNISHED IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOLICITATION OF PROXIFS BY THE MANAGEMENT OF THE COMPANY FOR USE AT
THE ANNUAL AND SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS OF THE
COMPANY (AND ANY ADJOURNMENT THEREOF) (THE “MEETING”) TO BE HELD ON
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2005 AT THE TIME AND PLACE AND FOR THE PURPOSES SET
FORTH IN Tl-m ACCOMPANYING NOTICE OF MEETING. While it is expected that the
solicitation will be primarily by mail, proxies may be solicited personally or by telephone by the regular
employees of the Company at nominal cost. All costs of solicitation by management will be borne by the
Company.
THE CONTENTS AND THE SENDING OF THIS INFORMATION CIRCULAR HAVE BEEN
APPROVED BY THE DIRECTORS OF THE COMPANY.
7


APPOINTMENT AND REVOCATION OF PROXIES
The individuals named in the accompanying form of proxy are Directors and/or Ofﬁcers of the Company.
A SHAREHOLDERVWISHJNG T0 APPOINT SOME OTHER PERSON (WHO NEED NOT BE
A SHAREHOLDER) T0 REPRESENT HIM AT THE MEETING HAS THE RIGHT TO DO SO,
EITIHER BY STRIKING OUT THE NAMES OF THOSE PERSONS NAMED IN THE
ACCOMPANYING FORM OF PROXY AND INSERTING THE DESIRED PERSON'S NAME IN
THE BLANK SPACE PROVIDED IN THE FORM OF PROXY OR BY COMPLETING
ANOTHER FORM OF PROXY. A proxy will not be valid unless the completed form of proxy is
received by Computershare Trust Company of Canada, Attention: Proxy Department, 9th Floor, 100
University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5] 2Y1, or by fax at 1—866A249-7775, (the “Transfer Agent") not
less than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) before the time for holding the Meeting
or any adjournment thereof, or delivered to the Chairman of the Meeting prior to the commencement of
the Meeting.
A Shareholder who has given a proxy may revoke it by an instrument in writing executed by the
Shareholder or by his attorney authorized in writing or, where the Shareholder is a corporation, by a duly
authorized ofﬁcer or attorney of the corporation, and delivered to the registered and records ofﬁce of the
Company, at Suite 885 — 800 West Georgia Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6C 3H1, at any time
up to and including the last business day preceding the day of the Meeting or if adjourned, any
reconvening thereof, or to the Chairman of the Meeting on the day of the Meeting or, if adjourned, any
reconvening thereof or in any other manner provided by law. A revocation of a proxy does not affect any
matter on which a vote has been taken prior to the revocation.
ADVICE T0 BENEFICIAL SHAREHOLDERS
The information set forth in this section is of signiﬁcant importance to many shareholders, as r
substantial number of shareholders do not hold Common Shares in their own name. Shareholders
who hold their Common Shares through their brokers, intermediaries, trustees, or other persons, or who
otherwise do not hold their Common Shares in their own name (referred to in this Circular as “Beneﬁcial
Shareholders") should note that only proxies deposited by shareholders who appear on the records
maintained by the Corporation's registrar and transfer agent as registered holders of Common Shares will
be recognized and acted upon at the Meeting. If the Common Shares are listed in an account statement
provided to a Beneﬁcial Shareholder by a broker, those Common Shares will, in all likelihood, not be
registered in the shareholder's name. Such Common Shares will more likely be registered under the name
of the shareholder's broker or an agent of that broker. In Canada, the vast majority of such shares are
registered under the name of CD8 & Co. (the registration name for The Canadian Depositary for
. Securities, which acts as nominee for many Canadian brokerage ﬁrms). Oonnnon Shares held by brokers
(or their agents or nominees) on behalf of a broker‘s client can only be voted (for or against resolutions)
at the direction of the Beneﬁcial Shareholder. Without speciﬁc instructions, brokers and their agents and
nominees are prohibited from voting shares for the broker's clients. Therefore, each Beneﬁcial
Shareholder should ensure that voting instructions are communicated to the appropriate person
well in advance of the Meeting.
Existing regulatory policy requires brokers and other intermediaries to seek voting instructions from
Beneﬁcial Shareholders in advance of shareholders‘ meetings. The various brokers and other
intermediaries have their own mailing procedures and provide their own return instructions to clients,
which should be carefully followed by Beneﬁcial Shareholders in order to ensure that their Common
Shares are voted at the Meeting. The form of proxy supplied to a Beneﬁcial Shareholder by its broker (or
the agent of the broker} is substantially similar to the Instrument of Proxy provided directly to registered
shareholders by the Corporation. However, its purpose is limited to instructing the registered Shareholder
(i.e., the broker or agent of the broker) how to vote on behalf of the Beneﬁcial Shareholder. The vast
8


majority of brokers now delegate responsibility for obtaining instructions from clients to ADP Investor
Communications (“ADP”) in Canada. ADP typically prepares a machine-readable voting instruction
form, mails those forms to Beneﬁcial Shareholders and asks Beneﬁcial Shareholders to return the forms
to ADP, or otherwise communicate voting instructions to ADP wy way of the Internet or telephone, for
example). ADP then tabulates the results of all instructions received and provides appropriate
instructions respecting the voting of shares to he represented at the Meeting. A Beneﬁcial Shareholder
who receives an ADP voting instruction form cannot use that form to vote Common Shares
directly at the Meeting. The voting instruction forms must be returned to ADP (or instructions
respecting the voting of Common Shares must otherwise he communicated to ADP) well in
advance of the Meeting in order to have the Common Shares voted. If you have any questions
respecting the voting of Common Shares held through a broker or other intermediary, please
contact that broker or other intermediary for axistanoe.
Although a Beneﬁcial Shareholder may not be recognized directly at the Meeting for the purposes of
voting Common Shares registered in the name of his broker, a Beneﬁcial Shareholder may attend the
Meeting as proxyholder for the registered shareholder and vote the Common Shares in that capacity.
Beneﬁcial Shareholders who wish to attend the Meeting and indirectly vote their Common Shares
as proxyholder for the registered shareholder, should enter their own names in the blank space on
the form of proxy provided to them and return the same to their broker (or the broker's agent) in
accordance with the instructions provided by such broker.
All references to shareholders in this Management Information Circular and the accompanying
Instrument of Proxy and Notice of Meeting are to registered shareholders unless speciﬁcally stated
otherwise.
VOTING OF PROXIES
SHARES REPRESENTED BY PROPERLY EECUTED PROXIES IN FAVOUR OF PERSONS
DESIGNATED IN TEE ENCLOSED FORM OF PROXY WILL BE VOTED FOR ALL
MATTERS TO BE VOTED 0N AT THE MEETING AS SET OUT IN THIS INFORMATION
CIRCULAR 0R WITHHELD FROM VOTING IF SO INDICATED ON THE FORM OF
PROXY. '
The shares represented by proxies will, on any poll where a choice with respect to any matter to be acted
upon has been speciﬁed in the form of proxy, be voted in accordance with the speciﬁcation made.
SUCH SHARES WILL, ON A POLL, BE VOTED IN FAVOUR OF EACH MATTER FOR
7 WHICH N0 CHOICE HAS BEEN SPECIFIED BY TIE SHAREHOLDER.
The enclosed form of proxy. when properly completed and delivered and not revoked, confers
discretionary authority upon the person appointed proxy thereunder to vote with respect to amendments
or variations of matters identiﬁed in the Notice of Meeting, and with respect to other matters which may
properly come before the Meeting. In the event that amendments or variations to matters identiﬁed in the
Notice of Meeting are properly brought before the Meeting or any further or other business is properly
brought before the Meeting, it is the intention of the persons designated in the enclosed form of proxy to
vote in accordance with their best judgement on such matters or business. At the time of the printing of
this Information Circular, the management of the Company knows of no such amendment, variation or
other matter which may be presented to the Meeting.
9


QUORUM
The lay-laws of the Company provide that at least two persons holding or representing by proxy not less
than 10% of the issuedand outstanding Common Shares of the Company shall constitute a quorum for
meetings of Shareholders.
VOTING SHARES AND PRINCIPAL HOLDERS THEREOF
The Company’s authorized capital consists of an unlimited number of voting common shares without par
value (deﬁned herein as the “Common Shares"), of which 28,614,682 Common Shares are issued and
outstanding as of the date of this Information Circular. The holders of Common Shares are entitled to
one vote for each Common Share held. Holders of Common Shares of record at the close of business on
September 1, 2005 will be entitled to receive notice of and vote at the Meeting.
To the knowledge of the directors and senior ofﬁcers of the Company, no person beneﬁcially owns,
directly or indirectly, or exercises control or direction over Common Shares carrying more than 10% of
the voting rights attached to all shares of the Company.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The audited ﬁnancial statements of the Company for the year ended April 30, 2005 which are delivered
with this Circular will be received for consideration at the Meeting. Shareholder approval is not required
in respect of these statements.
ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
The directors of the Company are elected at each annual general meeting and hold ofﬁce until the next,
annual general meeting or until their successors are elected or appointed. In the absence of instructions
to the contrary, the enclosed proxy will be voted for the nominees herein listed.
Shareholder approval will be sought to ﬁx the number of directors of the Company at four (4).
Management of the Company proposes to nominate each of the following persons for election as a
director. Information concerning such persons, as furnished by the individual nominees, is as follows:
No. of Shares
- r ‘ Beneﬁcially
7 Name, Place of Residence . ‘ - Owned,
and Present Podtion Principal Occupation Director Controlled
in the Company for the Past Five Years Since _ or Directed m
D. BARRY LEE ‘1’ President of the Company, Sep 2002 - present, Mar. 10, 2000 2,139,389
Vancouver, BC. President & C.E.O. of EU... Productions Ltd,
President & Director Jan 1985 - present
LESTER STACK President, Tenax Energy Inc., an oil and gas Jun. 18, 2003 150,000
Calgary. AB management consulting company, 2000 -
Vice-President & Director present, Consultant, Stach & Associates Inc.,
1993 - present
10


I , No. of Shares
Beneﬁcially
Name, Place of Residence Owned,
and Present Position c . Principal Occupation Director Controlled
in the Company for the Past Five Years Since or Directed ‘2)
CHRISTOPHER President & CEO, Northern Sun Exploration Mar. 10, 2000 80,472
COOPER m Company Inc., 2002 — present, President,
Vancouver, B.C. Styles Management Inc., 1995 - present
Director
STEVEN BRUK ‘1) President1 Watch Resources Ltd. 2004 — 2005. Nov. 11, 2009. 111500
West Vancouver. B.C. President1 Choice Resources Corp. 2001 - 2006
Director
NOTES:
(1) Member of the Audit Committee and the Reserves Committee. Banks’ board of directors has no other
committees.
(2) Shares beneﬁcially owned, directly or indirectly, or over which control or direction is exercised, as at
September 1, 2005, based upon information furnished to the Company by individual directors.
Unless otherwise indicated, such shares are held directly.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Comﬂsation of Named Executive Ofﬁcers
The table below sets out particulars of compensation paid to the following executive ofﬁcers for services
to the Company during the three most recently completed ﬁnancial years:
(a) the individual who served as the Company’s chief executive ofﬁcer or acted in a similar capacity
(“CEO”) during the most recently completed ﬁnancial year;
(b) the individual who served as the Company's chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer or acted in a similar capacity
(“CFO”) during the most recently completed ﬁnancial year;

7 (c) each of the three most highly compensated executive ofﬁcers, other than the CEO and CFO, who
was serving as an executive ofﬁcer at the end of the most recently completed ﬁnancial year and
whose total salary and bonus exceeded $150,000 per year, and

(d) any additional individuals for whom disclosure would have been provided under (c) except that
the  was not serving as an executive ofﬁcer of the Company at the end of the most
recently completed ﬁnancial year.

(each of whom is a “Named Executive Ofﬁcer").

Snmmar Com nsation Table

The following sets forth compensation for the Company’s Named Executive Ofﬁcers for the fiscal years

indicated:
11


Securities Restricted
‘ ' " Under Sharesor
Name V Option] Restricted All other
and Fian Other Annual EARS Share L'I‘ﬂ’ Compen-
Prlncipal Year Salary Bonus Compensatimr granted Units Payouts sation
Position End (8) (S) (S) (if) ($) (3) (3) I
D. Barry Lee“) 2005 Nil 4,373 W 90,000 100,000 7 il Nil i1 7
President & CEO 2004 Nil Nil 27,500 “l 100,000 Nil Nil Nil
2003 Nil Nil 24,000 (D 280,000 Nil Nil Nil
Christopher 2005 N/A N/A N/A N/A NIA N/A N/A
Wright (2) 2004 N/A N/A N/A N/A NIA N/A N/A
President 2003 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
NOTES:

(1) Mr. Lee received compensation as a consultant to the Company. In addition to serving as
President and CEO, Mr. Lee has also served Banks for the past three ﬁnancial years in a
capacity similar to that of a CFO, although he has not held that formal position. No other
Person has served as CFO during that time.

(2) Mr. Wright resigned as President of the Company on September 24, 2002. »

Long Term Incentive Plan (LTIEI Awards
The Company does not have a UHF, pursuant to which cash or non-cash compensation intended to serve
as an incentive for performance (whereby performance is measured by reference to ﬁnancial performance
or the price of the Company’s securities), was paid or distributed to the Named Executive Ofﬁcer(s)
during the most recently completed ﬁnancial year.
Option/Stock Appreciation Rights Q‘SAR’f! Grants dur'gg the most recently completed Financial
Year
Market Value
Securities % of Total Of Securities
Under Options/SAKS Underlying
Options/SARS Granted to Exercise or Options/SARS
r Granted Employees in Base price on the Date Expiration
Name (#) Financial Year ($ISecurity) of Grant Date
L SISecuri )
D_ Barry Lee 100.000 7% $0.35 Oct. 6, 2009
President
Aggggpted Options/SAR Exercises in Last Financial Year and Financial Year-End Option/SAR
Values
The Named Executive Ofﬁcers did not exercise any options in respect of the Company’s shares during
the most recently completed ﬁnancial yeari
12


Termination of Emplomeng Chgpges in Roi-gamime and Emploment Contracts:
The Company is party to a Management Agreement dated June 1, 2004 with D. Barry Lee (the “Lee
Management Agreement”) pursuant to which he provides his services to Banks as President, Chief
Execmive Ofﬁcer and de facto chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer. Mr. Lee is paid compensation of $7,500 per month
plus GST. The Lee Management Agreement is for a ﬁxed term of two years, renewable for a second
two-year term, and from year-to—year thereafter. Mr. Lee is entitled to six months‘ severance (i.e.
$45,000) in the event that the Lee Management Agreement is terminated by the Company where there is
no cause, or in the event that he elects to resign upon the occurrence of a “takeover of control” (as that
term is deﬁned in the Lee Management Agreement). The Amalgamation will constitute a takeover of
control of Banks, however, Mr. Lee has waived his right to resign and to be paid severance of $45,000 as
a result of the Amalgamation. The Lee Management Agreement also contains a provision requiring Mr.
Lee to maintain Banks’ proprietary information in strict conﬁdence.
The Company and its subsidiaries have no compensatory plan or arrangement in respect of compensation
received or that may be received by the Named Executive Ofﬁcers in the Company’s most recently
completed or current ﬁnancial year to compensate such executive ofﬁcers in the event of the termination
of employment (resignation, retirement, change of control) or in the event of a change in responsibilities
following a change in control, where in respect of the Named Executive Officer the value of such
compensation exceeds $100,000.
Compensation of Directors
The Company has no arrangements, standard or otherwise. pursuant to which directors are compensated
by the Company or its subsidiaries for their services in their capacity as directors, or for committee
participation, involvement in special assignments or for services as a consultant or expert during the most
recently completed ﬁnancial year or subsequently, up to and including the date of this Information
Circular.
The Company grants stock options to assist it in compensating, attracting, retaining and motivating the
directors of the Company and to closely align the personal interests of such persons to that of the
shareholders. '
INDEBTEDNESS TO COMPANY OF DIRECTORS EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND SENIOR
OFFICERS
There is no indebtedness of any director, executive ofﬁcer, senior ofﬁcer, proposed nominee for election
W as a director or associate of them, to or guaranteed or supported by the Company or any of its
subsidiaries either pursuant to an employee stock purchase program of the Company or otherwise, during
the most recently completed ﬁnancial year.
INTEREST OF CERTAIN PERSONS OR COMPANlES IN MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
Other than as set forth below and elsewhere herein, the Company is not aware of any material interests,
direct or indirect, by way of beneﬁcial ownership of securities or otherwise, of any director or executive
ofﬁcer of the Company, or any shareholder holding more than 10% of the voting rights attached to the
Common Shares or any associate or afﬁliate of any of the foregoing in any transaction in the preceding
three year period or any proposed transaction which has or will materially affect the Company, or in any
transaction to be proposed at the Meeting.
13


To the knowledge of the directors and senior ofﬁcers of Banks, as of the date hereof, no person or
company beneﬁcially owns, directly or indirectly, or exercises control or direction over, Common Shares
of Banks carrying more than 10% of the voting rights attached thereto.
As at September 1, 2005, the directors and senior ofﬁcers of Banks and their respective associates and
afﬁliates, as a group, owned, directly or indirectly, 2,937,611 Common Shares and will receive an
aggregate of approximately 1,468,805 Arapahoe Shares issued pursuant to the Amalgamation in respect
of these holdings. To the knowledge of Banks, as of the date hereof, no director, ofﬁcer or insider of
Banks, or their respective associates and afﬁliates, own, directly or indirectly, or exercise mum! of or
direction over, any Arapahoe Shares.
The Banks Principals hold an aggregate of 2,937,611 Common Shares and Banks Pro-Amalgamation
Options entitling them to acquire an aggregate of 1,985,000 additional Common Shares which, if
exercised, would collectively represent approximame 16% of the issued and outstanding Common
Shares of Banks. The Banks Principals have entered into Lock—Up Agreements with Arapahoe pursuant
to which they have agreed to vote in favour of the Special Resolution and to otherwise support the
Amalgamation, subject to the provisions of the Lock-Up Agreements.
As at September 1, 2005, to the knowledge of Banks, no directors or ofﬁcers or other insiders of
Arapahoe own, directly or indirectly, or exercise control of or direction over, any Common Shares.
Banks and Tenax Energy Inc. (“Tenax”) entered into that certain Business Development and
Management Services Agreement dated for reference October 17, 2002 (the "Pentax Business
Development Agreement”), as amended, under which Tenax negotiated Banks’ contracts with
Poundmaker First Nation. In return for those services, Banks paid to Tenax $75,000 and issued to Tenax
600,000 Common Shares. In addition, Banks granted to Tenax a 2.5% gross overriding royalty interest (a,
“GORR") in Banks’ interest in the Ponndmaker lands and Banks’ share of petroleum and natural gas
produced therefrom. Banks has subsequently granted to Tenax a 2.5% GORR in all of its other
petroleum and natural gas properties and production therefrom in consideration of Tenax identifying the
opportunity to acquire such properties and assisting Banks in completing those acquisitions. See
“Appendix C - Information Concerning Banks Energy Inc. — Principal Properties". Pursuant to the Tenax
Business Development Agreement, Banks also agreed to pay to Tenax an amount equal to 5% of the
value of a transaction which constitutes a “Change of Control" as deﬁned therein. The Amalgamation
will constitute a Change of Control under the Tenax Business Development Agreement, and will result in
a payment obligation of Banks to Tenax of $581,805. Pursuant to an agreement dated August 9, 2005
among Banks, Arapahoe and Tenax, (the “Tenax Supplemental Agreement”), Arapahoe has agreed to
r assume the obligations of Banks under the Tenax Business Development Agreement upon completion of
the Amalgamation. Pursuant to the Tenax Supplement Agreement, Arapahoe, Tenax and Banks have
further agreed that the payment obligation to Tenax will he paid and satisﬁed by the issuance by
Arapahoe to Tenax of 808,063 Arapahoe Shares, subject to regulatory approval. Mn Lester Stach serves
as a director and Vice»President of Business Development of Banks and will realize an indirect beneﬁt
from this payment in Arapahoe Shares by virtue of the fact that he is a shareholder, a director and
President of Tenax. Tenax provides ongoing management services to Banks under the Tenax Consulting
Agreement described below under ‘Management Contracts".
It is a condition of the completion of the Amalgamation that Arapahoe shall have taken all reasonable
steps to ensure that Mr. D. Barry Lee, a director of Banks, is appointed as a director of Arapahoe on the
Effective Date or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable.
l4


INTEREST OF INFORMED PERSONS [N MATERIAL TRANSACTIQNS

Other than as set forth herein, no Informed Person of the Company, any proposed director of the
Company, or any associate or afﬁliate of any Informed Person or proposed director has any material
interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction within three years before the date hereof or in any proposed
transaction which has materially affected or would materially affect the Company. An “Informed
Person” means a director or executive ofﬁce of a reporting issuer; a director or executive ofﬁcer of a
person or company that is itself an Informed Person or subsidiary of a reporting issuer; any person or
company who beneﬁcially owns, directly or indirectly, voting shares of a reporting issuer or who
exercises control or direction over shares of the reporting issuer or a combination of both carrying more
than 10% of the voting rights atmhed to all outstanding voting securities of the reporting issuer; and a
reporting issuer that has purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired any of its securities, for so long as it
holds any of its securities.

APPODXTNEENT AND REMUN'ERATION 0F AUDITOR

Tony M. Ricci, Chartered Accountant ("Pony M. Ricci"), of Vancouver, British Columbia, resigned as
the Company’s auditor on July 8, 2005. There are no reportable events between the Company and Tony
M. Ricci, and Mr. Ricci has not given any qualiﬁed opinions or denied giving any opinions. Effective
July 8, 2005, the Company appointed BDO Dunwoody LLP, Chartered Accountants, of Suite 1900 — 801
6th Avenue SW, Calgary, Alberta, as its new auditor.

‘ Copies of the Company’s Notice of Change of Auditor and letters sent to the British Columbia Securities
Commission, the Alberta Securities Commission and the TSXV by each of the former auditor and the
successor auditor are attached to this Information Circular as Appendix G. The Board of Directors has
reviewed the Notice and the letters from the former and successor auditors.

The audit committee of the Board of Directors recommends the election of BDO Dunwoody LLP,
Chartered Accountants, of Calgary, Alberta, as the Company’s auditor to hold ofﬁce until the Company’s
next annual general meeting. The Company proposes that the Board of Directors be authorized to ﬁx the
remuneration to be paid to the auditor. Unless otherwise instructed, the proxies solicited by management
will be voted for the appointment of BDO Dunwoody LLP, Chartered Accountants, as the Company’s
auditor.

MANAGEMENT CONTRACTS

Except as set forth below, no management functions of the Company are performed to any substantial

,, degree by a Person other than the directors or executive ofﬁcers of the Company.

Tenax provides the services of lester Stach to Banks as Vice President, Business Development pursuant
to a Consulting Services Agreement dated October 1. 2002 among Banks, Tenax and its principals,
namely Mr. Stach, John Land, Melvin Benson and Richard Velhat (the “Tensor Consulting
Agreement"). Tenax’s address is #615-815 - lst Street SW, Calgary, Alberta. Banks pays to Tenax the
sum of $10,000 per month for its consulting services, and paid a total of $120,000 to Tenax thereunder
during the ﬁnancial year ended April 30, 2005. The Tenax Consulting Agreement is for an indeﬁnite
term and may be terminated on one month’s notice by either Banks or Tenax. Mr. Stach is an Informed
Person and is a resident of Calgary, Alberta.

Tenax also continues to assist Banks in ﬁnding and negotiating the acquisition of oil and gas properties
from time-to-time under the Tenax Business Development Agreement. In return for its services, Banks
grants to Tenax a 2.5% GORR on properties that it has acquired with Tenax’s assistance.

15


Copies of the Tenax Consulting Agreement and Tenax Business Development Agreement are available

for inspection at the ofﬁce of Banks, 2410- 650 West Georgia Street. Vancouver, British Columbia, during

ordinary business hours.

AUDIT COMMI'rrEE”

The Audit Committee's Charter

Mandate

The primary function of the audit committee (the “Connnittee”) is to assist the board of directors in

fulﬁlling its ﬁnancial oversight responsibilities by reviewing the ﬁnancial reports and other ﬁnancial

information provided by the Company to regulatory authorities and shareholders, the Company's systems

of internal controls regarding ﬁnance and accounting and the Company's auditing, accounting and

financial reporting processes. The Committee's primary duties and responsibilities are to:

(i) Serve as an independent and objective party to monitor the Company‘s ﬁnancial reporting and
internal control system and review the Company's ﬁnancial statements.

(ii) Review and appraise the performance of the Company‘s external auditors.

(iii) Provide an open avenue of communication among the Company's auditors, ﬁnancial and senior
management and the Board of Directors.

Composition

The Committee shall be comprised of three directors as determined by the Board of Directors, the’

majority of whom shall be free from any relationship that, in the opinion of the Board of Directors,

would interfere with the exercise of his independent judgment as a member of the Committee, At least

one member of the Committee shall have accounting or related ﬁnancial management expertise. All

members of the Committee that are not ﬁnancially literate will work towards becoming ﬁnancially

literate to obtain a working familiarity with basic ﬁnance and accounting practices. For the purposes of

the Audit Committee Charter, the deﬁnition of “financially literate" is the ability to read and understand

a set of ﬁnancial statements that present a breadth and level of complexity of accounting issues that are

generally comparable to the breadth and complexity of the issues that can presumably be expected to be

raised by the Company's ﬁnancial statements.

. The members of the Conunittee shall be elected by the Board of Directors at its ﬁrst meeting following
the annual shareholders' meeting. Unless a Chair is elected by the full Board of Directors, the members of
the Committee may designate a Chair by a majority vote of the full Committee membership.

Meetings
The Committee shall meet a least twice annually, or more frequently as circumstances dictate. As part of
its job to foster open communication, the Committee will meet at least annually with the Chief Financial
Ofﬁcer and the external auditors in separate sessions.
Responsibilities and Duties
To fulﬁll its responsibilities and duties, the Committee shall:

16


Documents/Reports Review

(a) Review and update the Charter annually.

(b) L Review the company's ﬁnancial statements including Management’s Discussions & Analyses,
any annual and'interim earnings press releases before the Company publicly discloses this
information and any reports or other ﬁnancial information (including quarterly ﬁnancial
statements), which are submitted to any governmental body, or to the public, including any
certiﬁcation, report, opinion, or review rendered by the external auditors.

ExtentalAuditars

(a) Review annually, the performance of the external auditors who shall be ultimately accountable to
the Board of Directors and the Committee as representatives of the shareholders of the Company.

(b) Recommend to the Board of Directors the selection and, where applicable, the replacement of the
external auditors nominated annually for shareholder approval.

(c) Review with management and the external auditors the audit plan for the yearend ﬁnancial
statements and intended template for such statements.

(d) Review and pte—approve all audit and audit-related services and the fees and other compensation
related thereto, and any non-audit services, provided by the Company's external auditors.
Provided the pre-approval of the non-audit services is presented to the Committee's ﬁrst scheduled
meeting following such approval such authority may be delegated by the Committee to one or more
independent shareholders of the Committee. 7

Financial Reporting Processes

(a) In consultation with the external auditors, review with management the integrity of the
Company's ﬁnancial reporting process, both internal and external.

(1)) Consider the external auditors' judgments about the quality and appropriateness of the Company's
accounting principles as applied in its ﬁnancial reporting.

(c) Consider and approve, if appropriate, changes to the Company's auditing and accounting

7 principles and practices as suggested by the external auditors and management

(d) Following completion of the annual audit, review separately with management and the external
auditors any signiﬁcant difﬁculties encountered during the course of the audit, including any
restrictions on the scope of work or access to required information.

(e) Review any signiﬁcant disagreement among management and the external auditors in connection
with the preparation of the ﬁnancial statements.

(0 Review with the external auditors and management the extent to which changes and
improvements in ﬁnancial or accounting practices have been implemented

(g) Review any complaints or concerns about any questionable accounting, internal accounting
controls or auditing matters.

17 I


(h) Review certiﬁcation process.

(i) Establish a procedure for the conﬁdential, anonymous submission by employees of the Company
of concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters.

Other ‘

(a) Review any related-party transactions.

Composition of the Audit Committee

The following are the members of the Committee a):

Financiall literate
Christoher Coo er
NOTE:

(1) As deﬁned by Multilateral Instrument 52-110 (“MI 52-110”). The Company is relying on the
exemption provided under Section 6.1 of MI 52-110.
Audit Committee Oversight
At no time since the commencement of the Company's most recently completed ﬁnancial year was a
recommendation of the Committee to nominate or compensate an external auditor not adopted by the
Board of Directors.
Reliance on Certain Exemptions
At no time since the commencement of the Company's most recently completed ﬁnancial year has the
Company relied on the exemption in Section 2.4 of MI 52-110 (De Minirnis Non-audit Services), or an
exemption from MI 52-110, in whole or in part granted under Part 8 of Multilateral Instrument 52-110.
Pro-Approval Policies and Procedures
The Committee has adopted speciﬁc policies and procedures for the engagement of non—audit services as
7 described above under the heading “External Auditors".

External Auditor Service Fees (By Category)
The aggregate fees billed by the Company‘s external auditors in each of the last two ﬁscal years for audit
fees are as follows:

Financial Year Audit Related Fees Tax Fees All Other Fees

Endin

A111 30,2005 $22,500‘”

Aril 30, 2004 $3,500 $15,000 $4.0m
NOTE:
(1) Estimated audit fees for the ﬁnancial year ended April 30. 2005‘
(2) Fees paid for assistance in the preparation of interim ﬁnancial statements.

13


Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
The only compensation plan under which equity securities of the Company are authorized for issuance is
the Stock Option Plan of the Company, which has been approved by the shareholders. The following
table sets out a summarny the number of securities to be issued upon the exercise of outstanding options
as at the Company‘s yearvend of April 30, 2005.
Number of Securities to Weighted—Average Number of Securities Remaining
be Issued Upon Exercise Exercise Price of Available for Future Issuance Under
of Outstanding Options, Outstanding Options, Equity Compensation Plans
Warrants and Rights Warrants and Rights (Excluding Securities Reﬂected in
Column (3))
Equity compensation
plans approved by 1,395,000“) $0.34 251,468
secmityholders
Equity compensation
plans not approved by 1,215,000“) $0.31 Nil
securityholders
2,610,000 “ 251,468
Notes:
(1) Options granted pursuant to the Company’s Stock Option Plan
(2) Options granted prior to adoption of the Company’s Stock Option Plan which are still outstanding.
PART III
SPECIAL BUSINESS TO BE CONDUCTED AT THE MEETING
' RE-APPROVAL OF STOCK OPTION PLAN
At previous general meetings, the Shareholders of the Company have approved the Company's Stock
Option Plan by way of disinterested shareholder vote. The Stock Option Plan was established to provide
incentive to employees, directors, ofﬁcers, management companies and consultants who provide services
to the Company. The intention of management in proposing the Stock Option Plan was, and continues to
be, to increase the proprietary interest of such persons in the Company, thereby aiding the Company in
attracting, retaining and encouraging the continued involvement of such persons with the Company and
giving them incentive to assist in maximizing shareholder value. The number of Common Shares allotted
and reserved for issuance under the Stock Option Plan is equal to 10% of the issued and outstanding
shares of the Company ﬁ‘om time to time on a “rolling basis".
The policies of the TSXV require the Company to submit the Stock Option Plan to the Shareholders for
re—approval and ratiﬁcation at each annual general meeting. Accordingly, the Shareholders will be
requested to consider and, if deemed ﬁt, pass an ordinary resolution to re—approve and ratify the Stock
19


Option Plan. The Stock OptionPlan must be approved by a majority of the Votes cast at the Meeting
other than votes attaching to securities beneﬁcially owned by:
(a) Insiders to whom shares may be issued pursuant to the Stock Option Plan; and
(b) Associates of Persons referred to in (a).

Non-voting and subordinate voting shares are to be given full voting rights in these circumstances.

The term “Insider” is deﬁned in the Securities Act (British Columbia) and generally includes (i) directors

and senior ofﬁcers of the Company, (ii) directors or senior ofﬁcers of a company that is an Insider or

subsidiary of the Company, and (iii) holders of greater than 10% of the voting securities of the Company.

All of the Company’s directors and senior ofﬁcers are Insiders, and as such, they and their associates

may not vote on the resolution.

The Company’s Insiders will participate in the Company’s Stock Option Plan, as amended, and will in all

' likelihood acquire the majority of shares allocated under the Stock Option Plan. Accordingly,

management is seeking disinterested Shareholder approval for the amendment of the Stock Option Plan.

Terms of the Stock Option Plan

A full copy of the Stock Option Plan, as amended, will be available at the Meen'ng for review by

Shareholders. Shareholders may also obtain copies of the Stock Option Plan from the Company prior to

the Meeting on written request. The following is a summary of the material terms of the Stock Option

Plan, as amended:

Number of Shares Reserved. The number of common shares reserved for issuance under the Stoclt

Option Plan is 10% of the number of Common Shares outstanding at any given time.

Annual Shareholder Apmval The Company shall submit the Stock Option Plan for approval and

ratiﬁcation by the Shareholders of the Company by way of disinterested shareholder approval at each

annual general meeting of the Company.

Administrau‘on. The Stock Option Plan is to be administered by the Board of Directors of the Company

or by a committee to which such authority is delegated by the Board from time to time.

Eligible Persons. The Stock Option Plan provides that stock options may be issued only to directors,
7 senior ofﬁcers. employees, full-time dependent contractors and consultants and part-time dependent

contractors of the Company or of any of its afﬁliates or subsidiaries, to employees of consultant

companies providing management or administrative services to the Company, and to consultant

companies themselves. Such persons and entities are referred to herein as “Eligible Persons".

Board Discretion. The Stock Option Plan provides thaL generally. the number of shares subject to each

option, the exercise price, the expiry time, the extent to which such option is exercisable and other terms

and conditions relating to such options shall be determined by the Board of Directors of the Company or

any committee to which such authority is delegated by the Board from time to time.

Maximum Term of Options. Options granted under the Stock Option Plan will be for a term not

exceeding five years from the date of grant for so long as the Company is a Tier 2 Issuer, and for a term

not exceeding ten years if the Company becomes a Tier 1 Issuer.

20 '


Maximum Options Er Person. The number of shares reserved for issuance to any one option holder
pursuant to options granted under the Stock Option Plan during any twelve month period may not exceed
5% (or, in the case of a Consultant, 2%) of the outstanding shares of the Company at the time of grant.
The number of sharesvreserved for issuance to Consultanm and Employees who are engaged in investor
relations activities is limited to an aggregate of 2% of the outstanding shares of the Company at the time
of grant. '
No Assignment. The options may not be assigned or transferred.
Termination Prior to Exm'rv. Generally, options must expire and terminate on a date stipulated by the
Board at the time of grant and, in any event, must terminate not later than 90 days following the date on
which the option holder ceases to be an Eligible Person, or 30 days if the option holder was conducting
investor relations activities. If an option holder dies, the options of the deceased option holder will be
exercisable by his or her estate for a period not exceeding 12 months or the balance of the term of the
options, whichever is shorter.
Exercise Price. Options granted under the terms of the Stock Option Plan will be exercisable at a price
which is not less than the Discounted Market Price, as that term is deﬁned in the Exchange Policy
Manual as of the date hereof, or such other minimum price as is permitted by the Exchange in accordance
with its policies from time to time.
Full Payment for Shares. The Company will not issue shares pursuant to options granted under the Stock
Option Plan unless and until the shares have been fully paid for. The Company will not provide ﬁnancial
assistance to option holders to assist them in exercising their options.
Reduction of Exercise Price. The exercise price of stock options granted to Insiders may not be
decreased without disinterested shareholder approval (as described above). '7
Termination of Plan. The Stock Option Plan will terminate when all of the options have been granted or
when the Stock Option Plan is otherwise terminated by the Company. Any options outstanding when the
Stock Option Plan is terminated will remain in effect until they are exercised or they expire,
PROPOSED AMALGAMATION
General
The Meeting has been called, among other things. to ask the Shareholders to consider, and if
. thought ﬁt, pass with or without variation the Special Resolution approving the Amalgamation as
described herein.
Details of the Amalgamation
The Amalgamation involves Banks, Arapahoe and Subco. Banks and Subco will amalgamate and
continue as one corporation, which will be a wholly—owned subsidiary of Arapahoe. On the Effective
Date:
(a) each holder of Common Shares, other than Dissenting Shareholders, shall receive, in
exchange for each one (1) Common Share held by such Shareholder on the Effective
Date, 0.50 of a fully paid and non-assessable Arapahoe Share; and
21


(b) Arapahoe will receive one (1) fully paid and non-assessable common share in the capital
of Amalco in exchange for its one and only issued and outstanding Subco common share
held by Arapahoe.

No fractional Arapahoe Shares will be issued to holders of Common Shares and in lieu of any
fractional entitlement, the number of Arapahoe Shares issued to each former holder of Common Shares
shall be rounded up to the next greater whole number of Arapahoe Shares if the fractional entitlement is
equal to or greater than 0.5, and shall be rounded down to the next lesser whole number of Arapahoe
Shares if the fractional entitlement is less than 0.5 (subject to only one (1) rounding per holder of
Common Shares).

Completion of the Amalgamation is subject to compliance with the terms and conditions set forth
in the Amalgamation Agreement. Upon the Amalgamation becoming effective, Banks and Subco will
continue as one corporation which will own all of the assets, properties, rights, privileges and franchises
and be subject to all of the liabilities, contracts and obligations of each of the amalgamting corporations.

If the Banks Shareholders approve the Amalgamation at the Meeting and the other terms and
conditions of the Amalgamation Agreement are satisﬁed, Articles of Amalgamation are expected to be
ﬁled with the Registrar effective on or about October 12, 2005. The YBCA provides that, upon receipt of
such Articles of Amalgamation, the Registrar shall issue the Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation whereupon the
Amalgamation will become effective.

Reasons for and Background to the Amalgamation

In March 2004, the Board of Directors of Banks instructed management to explore growth
alternatives that included mergers with other oil and gas companies with a view to becoming a larger and
more diverse company. To assist with this process, Banks engaged the services of Woodstone Capital
Inc. tnrder a ﬁnancial advisory services agreement dated June 29. 2004. Since that time, management of
Banks has met with various parties in connection with a potential strategic transaction.

In late May 2005. D. Barry Lee, President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Banks and Jeffrey L.
Standen, President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Arapahoe, met on several occasions for the purpose of
exploring a potential strategic transaction involving Banks and Arapahoe. Each party agreed to conduct
an analysis as to the basis on which a transaction might proceed. Shortly thereafter, Banks and Arapahoe
entered into a conﬁdentiality agreement pursuant to which the parties granted each other access to certain
conﬁdential information and the opportunity to conduct preliminary due diligence.

Banks and Arapahoe negotiated the fundamental terms and conditions of a proposed business
combination while each of them conducted due diligence on the other with respect to operations, reserve
valuations and title reviews. The result of negotiations was the Amalgamation Agreement and Lock-Up
Agreements entered into by the Banks Principals.

On July 1], 2005, Banks entered into a letter of engagement with Woodstone whereby Banks
engaged Woodstone to provide a fairness opinion respecting the consideration offered to the Banks
Shareholders under the Amalgamation Agreement. On or around August 8. 2005, Woodstone provided a
verbal opinion to Banks to the effect that the consideration offered under the Amalgamation Agreement
is fair, ﬁom a ﬁnancial viewpoint, to the Banks Shareholders. Woodstone indicated that it would provide
a formal written fairness opinion and did so by way of a letter dated as of August 10, 2005 addressed to
the Board of Directors of Banks. A true copy of Woodstone‘s fairness opinion is attached as Appendix F.
- Woodstone Fairness Opinion.

22


On August 8, 2005, the Board of Directors met to consider the terms and conditions of the
proposed Amalgamation as contemplated by the Amalgamation Agreement. The Board of Directors
determined that the proposed Amalgamation is fair from a ﬁnancial point of view to the Shareholders and
is in the best interests of Banks and the Shareholders, and voted unanimously to approve the
Amalgamation Agreean The Board also determined that it would unanimously recommend that Banks
Shareholders vote in favour of the Special Resolution.

Banks, Arapahoe and Subco executed the Amalgamation Agreement and the Tenax
Supplemental Agreement on August 9, 2005 and announced the Amalgamation on August 10, 2005. The
closing trading price of the Common Shares on August 9, 2005 was $0.195

On September 1, 2005, Banks, Arapahoe and Subco entered into an agreement amending the
Amalgamation Agreement, pursuant to which the deadline for holding the Meeting was extended to
October 7, 2005 and the deadline for completion of the Amalgamation was extended to October 12, 2005.
Banks Arapahoe and Subco entered into a second agreement as of September 9, 2005, pursuant to which
the deadline for holding the Meeting was further extended to October 14, 2005 and the deadline for
completion of the Amalgamation was extended to October 19, 2005.

On September 12, 2005, the Board of Directors approved this Information Circular, reaffirmed

' its recommendation, and authorized Banks to convene the Meeting.

The decision to proceed with the Amalgamation was based on a number of factors considered by
the directors and management of Banks including the opportunity to participate in a combined company
which:

I will have a larger production base with an improved distribution of asset value amongst various,
properties and exposure to a broader base of assets and drilling opportunities;

I will have a signiﬁcant inventory of lands at its disposal for the creation of new prospects with
approximately 49,529 net acres of undeveloped lands in areas that provide synergy in operations of
the two companies;

I will provide an opportunity for shareholders to participate in a company under the leadership of a
proven management learn, and a board of directors comprised of an experienced team of industry
professionals;

I will have greater human resources, enabling it to more effectively undertake the deve10pment,

r exploration and production of oil and natural gas opportunities;

I will eliminate certain redunth general and administrative costs between Arapahoe and Banks; and

I will have increased market capitalization that is anticipated to receive greater market attention,
resulting in improved liquidity for shareholders and an increased ability to secure ﬁnancing.

In addition, the transaction will generally provide for a tax deferred rollover of Common Shares
into Arapahoe Shares (see “Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations").

If any Shareholders do not agree with the value offered to them for their Common Shares, they
do have available to them rights of dissent under the YBCA

23


Fairness Opinion

Banks has received an opinion from Woodstone dated August 10, 2005 that the consideration
offered under the Amalgamation Agreement is fair, from a ﬁnancial viewpoint, to the Banks
Shareholders. Woodstone’s fairness opinion is subject to the qualiﬁcations and limitations set out
therein. A copy of Woodstone‘s fairness opinion is attached hereto as Appendix E Woodstone is arm’s
length to Banks and Arapahoe. The total consideration payable by Banks to Woodstone for the fairness
opinion and for the provision of its services under the Fiscal Advisory Services Agreement between
Banks and Woodstoue is $100,000, plus the reimbm’sement of nominal expenses.

Effect of the Amalgamation Upon Shareholders

Each Banks Shareholder, other than Dissenting Shareholders, will receive 0.50 of one Arapahoe
Share for every one (1) Common Share held, The Amalgamation will result in the continuing
amalgamated corporation becoming a wholly—owned subsidiary of Arapahoe, with the articles and by-
laws of the amalgamated corporation being the same as those of Subco. Following completion of the
Amalgamation, the Common Shares will no longer trade on the TSXV. Arapahoe will continue as a
publicly traded TSXV-listed company with its current management team For information in respect of
the directors and ofﬁcers of Arapahoe, see Appendix B. Information Concerning Arapahoe Energy
Corporation Directors and Ofﬁcers.

Assuming that: (a) there are no Dissenting Shareholders in respect of the Amalgamation; (h) a
total of 22,820,849. Arapahoe Shares are outstanding on the Effective Date and (c) no other securities of
Arapahoe exercisable or convenible into Arapahoe Shares which are outstanding on the Effective Date
have been exercised or converted, there will be approximately 37,936,253 Arapahoe Shares and options
and warrants to purchase up to 8,212,003 additional Arapahoe Shares issued and outstanding

1 immediately following the Effective Date. Banks Shareholders will hold approximately 15,115,404
Arapahoe Shares immediately following completion of the Amalgamation, representing approximately
40% of the issued and outstanding Arapahoe Shares. See "Pro-Forma Information."
The Amalgamation Agreement '

The Amalgamation Agreement provides for the merger of Banks and Arapahoe, by way of the
amalgamation of Banks and Subco. The following is a summary only and reference should be made to
the full text of the Amalgamation Agreement set forth in Appendix A to this Information Circular.
Representations, Warranties and Covenants

The Amalgamation Agreement contains detailed representations and warranties made by each of
Banks, Arapahoe and Subco to the others in respect of their respective assets, liabilities, capital, ﬁnancial
position and operations. 7

Each of Banks. Arapahoe and Subco also provide covenants in favour of the others which govern
the conduct of their operations and affairs prior to the completion of the Amalgamation.

Conditions of the Amalgamation

The Amalgamation Agreement contains a number of conditions precedent to the obligations of
Banks and Arapahoe thereunder. Unless all of such conditions are satisﬁed or waived by the party or
parties for whose beneﬁt such conditions exist, to the extent they may be capable of waiver, the
Amalgamation will not proceed. There is no assurance that the conditions will be satisﬁed or waived on a
timely basis, or at all. The conditions to the Amalgamation becoming effective are set out in Article 8 of

24


the Amalgamation Agreement Please refer thereto for the full text of the conditions. The following is a

summary of certain of the conditions precedent:

Mutual Conditions ,

(a) The Special Resolution shall have been approved by not less than twovthirds (2/3) of the votes
cast by Shareholders at the Banks Meeting in accordance with applicable Laws;

(b) Subco’s special resolution respecting the Amalgamation shall have been approved by Arapahoe
in accordance with applicable Laws and the Amalgamation Agreement;

(c) the TSXV shall have approved the issuance by Arapahoe of the Arapahoe Amalgamation
Options (as deﬁned in the Amalgamation Agreement) in connection with the completion of the
Amalgamation on the terms and conditions of the Arapahoe Stock Option Plan (as deﬁned in the
Amalgamation Agreement); ’

(d) the TSXV shall have conditionally approved the listing thereon of the Arapahoe Shares (i) to he
issued pursuant to the Amalgamation as of the Effective Date, (ii) issuable upon exercise of the
Arapahoe Amalgamation Options granted in accordance with the Amalgamation Agreement, and
(iii) issuable upon exercise of the Banks Pre—Amalgamation Options and the Banks Warrants;

(e) all other regulatory approvals required to complete the Amalgamation shall have been obtained
or received from the Persons having jurisdiction in the circumstances, and all other applicable
regulatory requirements and conditions shall have been complied with, the failure to obtain
which would, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe,
Banks or Amalco after the Effective Time; 7

(0 there slmll not be in force any order or decree restraining or enjoining the consummation of the
transactions contemplated imder the Amalgamation Agreement and there shall be no proceeding,
whether of a judicial or administrative nature or otherwise, in progress that relates to or results

. from the transactions contemplated under the Amalgamation Agreement that would, if
successful, result in an order or ruling that would preclude completion of the transactions
contemplated under the Amalgamation Agreement in accordance with the terms and conditions
hereof or thereof;

(g) there shall not exist any prohibition at Law against the completion of the Amalgamation;

(h) none of the consents, orders, regulations or approvals contemplated herein shall contain terms or
conditions or require undertakings or security deemed unsatisfactory or unacceptable by any of
the parties hereto acting reasonably; and

(i) the Amalgamation Agreement shall not have been temiinated under Article 9 thereof.

Arapahne Conditions

(a) Banks shall have performed or complied with, in all material respects, each of its obligations,
covenants and agreements hereunder to be performed and complied with by it on or before the
Effective Time and Banks shall provide to Arapahoe a certiﬁcate of two senior ofﬁcers certifying
such compliance and Banks shall have no lmowledge to the contrary;

(h) each of the representations and warranties of Banks under the Amalgamation Agreement, shall
be true and correct in all respects on the date of the Amalgamation Agreement and as of the

25


Effective Date as if made on and as of such date except: (i) for such representations and
warranties made as of a speciﬁed date, which shall be true and correct as of such speciﬁed date,
(ii) as affected by transactions contemplated or permitted by the Amalgamation Agreement; or
(iii) where the failure of such representations and warranties in the aggregate to be true and
correct in all respects would not be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on
Banks or Trinity;

(c) since the date of the Amalgamation Agreement, there shall have been no Material Adverse
Change with respect to Banks or Trinity or any event, occurrence or development, including the
commencement of any action, suit or other legal proceeding which would be reasonably expected
to have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks or Trinity;

(d) Arapahoe shall have received a certiﬁcate of Banks addressed to the Arapahoe Parties and dated
the Effective Date, signed on behalf of Banks by two senior executive ofﬁcers of Banks,
conﬁrming that the conditions in Subsections 8,2(a), (b), (c) and (e) of the Amalgamation
Agreement have been satisfied;

(e) Arapahoe shall have received a certiﬁcate of Banks addressed to the Arapahoe Parties and dated
the Effective Date, signed on behalf of Banks by two senior executive ofﬁcers of Banks,
confirming that the Banks’ indebtedness as at such date does not exceed $2.6 million and that the
legal fees. disbursements and associated taxes of Banks legal counsel for the Amalgamation and
all matters related thereto does not exceed $120,000;

(f) the audited comparative ﬁnancial statements of Banks as at and for the year ended April 30, 2005
shall not have disclosed a Material Adverse Change in respect of Banks;

(g) Arapahoe shall have received the Lock-up Agreements, duly executed by each Banks Principals
in respect of all Banks Shares and Banks I’m-Amalgamation Options owned by such person.
directly or indirectly, or over which control or direction is exercised by such person which shall,
in the aggegate, represent not less than 13% of the Banks Shares issued and outstanding and the
Banks Shares issuable upon exercise of Banks Pre-Amalgamation Options;

(h) Banks Shareholders holding not more than 15% of the issued and outstanding Banks Shares
shall have exercised Banks Dissent Rights (which condition may be waived by Arapahoe);

(i) since the date of the Amalgamation Agreement, no action, suit or proceeding shall have been
taken before or by any Governmental Entity or by any private Person (including, without

7 limitation, any individual, corporation, ﬁrm, group or other entity or by any elected or appointed
public ofﬁcial in Canada or elsewhere against Banks or Trinity) (whether or not purportedly on
behalf of Banks) that would, if successful. have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks or Trinity, in
the sole discretion of Arapahoe, acting reasonably;

(j) there shall not be any action taken, any Law enacted, entered, enforced or deemed applicable by
any Governmental Entity or pending or threatened any suit, action or proceeding by any
Governmental Entity in connection with the grant of any appropriate regulatory approval or
otherwise, (i) seeking to prohibit or restrict the acquisition by Arapaboe or Subco of any
Common Shares, (ii) challenging or seeking to restrain or prohibit the consummation of the
Amalgamation or seeking to obtain from Banks, Arapahoe or Subco any damages that are
material in relation to Banks, (iii) seeking to prohibit or materially limit the ownership or
operation by Arapahoe or Subco of any material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe,
Banks or any of their respective subsidiaries or to compel Arapahoe or Subco to dispose of or
hold separate any material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or Arnalco or any

26


of their respective subsidiaries, as a result of the Amalgamation, (iv) seeking to prohibit
Arapahoe or Subco from effectively controlling in any material respect the business or operations
of Banks, or (v) imposing any condition or restriction that in the judgment of Arapahoe, acting
reasonably, would be materially burdensome to the future operations or business of any business
unit of Arapahoe or Amalco after the Effective Time;

(k) Banks’ board of directors and Shareholders shall have adopted all necessary resolutions, and all
other necessary corporate action shall have been taken by Banks to permit the consummation of
the Amalgamation and the transactions contemplated herein;

(1) all consents and approvals under any agreements to which Banks may be a party or bound which
are required or necessary or desirable for the completion of the transactions contemplated under
the Amalgamation Agreement, including the consent of Banks’ bankers, shall have been obtained
or received;

(in) Banks shall not, from the date hereof and up to completion of the Amalgamation, without prior
written consent of Arapahoe, have effected or taken any steps to effect any transaction or action
out of the ordinary course of business;

(n) Banks shall not have and shall not have caused Trinity to make any capital expenditures except
as outlined in Banks’ capital budget provided to Arapaho: in an amount exceeding $75,000 in
the aggregate or $30,000 on an individual basis, except as otherwise ageed in writing by
Arapahoe;

(0) Banks shall not agree to pay and shall not make any agreement for Arapahoe to pay any fees or
commissions of brokers, ﬁnders or other third parties employed in connection with the
Amalgamation other than fees required to be paid to Woodstone Capital Inc.; and

(p) the post-Amalgamation capitalization of Arapahoe being in accordance with the capitalization
table attached as Schedule “E” to the Amalgamation Agreement.

Banks Canditions

(a) The Arapahoe Parties shall have perforated or complied with, in all material respects, each of

1 their obligations, covenants and agreements hereunder to be performed and complied with by
them on or before the Effective Time;

7 (b) each of the representations and warranties of the Arapahoe Parties under the Amalgamation
Agreement, shall be true and correct in all respects on the date of the Amalgamation Agreement
and as of the Effective Date as if made on and as of such date except: (i) for such representations
and warranties made as of a speciﬁed date, which shall be true and correct as of such speciﬁed
date, (ii) as affected by transactions contemplated or permitted by the Amalgamation Agreement;
or (iii) where the failure of such representations and warranties in the aggregate to be true and
correct in all respects would not be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on
Arapahoe;

(c) since the date of the Amalgamation Agreement, there shall have been no Material Adverse Effect
with respect to Arapahoe or Arapahoe Subsidiaries or any event occurrence or development
which would be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe or
Arapahoe Subsidiaries;

27


((1) Banks shall have received a certificate of each of Arapahoe and Subco addressed to Banks and
dated the Effective Date, signed on behalf of each of Arapahoe and Subco by two senior
executive ofﬁcers of Arapahoe and Subco, certifying that the conditions in Subsections 83(a),
(b), (c) and (e) of the Amalgamation Agreement have been satisﬁed;

(e) since the date of the Amalgamation Agreement, no action, suit or proceeding shall have been
taken before or by any Governmental Entity or by any private Person (including, without
limitation, any individual, corporation, ﬁrm, group or other entity) or by any elected or appointed
public ofﬁcial in Canada or elsewhere against Arapahoe or Subco) (whether or not purportedly
on behalf of Arapahoe or Subco ) that would, if successful, have a Material Adverse Effect on
Arapahoe or Subco, in the sole discretion of Banks, acting reasonably;

(0 there shall not be any action taken, any Law enacted, entered, enforced or deemed applicable by
any Governmental Entity or pending or threatened any suit, action or proceeding by any
Governmental Entity in connection with the grant of any appropriate regulatory approval or
otherwise, (i) seeking to prohibit or restrict the acquisition by Arapahoe or Subco of any Banks
Shares, (ii) challenging or seeking to restrain or prohibit the consummation of the Amalgamation
or seeking to obtain ﬁ‘om Banks, Arapahoe or Subco any damages that are material in relation to
Arapahoe or Subco, (iii) seeking to prohibit or materially limit the ownership or operation by
Arapahoe or Subco of any material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or any
of their respective Subsidiaries or to compel Arapahoe or Subco to dispose of or hold separate
any material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or Amalco or any of their
respective subsidiaries, as a result of the Amalgamation, (iv) except for the TSXV imposing
escrow conditions, seeking to impose limitations on the ability of Arapahoe or Subco to acquire
or hold, or exercise full rights of ownership of, any Banks Shares or shares of Amalco, including
the right to vote the Banks Shares or shares of Amalco purchased by it on all matters properly
presented to the shareholders of Banks or Amalco, (v) seeking to prohibit Arapahoe or Subco
from effectively controlling in any material respect the business or operations of Banks, or (vi)
imposing any condition or restriction that in the judgment of Banks, acting reasonably, would be
materially burdensome to the future operations or business of any business unit of Arapahoe or
Amalco after the Effective Time;

(g) the boards of directors of Arapahoe and Subco shall have adopted all necessary resolutions, and
all other necessary corporate action shall have been taken by Arapahoe and Subco, to permit the
consummation of the Amalgamation;

(h) all consents and approvals under any agreements to which Arapahoe or Subco may be a party or

r bound which are required or necessary or desirable for the completion of the transactions
contemplated under the Amalgamation Agreement shall have been obtained or received;

(i) the post Amalgamation capitalization of Arapahoe being in accordance with the capitalization
table attached hereto as Schedule “E” to the Amalgamation Agreement;

(i) Banks receive evidence satisfactory to it. acting reasonably, that Arapahoe Shares issued upon
Amalgamation shall be freely tradeable under Canadian securities laws;

(k) the Arapahoe Parties shall not, from the date hereof and up to completion of the Amalgamation,
without the prior written consent of Banks, have effected or taken any steps to effect:

(i) a change in its articles, by-laws or constating documents;
28


(ii) a subdivision, consolidation or other change to its outstanding shares (except as
speciﬁcally contemplated herein);
(iii) the payment of any dividend;
(iv) any transaction or action out of the ordinary course of business (except as speciﬁcally
contemplated herein); or
(v) the sale or purchase of any asset or the entering into of any transaction (except as
speciﬁcally contemplated herein); and
(1) the Arapahoe Parties shall not agree to pay and shall not make any agreement for the Arapahoe
Parties, upon or following completion of the Amalgamation to pay any fees or commissions of
brokers, ﬁnders or other third parties employed in connection with the Amalgamation.
Mutual Covenants
(a) Until the earlier of the Effective Date or the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement in
accordance with Article 9 thereof, in each case except (i) with the consent of the other party to
any deviation therefrom or (ii) as expressly contemplated by the Amalgamation Agreement:
(i) it and its respective subsidiaries shall

(A) carry on its businesses in the usual and ordinary course consistent with past
practices and in a manner consistent with industry practice,

(B) use reasonable best efforts to preserve intact its present business organization
and material rights and franchises, to keep available the services of its current
ofﬁcers and employees, and to preserve its relationships with customers,
suppliers and others having lursiness dealings with it1 and

(C) maintain and keep its material properties and assets in as good repair and
condition as at the date hereof, subject to ordinary wear and tear, all to the end
that its goodwill and ongoing businesses shall not be impaired in any material
respect at the Effective Time;

(ii) it shall not, and it shall not permit any of its subsidiaries to:

(A) declare or pay any dividends on, make other distributions or return capital in
respect of any of its capital stock or any other equity interests, except for
dividends, distributions or return of capital payable by a subsidiary to such party
or a wholly-owned subsidiary of such party;

(B) split, combine or reclassify any of its capital stock or issue or authorize or
propose the issuance of any other securities in respect of, in lieu of or in
substitution for, shares of its capital stock;

(C) issue, sell, pledge, reserve, set aside, dispose of or encumber, repurchase, redeem
or otherwise acquire, any shares of its capital stock or any securities or
obligations convertible into, exercisable or exchangeable for, or any rights,
warrants, calls, subscriptions or options to acquire, shares of its capital stock,

29


except pursuant to fully vested stock options and warrants outstanding on the
date hereof; or

(D) 7 enter into or announce any agreement or arrangement with respect to the sale,
voting, registration or repurchase of any shares of its capital stock or any
security convertible into or exchangeable for such shares.

(iii) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to,

(A) incur any indebtedness for borrowed money or purchase money indebtedness or
assume, guarantee, endorse or enter into a “keepwell” or similar arrangement
with respect to, any indebtedness, other than indebtedness between such party or
any of its subsidiaries and another of its Subsidiaries, or

(B) enter into any material operating lease or create any mortgages, liens, security
interests or other encumbrances on the property of such party or any of its
subsidiaries in connection with any indebtedness.

(iv) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to:

(A) increase the amount of (or accelerate the payment or vesting of) any beneﬁt or
amount payable under, any employee beneﬁt plan or any other contracL
agreement, commitment, arrangement, plan or policy providing for compensation
or beneﬁts to any fonner, present or future director, ofﬁcer or employee of such
party or any of its subsidiaries, other than run on insurance for directors and
officers for six years; 7

(B) increase (or enter into any commitment or arrangement to increase) the
compensation or beneﬁts, or otherwise to extend, expand or enhance the
engagement, employment or any related rights, of any former, present or future
director, ofﬁcer, employee or consultant of such party or any of its subsidiaries;

(C) except as agreed to by the parties, whether through its board of directors or
otherwise, accelerate the vesting of any unvested stock options or accelerate the
release of, or the expiry date of any hold period relating to, as applicable, any
Banks Shares or Arapahoe common Shares, or otherwise amend, vary or modify
any plans or the terms of any stock option; oa-

(D) adopt, establish, enter into or implement any employee beneﬁt plan, policy,
severance or termination agreement providing for any form of beneﬁts or other
compensation to any former, present or future director, ofﬁcer or employee of
such party or any of its subsidiaries or amend any employee beneﬁt plan, policy,
severance or termination agreement.

(y) it shall not, nea- shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to, amend or propose to amend its
Charter Documents.

(vi) it shall not. nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to, pay, discharge, satisfy,
compromise or settle any material claims or material liabilities prior to the same being
due

30


(vii) except as required by applicable Laws, it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its
Subsidiaries to, enter into, terminate or waive any provision of, exercise any material
option or relinquish any material contractual rights under, or modify in any material
respect any material contract, agreean guarantee, lease commitment or arrangement.

(viii) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to, make any changes to the existing
accounting practices, methods and principles relating to such party or any Subsidiary of
such party except as required by Law or by Canadian generally accepted accounting

V principles as advised by such party’s or such Subsidiary's regular independent
accountants, as the case may be.

(ix) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to, make or rescind any material tax
election.

(x) it shall not nor shall it permit any subsidiary to, (a) enter into any conﬁdentiality or
standstill agreement (other than in respect of conﬁdentiality agreements entered into in
the ordinary course of business), or (b) amend or release any third party from its
obligations or grant any consent under, any conﬁdentiality or standstill provision or fail
to fully enforce any such provision.

(xi) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to, take or fail to take any action
which would cause any of such party‘s representations or warranties hereunder to be
untrue or would be reasonably expected to prevent or materially impede, interfere with
or delay the Amalgamation

(xii) it shall not. nor shall it permit any of its subsidiaries to, agree in writing or otherwise to
take any of the actions as described above in clauses (ii) through (xi).

(b) Each of Banks and Arapahoe shall promptly advise the other party in writing:

(i) of any event, condition or circumstance that might be reasonably expected to cause any
representation or warranty of such party contained in the Amalgamation Agreement to be
untrue or inaccurate on the Effective Date (or, in the case of any representation or
warranty made as of a speciﬁed date, as of such speciﬁed date);

(ii) of any Material Adverse Effect on such party or any event, occurrence or development
which would be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on such party;

, and

(iii) of any material breach by such party of any covenant, obligation or agreement contained
in the Amalgamation Agreement.

(c) Each of Banks and Arapahoe shall use its reasonable best efforts to, and shall use its reasonable
best efforts to cause its subsidiaries to, perform all obligations required to be performed by such
party or any of its subsidiaries under the Amalgamation Agreement, cooperate with the other
party hereto in connection therewith1 and do all such other acts and things as may be necessary or
desirable in order to consummate and make effective, as soon as reasonably practicable, the
transactions contemplated in the Amalgamation Agreement and, without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each of Banks and Arapahoe shall:

31


(i) use reasonable best efforts to satisfy or cause to be satisﬁed as soon as reasonably
practicable all the conditions precedent that are set forth in Article 8 of the
Amalgamation Agreement;

(ii) applyrfor and use reasonable best efforts to obtain as promptly as practicable all
appropriate regulatory approvals relating to such party or any of its subsidiaries and, in
doing so, to keep the other party hereto reasonably informed as to the status of the
proceedings related to obtaining the appropriate regulatory approvals, including
providing such other party with copies of all related applications and notiﬁcations, in
draft form, in order for such other party to provide its reasonable cements;

(iii) use reasonable best efforts to comply promptly with all requirements which applicable
Laws may impose on such party or such party’s subsidiaries with respect to the
transactions contemplated hereby;

(iv) use reasonable best efforts to defend all lawsuits or other legal, regulatory or other
proceedings to which it is a party challenging or affecting the Amalgamation Agreement
or the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby;

(v) use reasonable best efforts to have lifted or rescinded any injunction or restraining order
or other order which may adversely affect the ability of the parties to consummate the
transactions contemplated hereby;

(vi) effect all necessary registrations, ﬁlings and submissions of information required by
Governmental Entities from such party or any of such party‘s Subsidiaries in connection
with the transactions contemplated hereby: and 7

(vii) use reasonable best efforts to obtain all waivers, consents and approvals from other
parties to loan agreements, leases or other contracts required to be obtained by such party
or any of such party's subsidiaries to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby
which the failure to obtain would materially and adversely affect the ability of such party
or such party’s Subsidiaries to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby.

Covenants of Banks

Banks has given Arapahoe and Subco certain covenants including the following:

7 (a) Subject to Section 9.3 of the Amalgamation Agreement, the board of directors of Banks shall
recommend to the shareholders the approval of the special Resolution;

(b) subject to Section 9.3 of the Amalgamation Agreement, Banks shall, at the request and cost of
Arapahoe, solicit from the Holders of Banks Shares proxies in favour of approval of the
Resolution;

(c) subject to Section 9.3 of the Amalgamation Agreement, Banks shall not adjourn, postpone or
cancel (or propose adjournan postponement or cancellation of) the Meeting without
Arapahoe‘s prior written consent except as required by applicable Laws or, in the case of
adjournment, as may be required by the Shareholders as expressed by majority resolution.
Pursuant to amending agreements dated September 1, 2005 and September 9, 2005, Banks,
Arapahoe and Subco amended the Amalgamation Agreement to provide that the deadline for
Banks to hold the Meeting is October 14, 2005, and the deadline for the completion of the
Amalgamation is October 19, 2005‘.

32


(d) without the prior written consent of Arapahoe, not to be unreasonably withheld, Banks shall not
make any payments or otherwise satisfy Employee Obligations (as deﬁned in the Amalgamation
Agreement) or create any new Employee Obligations other than run on insurance for directors
and ofﬁcers; and

(e) Banks hereby agrees until the earlier of the Effective Date and the temtination of the
Amalgamation Agreement pursuant to Article 9 not to, and to cause Trinity not to, initiate,
propose, assist or participate in any activities or solicitations in opposition to or in competition
with the Amalgamation, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, not to induce or
attempt to induce any other person to initiate any shareholder proposal or “takeover bid,” exempt
or otherwise, within the meaning of the Securities Act, for securities of Banks or Trinity, nor to
undertake any transaction or negotiate any transaction which would be or potentially could be in
conﬂict with the Amalgamation and not to take actions of any kind which may reduce the
likelihood of success of the Amalgamation, except as required by statutory obligations.

Covenants of Arapahae

Arapahoe has given to Banks certain covenants including the following:

(a) Ampahoe shall appoint D. Barry Lee to the board of directors of Arapahoe on the Effective Date
or as soon as reasonably possible thereafter and shall appoint one other nominee identiﬁed by
Banks and agreed to by Arapahoe that shall be “independent” as deﬁned under applicable
securities laws.

0)) Arapahoc shall approve Subco’s special resolution. 7

(c) Subject to the ﬁduciary obligations of the board of directors of Arapahoe and other applicable
laws, Arapahoe shall use, following the Effective Date, its ﬁnancial resources primarily in the
development of the Amalco business.

(d) Until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement
pursuant to Article 9 thereof, it shall not permit Subco to sell, pledge, encumber, lease (whether
such lease is an operating or capital lease) or otherwise dispose of any assets.

(e) Until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement
pursuant to Article 9 thereof, it shall not permit Subco to, make or commit to make any capital

7 expenditures (including capital lease obligations) without the written consent of Banks.

(1‘) Until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement
pursuant to Article 9 thereof, Arapahoe has agreed not to, and cause Subco not to, initiate,
propose, assist or participate in any activities or solicitations in opposition to or in competition
with the Amalgamation, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, not to induce or
attempt to induce any other person to initiate any shareholder proposal or “takeover bid," exempt
or otherwise, within the meaning of the Securities Act, for securities of Arapahoe or Subco, nor
to undertake any transaction or negotiate any transaction which would be or potentially could be
in conﬂict with the Amalgamation and not to take actions of any kind which may reduce the
likelihood of success of the Amalgamation, except as required by statutory obligations.

(g) Both prior and following the Effective Date, Arapahoe shall use its commercially reasonable best
efforts to conduct and complete an equity ﬁnancing for proceeds of $10 million.

33


(h) Arapahoe shall effect an amalgamation with Amalco as soon as reasonably practicable (with
reference to tax advice) following the Effective Time,

(i) Arapahoe shall honour the adjustment provisions set out in the Banks Warrants and the Banks

L I’m-Amalgamation Options.

(j) Arapahoe shall pay all amounts outstanding to Quest Capital Corp. under that certain loan
agreement dated March 11, 2005 between Arapahoe and Quest as soon as reasonably practicable
and in any event prior to the Effective Date.

Access to Information

1. The Amalgamation Agreement provides that, subject to certain‘ provisions contained therein and

applicable Laws, upon reasonable notice to an ofﬁcer of such party, each of Banks and Arapahoe shall
(and shall cause each of its subsidiaries to) afford the ofﬁcers, employees, counsel, accountants and
other authorized representatives and advisers (“Representatives”) of the other party access, during
normal business hours from the date hereof and until the earlier of the Effective Date or the
termination of the Amalgamation Agreement, to its properties. books, contracts and records as well as
to its management personnel; provided that such access slmll be provided on a basis that minimizes
the disruption to the operations of such party. During such period, each of Banks and Arapahoe shall
(and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to) furnish promptly to the other party all information
concerning such party's business, properties and personnel as the other party may reasonably request.

2. The Arapahoe Parties and Banks acloiowledge that certain information received pursuant to the

Amalgamation Agreement will be non-public or proprietary in nature and that such parties shall not
disclose such information to third parties without the prior written consent of the other party unless
required to do so by law.

Closing Matters

1. The Amalgamation Agreement stipulates that the completion of the transactions contemplated under

the Amalgamation Agreement shall be closed at the ofﬁces of Ampahoe‘s cormsel, Davis &
Company LLP, 3000 Shell Centre, 400 - 4'“ Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 014, at 10:00 am.
(Calgary time) (the “Time of Closing”) on or before the second Business Day following the approval
of the special Resolution or on such other date or at such other time and place as the parties may
agree. Each of the Arapahoe Parties and Banks has agreed to deliver, at the Time of Closing, such
customary certificates, resolutions and other closing documents as may be required by the other
parties hereto, acting reasonably. For greater certainty, Banks and Arapahoe shall also deliver
evidence that all regulatory and TSXV approvals have been obtained, and Banks shall deliver an

' executed copy of a resignation and mutual release of all of the employees, if any, oﬂicers and
directors of Banks other than D. Barry Lee as a director of Banks. all without payment or liability to
the Arapahoe Parties or Banks.

Termination of Amalgamation Agreement
The Amalgamation Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the Effective Time by

mutual agreement of Banks, Arapahoe and Subco or by written notice promptly given to the others based

on the following:

1, By Arapahoe or Subco if the proposed Amalgamation is not submitted to the Shareholders for

approval by October 14, 2005; or

Z. by either Banks, Arapahoe or Subco, with respect to termination rights speciﬁed in Section 9.2 or 9.3

of the Amalgamation Agreement or if any of the conditions precedent for closing the Amalgamation
34


for the beneﬁt of such party (as summarized above and set out in the Amalgamation Agreement)
shall not have been satisﬁed or waived on or before 5:00 pm, Calgary, Alberta time. on October 14,
2005, other than as a result of a breach of the Amalgamation Agreement by the terminating party;

3. by either Banks, Arapahoe or Subco if the Shareholders do not approve the Amalgamation at the
Meeting; or ~ ‘

4. by Banks if it determines to pursue an alternative transaction and pay a non-completion fee to
Arapahoe as described below under “Arapahoe Non—Completion Fee";

5. by Arapahoe or Subco if prior to the Effective Time, holders of more than 2.5% of the Common
Shares have validly exercised Dissent Righm. This condition may be waived by Arapahoe in its
discretion.

Arapahoe Non-Completion Fee

In the event that Banks obtains a bona tide and unsolicited offer from a third party to acquire the
assets or shares of Banks or to enter into a transaction or arrangement which would materially interfere
with the Amalgamation which Banks wishes to pursue, Banks may terminate the Amalgamation

Agreement by giving written notice to Arapahoe and making a cash payment to Arapahoe in the amount

of $500,000, which payment will constitute compensation to Arapahoe and its shareholders for the non-

performance of the Amalgamation Agreement and the fees and expenses associated therewith.

Non-Solicitation

Under the Amalgamation Agreement, Banks has agreed until the earlier of the Effective Date and
the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement pursuant to its terms not to, and to cause Trinity not to:
initiate, propose, assist or participate in any activities or solicitations in opposition to or in competition
with the Amalgamation, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, not to induce or attempt to
induce any other person to initiate any shareholder proposal or “takeover bid", exempt or otherwise,
within the meaning of the Securities Act, for securities of Banks or Trinity, nor to undertake any
transaction or negotiate any transaction which would be or potentially could be in conﬂict with the

Amalgamation and not to take actions of any kind which may reduce the likelihood of success of the

Amalgamation, except as required by statutory obligations.

Resignation: afDirwtors and Ofﬁcers ofBanks

, Upon the Effective Date of the Amalgamation, all ofﬁcers and directors of Banks other than D.

Barry Lee shall resign. Mr. Lee will be appointed and will serve as President of Amalco. One position

on the board of directors of Arapahoe will be made available to a nominee of Banks, being Mr. Lee. For

information in respect of the board of directors and management of Arapahoe, see Appendix B -

Information Concerning Arapahoe Energy Corporation.

Form of Proposed Special Restitution

The text of the proposed special resolution to approve the Amalgamation and the Amalgamation
Agreement is substantially as set forth in Appendix ‘11" to this Information Circular

35


PROCEDURE FOR THE AMALGAMATION TO BECOME EFFECTIVE
Procedural Steps

The Amalgamhtion is proposed to be carried out pursuant to Sections 182 and 183 of the YBCA,
The following procedural steps must be taken in order for the Amalgamation to become effective:

(a) the Amalgamation and the Amalgamation Agreement must be approved by the

Shareholders in the roamier described below;

(b) all conditions precedent to the Amalgamation, including completion of the Resolution
Arrangement, and as set forth in the Amalgamation Agreement, must be satisﬁed or
waived by the appropriate party; and

(c) the Articles of Amalgamation in the form prescribed by the YBCA must be ﬁled with the
Registrar.

Banks Shareholder Approval

Pursuant to the YBCA, the Special Resolution approving the Amalgamation is required to be
approved by at least 2/3 of the votes cast by the Shareholders present in person or represented by proxy
at the Meeting. For purposes of voting on the Special Resolution at the Meeting, the Shareholders will be
entitled to one vote on a ballot for each Common Share held.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Special Resolution authorizes the Board of Directors, without
further notice to or approval of the Shareholders, subject to the terms of the Amalgamation Agreement, to
amend or terminate the Amalgamation Agreement or to decide not to proceed with the Amalgamation
and to revoke such Special Resolution at any time prior to the proposed Effective Date of the
Amalgamation if, in the view of the Board of Directors, it is not in the best interests of the Shareholders
to proceed with the Amalgamation.

Pursuant to TSXV Policy 5.9, which incorporates by reference Ontario Securities Commission
Policy 61-501(the “OSC Rule") the Amalgamation constitutes a “business combination" which must be
approved by way of “minority approval" being approval by a simple majority of 50% plus one of the
votes properly cast by the Shareholders on the Special Resolution, but excluding the votes cast by any
Shareholder who is a “related party” of Banks at the time the Amalgamation is approved and who is
entitled to receive a “collateral beneﬁt” as a result of the Amalgamation. The term “related party” is

, deﬁned in the OSC Rule and, as applied to the Amalgamation, includes, among others, a director or
senior ofﬁcer of Banks, a person or company that manages or directs, to any substantial degree, the
affairs or operations of Banks, and a director or senior ofﬁcer of any such company. The term “collateral
beneﬁt” is also defined in the OSC Rule and, as applied to the Amalgamation, includes, among other
things, any beneﬁt that a related party of Banks is entitled to receive, directly or indirectly, as a
consequence of the Amalgamation, including a lump sum payment related to past or future services as an
employee, director or consultant of Banks or of another entity. To the knowledge of Banks after
reasonable inquiry, the votes attached to a total of 631,000 Common Shares, constituting 2.14% of the
issued and outstanding Common Shares, must be excluded when determining the results of balloting on
the Special Resolution. Those Common Shares are controlled by the directors and ofﬁcers of Tenant who
are related parties entitled to receive a collateral beneﬁt as a result of the Amalgamation by virtue of the
fact that Tenax, to a substantial degree, manages the affairs of Banks and that Tenax is entitled to a
payment pursuant to the Tenax Business Development Agreement as a result of the Amalgamation. See
“Interest of Certain Persons or Companies in Matters to be Acted Upon“ and “Management Contracts",

36


Prior Valuations and Exemption from Formal Valuation

Banks is exempt ﬁom obtaining a formal valuation in connection with the
Amalgamation pursuant to section 4.4 of the OSC Rule inasmuch as the Common Shares are listed for
trading on the TSXV and are not listed or quoted for trading on any other speciﬁed market. No valuation
in respect of Banks has been made in the 24 months prior to the date of this Information Circular;
however, as required by applicable securities regulations, Banks has obtained an independent valuation
of its petroleum and natural gas reserves as at its ﬁnancial year ended April 30, 2004, which is available
for viewing on SEDAR at www.sedar.com. See “Appendix C - Information Concerning Banks Energy
Inc. - Information Incorporated by Reference”.

Regulatory Approvals

It is a mutual condition of the Amalgamation Agreement that requisite regulatory approvals be
obtained prior to the Effective Date. It is anticipated that Arapahoe will have made application to all
applicable regulatory authorities prior to the Effective Date in order to obtain all approvals required with
respect to the Amalgamation. There is no guarantee that approvals from the required regulatory
authorities will be obtained on a timely basis or on terms and conditions satisfactory to Banks and
Arapahoe.

It is a condition to the completion of the Amalgamation that the T SXV has approved the listing
of the Arapahoe Shares subject only to the ﬁling of required documents which cannot be ﬁled prior to the
Effective Date. Arapahoe will apply to list the Arapahoe Shares to be issued pursuant to the
Amalgamation on the TSXV and listing will be subject to Banks and Arapahoe fulﬁlling all of the listing
requirements of the TSXV. Provided that conditional approval is obtained, the listing of the Arapahoe
Shares on the TSXV will be subject to the on-going requirements of the TSXV.

PROCEDURE FOR EXCHANGE OF CERTIFICATES

Upon completion of the Amalgamation, Banks Shareholders (other than Dissenting
Shareholders) will be deemed to be holders of Arapahoe Shares as of the Effective Date and former
registered Banks Shareholders will be entered into the register of holders of Arapahoe Shares without
further act or formality. A Letter of Transmittal for the surrender of certiﬁcates representing Common
Shares for use in exchanging those certiﬁcates for Arapahoe Share certiﬁcates is enclosed with this
Information Circular. The Letter of Transmittal contains complete instructions on how Banks
Shareholders are to exchange their Common Share certiﬁcates. Registered Banks Shareholders (other
than Dissenting Shareholders) should read and follow these instructions. The Letter of Transmittal, when

, properly completed and returned together with a certiﬁcate or certiﬁcates representing Common Shares
and all other required documents, will enable each registered Banks Shareholder (other than Dissenting
Shareholders) to obtain the certiﬁcates representing the number of Arapahoe Shares received under the
Amalgamation.

Pursuant to the terms of the Amalgamation, any certiﬁcates formerly representing Common
Shares that are not deposited with the Depositary, together with a duly completed Letter of Transmittal
and any other documents the Depositary reasonably requires, on or before the sixth anniversary of the
Effective Date, will cease to represent a right or claim of any kind or nature and the right of the holder of
such Common Shares to receive Arapahoe Shares will be deemed to be surrendered to Ampahoe together
with all interest1 dividends or distributions thereon held for such Banks Shareholder.

The following sets forth the procedures to he followed by a Banks Shareholder in order to
receive the Arapahoe Shares to which he or she are entitled under the Amalgamation.

37


A Shareholder must deliver to the Depositary at any of the ofﬁces listed in the Letter of
Transmittal,

(i) the certiﬁcate or certiﬁcates representing the Common Shares;

(ii) a Letteer Transmittal in the form accompanying the Information Circular or a manually
executed photocopy (facsimile) thereof, properly completed and duly executed as
required by the instructions set out in the Letter of Transmittal; and

(iii) any other relevant documents required by the instructions set out in the Letter of
Transmittal. _

In all cases, delivery of Arapahoe Shares in exchange for Common Shares will be made only

after timely receipt by the Depositary of certiﬁcates representing the Common Shares, together with a
properly completed and duly executed Letter of Transmittal in the form accompanying the Information
Circular, or a manually executed photocopy (facsimile copy) thereof, relating to such Common Shares,
with signatures guaranteed if so required in accordance with the instructions in the Letter of Transmittal,
and any other required documents.

The method of delivery of certiﬁcates representing the Common Shares and all other required
documents is at the option and risk of the person depositing the same. Banks reconnnends that such
documents be delivered by hand to the Depositary and a receipt obtained or, if mailed. that registered
mail with return receipt requested be used and that appropriate insurance be obtained.

Shareholders whose Common Shares are registered in the name of a broker. investment dealer,
bank. trust company or other nominee should contact that nominee for assistance in depositing those
shares.

All questions as to validity, form, eligibility and acceptance of any Common Shares deposited
pursuant to the Amalgamation shall be determined by Arapahoe in its sole discretion. Depositing
Shareholders agree that such determination shall be ﬁnal and binding. Arapahoe reserves the absolute
right to reject any and all deposits which it detemrines not be in proper form or which may be unlawful
for it to accept under the laws of any jurisdiction. Arapahoe reserves the absolute right to waive any
defect or irregularin in the deposit of any Common Shares.

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF BANKS
r The Board of Directors has unanimously determined that the Amalgamation is fair from a
ﬁnancial point of View to the Shareholders and is in the best interests of Banks and the Shareholders, and
has authorized the submission of the Amalgamation Agreement and the Amalgamation to Shareholders
for approval. The Board of Directors of Banks unanimously recommends that the Shareholders
vote in favour of the Special Resolution.

The Board of Directors and their associates and affiliates in the aggregate, hold or control
2,937,611 Common Shares and options to acquire an aggregate of 1,985,000 additional Common Shares
which, if exercised, would result in the Board controlling 16% of the issued and outstanding Common
Shares of Banks. In reaching its determination and making its recommendation, the Board of Directors
considered a number of factors including certain advantages of proceeding with the transaction, which
are summarized under “Details of the Amalgamation. Reasons for and Background to the
Amalgamation”. The Board of Directors also considered and evaluated information regarding the
Amalgamation, including among other things:

38


I the financial condition, results of operations, business, plans and current and future prospects of
Ampahoe, Subco and Banks, and the potential for the enhancement of the business efﬁciency,
management, effectiveness and ﬁnancial results of the combined entity;

- the historical and'cunent trading prices of common shares of Arapahoe and Common Shares of
Banks; '

I the terms of the Amalgamation, including the right to dissent given to Shareholders;

I public and internal information relating to the business, operations, financial perfomtance and stock
trading history of Arapahoe;

- the fairness opinion received from Woodstone Capital Inc. (see “Fairness Opinion"); and

I the ﬁduciary duties and obligations of the Board of Directors in considering the Amalgamation.

Based on all of these matters and such other matters as the members of the Board of Directors
deemed relevant, the Board of Directors unanimously approved the Amalgamation Agreement.

The foregoing discussion of the information and factors considered and given weight by the
Board of Directors is not intended to be exhaustive, but is believed to include all material factors
considered by the Board of Directors. In addition, in reaching the detennination to approve and
recommend the Amalgamation, the Board of Directors did not assign any relative or speciﬁc weight to
the foregoing factors which were considered. Individual directors may have given different weight to
these factors.

The Board of Directors appreciates that there are risks associated with the Amalgamation;
including the risk that some of the potential beneﬁts set forth above may not be realized or that there may
be signiﬁcant costs associated with realizing such beneﬁts. The Board of Directors behaves that the
factors in favour of the Amalgamation outweigh the risks and potential disadvantages, although there can
be no assurance in this regard.

, POST-AMALGAMATION

After the Effective Date, Arnaloo will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of Arapahoe. Former Banks
Shareholders will become holders of Arapahoe Shares. See “Pro-Forma Information". Jeffrey L Standen
will be appointed Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Arnalco, while D. Barry Lee will be appointed as its

, President and Brenda Stanger its Chief Financial Ofﬁcer and Secretary. The board of directors of

Amalco will be comprised of Jeffrey L. Standen, D. Barry Lee, H. Barry Hemsworth, and Michael

Atkinson, The current management team of Arapahoe, led by Jeffrey L. Standen, President and Chief

Executive Ofﬁcer, Ross E. Moulton, Vice President of Exploration and Brenda Stanger, Chief Financial

Ofﬁcer, will continue to serve in their respective positions with Arapahoe. The board of directors of

Arapahoe will be comprised of Jeffrey L. Standen, H. Barry Hemsworth, Ross E. Moulton and D. Barry

Lee. For information in respect of the directors and senior ofﬁcers of Arapahoe, see “Appendix B -

Information Concerning Arapahoe Energy Corporation - Directors and Ofﬁcers”.

STOCK EXCHANGE LISTINGS

The outstanding Common Shares of Banks are currently listed and posted for trading on the
TSXV. On August 9, 2005, the last day on which the Common Shares traded prior to the date of the
announcement of the proposed Amalgamation, the closing price of the Common Shares on the TSXV
was $0.195 per Common Share.

39


The issued and outstanding Arapahoe Shares are currently listed and posted for trading on the V
TSXV. On August 9, 2005, the last day on which the Arapahoe Shares traded prior to the date of the
announcement of the proposed Amalgamation, the closing price of the Common Shares on the TSXV
was $0.55 per Arapahoe Share.

Subject to acceptance by the TSXV, upon completion of the Amalgamation the Arapahoe Shares will
continue to be listed on the TSXV and the Common Shares of Banks will cease to be listed for trading on
the TSXV.

FEES AND EXPENSES

Costs of the Amalgamation, including expenses incurred by Banks and Arapahoe in respect of
legal, accounting, professional advisory fees, transfer agent, printing and stock exchange listing fees are
estimated to be $400,000 in aggregate.

CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS

In the opinion of Clark Wilson, counsel to Banks, the following is a summary of the principal
Canadian federal income tax consequences of the Amalgamationv and the exercise of dissent rights as
described herein, generally applicable to holders of Common Shares who are resident in Canada and
whose Common Shares constitute capital property to them for the purposes of the Income Tax Act
(Canada) (the “Tax Act").

Common Shares will generally constitute capital property to a Shareholder unless the Tax Act
deems such Common Shares to be inventory of the Shareholder or unless the Shareholder is a trader or
dealer in securities or is engaged in an adventure in the nature of a trade with respect to such Common
Shares. A Shareholder whose Common Shares might not otherwise qualify as capital property, other than
a trader or dealer in securities, may be entitled to obtain such qualiﬁcation by making an irrevocable
election provided by subsection 39(4) of the Tax Act. This irrevocable election, if made, would have the
effect of treating as capital property all present and ﬁxture property of such an electing Shareholder which
qualiﬁes as a "Canadian security” as deﬁned in the Tax Act and the Regulations.

This summary is based on the current provisions of the Tax Act and regulations made thereunder
in force on the date hereof (the “Regulations”), applicable jurisprudence, the current administrative and
assessing policies of the Canada Revenue Agency (the “CRA”), and any published proposals for
amendments to the Tax Act or the Regulations. This summary does not take into account provincial laws

, or tax laws of jurisdictions outside Canada and it does not apply to ﬁnancial institutions which are
subject to the mark-to—market rules under the Tax Act.

This summary is of a general nature only and is not intended to be, nor should it be construed to
be, legal or tax advice to any Shareholder, and no representation with respect to the Canadian income tax
consequences to any particular Shareholder is made. Each holder of Common Shares, and particularly
a holder of Common Shares whose Common Shar may not constitute capital property, should
obtain and must depend upon the advice of the holder’s own tax advisor with respect to the income
tax consequences of the Amalgamation and the exercise of dissent rights based on the holder’s own
particular circumstances.

Exchange nfCrmmmn Shares farAmpahoe Share:

A holder of Common Shares who acquires Arapaho: Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation will

he deemed to have disposed of the Common Shares, but will realize neither a capital gain nor a capital
40


loss on the disposition of such Common Shares. The Arapahoe Shares so received by a holder of
Common Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation will be deemed to have been acquired at a cost equal to
the aggregate adjusted cost base of the Common Shares held by the holder immediately prior to the
Amalgamation. The adjusted cost base of Arapahoe Shares must be determined by averaging the cost of
the Arapahoe Shares admired by a holder of Common Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation with the
adjusted cost base of anyother Arapahoe Shares then held by the holder as capital property.
Dissenting Sharehoﬂers
Dissenting Shareholders who receive the fair value of their Common Shares will be considered to
have disposed of their Common Shares on the date of the Amalgamation. To the extent that Dissenting
Shareholders are considered to dispose of their shares to Banks, and the amount ultimately paid to a
Dissenting Shareholder exceeds the paid-up capital of their Connnon Shares, this amount will be
excluded from the former holder‘s proceeds of disposition for the purposes of computing any taxable
capital gain or, generally speaking, any allowable capital loss on disposition and will be deemed to be a
taxable dividend paid by Banks to such Dissenting Shareholder. The deemed dividend will be treated in
the same manner as if the Dissenting Shareholder had received a regular taxable dividend from Banks. In
certain circumstances, corporations or trusts or partnerships which have corporations as beneﬁciaries or
partners, may be denied a capital loss in respect of their Common Shares of Banks to the extent that any
dividends have, or have been deemed to have, been received thereon. CRA also considers that, in certain
circumstances, Dissenting Shareholders should be considered to have disposed of their Common Shares
to the Amalco for proceeds of disposition equal to the amount paid to them. other than interest, if any. In
view of the uncertainties under the relevant legislation as to whether amounts paid to a Dissenting
Shareholder would be treated entirely as proceeds of disposition, or in part as the payment of a deemed
ditn'dend, Dissenting Shareholders should consult with their own tax advisors in this respect
DISSENTING SHAREHOLDERS '
The following description is not a comprehensive statement of the procedures to be
followed by Shareholders who seek payment of the fair value of his Common Shares and is
qualiﬁed in its entirety by reference to the full text of Section 193 of the YBCA which is attached to
this Information Circular as Appendix E. A Shareholder who intends to exercise the right of
dissent and appraisal should carefully consider and comply with the provisions of that section.
Failure to comply with the provisions of that section and to adhere to the procedures established
therein may result in a loss of all rights thereunder.
Section 193 of the YBCA provides that any holder of Common Shares may dissent if Banks
, resolves to amalgamate with another corporation. In order to invoke the provisions of Section 191 a
reg'stered Shareholder must send to Banks at or before the Meeting a written objection (a “notice of
dissent") to the Special Resolution. In addition to any other right a Dissenting Shareholder may have,
such a Shareholder who complies with the dissent procedure of Section 193 is entitled to be paid the “fair
value” of the Common Shares held by such holder, determined as at the close of business on the last
Business Day before the day on which the Special Resolution was adopted
A Dissenting Shareholder may claim under Section 193 only with respect to all the Common
Shares of a class held by such holder on behalf of any one beneﬁcial owner and registered in the holder's
name. Persons who are beneﬁcial owners of Common Shares registered in the name of a broker,
custodian, nominee or other intermediary that wish to dissent should he aware that only the
registered owner of Common Shares is entitled to dissent. The sending of a notice of diment does
not deprive a Shareholder of the right to vote against the Special Resolution, however, a vote
against the Special Resolution does not constitute a notice of dissent.
41


Aﬁer the adoption of the Special Resolution, either the Dissenting Shareholder or Amalco (or
Banks prior to the Effective Date) has the right to apply to the Supreme Court of Yukon (the “Court") by
originating notice for determination of the fair value of the holder’s Common Shares. Following such
application to the Com-t. Amalco or Banks, as applicable, must, within ten days of being served with a
copy of the oriy'nating notice if the applicant is a Dissenting Shareholder, or within ten days of the date
the application is returnable, if the applicant is Amalco or Banks, send to each Dissenting Shareholder a
written offer to pay him an amount for the holder's Common Shares considered by the directors to be the
fair value of his Common Shares. Every offer made to a Dissenting Shareholder shall be made on the
same terms and shall contain or be accompanied by a statement showing how the fair value was
determined. The fair value so determined could be more or less than the value received by Shareholders
who participate in the Amalgamation and could be based on considerations other than or in addition to
the market price of Common Shares or the net asset value of Banks, as the case may be.

A Dissenting Shareholder may make an agreement with Amalco or Banks for the purchase of
such holder’s Common Shares in an amount of the aforementioned offer. or otherwise, any time before
the Court pronounces an order ﬁxing the fair value of the Common Shares.

A Dissenting Shareholder is not required to give security for costs in respect of an application to
the Court to ﬁx the fair value of such holder’s Connnon Shares, and except in special circumstances shall
not be required to pay the costs of the application or appraisal subject to Court imposed limits.

0n the application, the Court may make an order ﬁxing the fair value of the Common Shares of
all Dissenting Shareholders who are parties to the application, giving judgment in that amount against
Amalco or Banks, as applicable, and in favour of each of Dissenting Shareholders, and ﬁxing the time
within which Amalco or Banks, as applicable, must pay that amount to the Dissenting Shareholders. The
Court may, in its discretion, allow a reasonable rate of interest on the amount payable to each Dissenting
Shareholder calculated from the date on which the Dissenting Shareholder ceases to have any rights as a’
Shareholder until the date of payment

A Dissenting Shareholder ceases to have any rights as a Shareholder. other than the right to be
paid the fair value of his Common Shares, on the earliest of the Effective Date, the making of an
agreement between the Dissenting Shareholder and Amalco or Banks, as applicable, or the
pronouncement of the order of the Court ﬁxing the fair value of the Common Shares. Until any of the
foregoing events occurs, the Shareholder may withdraw his dissent or Banks may rescind the Special
Resolution in question and in either event proceedings under Section 193 shall be discontinued.

Notwithstanding the above, neither Banks nor Amalco can make a payment to any Dissenting
Shareholder under Section 193 if there are reasonable grounds for believing that Banks, or Amalco, as
the case may be, is or would after the payment be unable to pay its liabilities as they become due or the
realizable value of the company's assets would thereby be less than the aggregate of its liabilities. In such
event, Banks or Amalco, as the case may he, shall notify each Dissenting Shareholder that it is unable
lawfully to pay Dissenting Shareholders for their Common Shares, in which case the Dissenting
Shareholder may, by written notice to Banks or Amalco, as the case may be, within 30 days after receipt
of such notice, withdraw his written objection, in which case such Shareholder shall be reinstated to his
full rights as a Shareholder, failing which he will retain status as a claimant against Banks or Amalco, as
the case may be, to be paid as soon as Banks or Amalco is lawfully entitled to do so or, on a liquidation,
to be ranked subordinate to creditors but prior to Shareholders.

Failure to strictly comply with the requirements of Section 193 of the YBCA may result in
the loss of any right of dissent. Persons who are beneﬁcial owners of the Common Shares
registered in the name of a broker, custodian, nominee or other intermediary who wish to dissent
should be aware that only the registered holders of such Common Shares are entitled to dissent.

42


Accordingly, a beneﬁcial owner of Common Shares who dem‘res to exercise this right must make
arrangements for the Common Shares beneﬁcially owned by such holder to be registered in his
name prior to the time the written objection to the Special Resolution is required to be received by
Banks or, alternatively, make arrangements for the registered holder of his Common Shares to
dissent on such holder’s behalf.

In the event oi' a strike, lockout or other work stoppage involving postal employees, all
documents (other than share certiﬁcates) required to be delivered by a Shareholder should he
delivered by facsimile to the Depositary at 1-866-249-7775.

The Amalgamation Agreement provides that it is a condition to the completion of the
Amalgamation that holders of not more than 2.5% of the outstanding Common Shares exercise
their right of dissent.

The above is only a summary of the provisions of Section 193 of the YBCA which are technical
and complex Section 193 is set out in Appendix E hereto. It is recommended that any Shareholder
wishing to avail himself of his right of dissent seek his own legal advice as failure to comply strictly
with the provisions of the statute may prejudice his right of disent.

PRO-FORMA INFORMATION
Pro-Forma Consolidated Capitalization

The following table sets forth the consolidated capitalization of Arapahoe, Subco and Banks as at
June 30, 2005 and pro-forum consolidated capitalization of Ampahoe as at June 30, 2005, after giving
effect to the Amalgamation.

Amghoe") Subcom Banks“) Pro-Format“)
As at June 30, As at June 30, As at June 30, As at June 30,
2005 2005 2005 2005 after giving
effect to the
Amalﬂtion
Arapaho: Shares 22,317,939 - - 37,433,343‘
Arapahoe Warrants 1,132,322 - - 5,228,822
Arapahoe Options 1,678,181 - - 2,983,181
r Subco Common Shares - 1 - -
Banks Common Shares - - 28,614,682 -
Banks Warrants - — 8,193,000 -
Banks Options - - 2,610,000 —
Notes:
(1) See Appendix B - Information Concerning Arapahoe Energy Corporation. ' .
(2) See Part V — Information Concerning Subco.
(3) See Appendix C - Information Concerning Banks Energy Inc. and the Banks Financial
Statements delivered herewith.
43


(4) Assumes the issuance of 15,115,404 Arapahoe Shares upon completion of the Amalgamation,
which number includes 808,063 Arapahoe Shares to satisfy the obligation to Tenax. See also
Appendix D - Pro-Fem Financial Statements.

(5) Does not include 502,910 Arapahoe Shares issued in August 2005. See “Capitalization of
Arapahoe” nor any Arapahoe Shares that may be issued pursuant to private placements Arapahoe
may undertake to satisfy its covenant to use its commercially reasonable best efforts to conduct
and complete an equity ﬁnancing for proceeds of $10,000,000.

As at June 30, 2005, on a proforma basis after giving effect to the Amalgamation, Arapahoe has
net working capital of $1,346,135.

Operational Information
The following table sets forth certain combined operational infomiation after giving effect to the

Amalgamation.

Ara oe Banks Combined

Average Daily Production

Oil & NGLs (BBLSID) 3.4 326 329.4

Natural Gas (MCF/D) 18.3 0 18.3

Proved Reserves

Oil & NGLs (MBBLS) 17 313 330

. Natural Gas (MMCF) 825 O 825

Proved 5: Probable Reserves

Oil and NGLs (MBBLS) 40.6 527 567.6

Natural Gas (MMCF) 4,804 807 5,611

Net Undevelo d Land (Ha) 7,013 13,624 20,637 7

Pro-Forma Financial Statements
The pro-forma ﬁnancial statements of Arapahoe, having given effect to the completion of the

Amalgamation, are set forth in Appendix D. PmFoma Financial Statements.

TIMING

If the Meeting is held as scheduled and is not adjourned and the other conditions set forth in the

Amalgamation Agreement are satisﬁed or waived, Banks expects that the Effective Date will be on or
7 about October 19, 2005. It is not possible, however. to state with certainty when the Effective Date will
occur.

The Amalgamation will become effective upon the ﬁling with the Registrar of the Articles of
Amalgamation, together with such other material as may be required by the Registrar and the issuance by
the Registrar of the Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation.

JUDICIAL DEVEIDPNHENTS

Banks is not aware of any recent legal developments with respect to transactions similar to the
Amalgamation. Banks understands that the current trend in jurisprudence is toward permitting
amalgamations to proceed subject to compliance with procedures designed to ensure substantial fairness
to the minority shareholders, such as TSXV Policy 5.9 and the OSC Rule.

44


Shareholders should consult their legal advisors for determination of their legal rights with

respect to the Amalgamation.
V RESALE 0F ARAPAHOE SHARES

Resale of Arapahoe Shares
Canada

The Arapahoe Shares to be issued to holders of Common Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation
will be issued in reliance on exemptions from prospectus and registration requirements of applicable
securities laws of the various applicable provinces in Canada and will generally be “freely tradeahle”
(and not subject to any “restricted” or ‘hold period") if the following conditions are met: (i) the trade is
not a control distribution (as deﬁned in applicable securities legislation); (ii) no unusual effort is made to
prepare the market or to create a demand for the securities that are the subject of the trade; (iii) no
extraordinary commission or consideration is paid to a person or a company in respect of the trade; and
(iv) if the selling securityholder is an Insider or an ofﬁcer of the issuer, the selling securityholder has no
reasonable grounds to believe that the issuer is in default of securities legislation
United States

The Arapahoc Shares issuable pursuant to the Amalgamation have not been and will not be
registered under the U.S. Securities Act, and will be “restricted securities" within the meaning of Rule ,
144 under the U.S. Securities Act to the same extent and proportion that the Common Shares exchanged
by a former Shareholder in connection with the Amalgamation were restricted securities. Restricted
securities may not be offered or sold in the United Stares or to U.S. persons (as such term is deﬁned in
Regulation S under the U.S. Secmities Act) except pursuant to (i) an effective registration statement
under the U.S, Securities Act or (ii) an exemption from the registration requirements of the U.S.
Securities Act Unrestricted securities may generally be resold in the United Suites without restriction
under the US Securities Act, so long as the person selling such securities was not an “afﬁliate” of Banks
or Arapahoe immediately before the Amalgamation and is not an afﬁliate of Arapahoe after the
Amalgamation. An “afﬁliate” of an issuer is a person that directly, or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries, controls or is controlled by, or is under common control with such issuer, whether
through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise. Shareholders who were "afﬁliates"
.of either Banks or Arapahoe immediately before the Amalgamation are subject to resale restrictions
under the U.S. Securities Act In addition, Shareholders who are afﬁliates of Arapahoe after the
Amalgamation will be subject to resale restrictions under the Securities Act. An “affiliate” of a person is

7 any person that directly. or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, controls or is controlled by, or
is under common control with the person speciﬁed. Directors, executive ofﬁcers and persons who
beneﬁcially own 10% or more of an issuer’s outstanding securities are generally considered to he
“afﬁliates” of that issuer.
Banks Shareholders are urged to consult their legal advisors to determine the extent of all
applicable resale provisions.
RISK FACTORS

Exploration of oil and gas properties involves a high degree of risk and the successful
achievement of a proﬁtable operation cannot be assured. The Company’s Freemont. Poundniaker and
Senlac properties have risks and uncertainties associated with them To date, the Company has interests
in early stage producing wells in Saskatchewan. Costs of ﬁnding and evaluating oil and gas properties are
substantial, and may take several years to complete. The Company must overcome many risks associated

45


with an early stage exploration project. Outstanding items to be completed include, but are not limited to,
identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of commercially viable oil and gas reserves (risks of a dry well),
completion of third party feasibility studies and reserve estimations, securing funding on all future
exploration wells, funding of all costs related to a commercial operating venture, and completion of the
permitting process. Construction and operational risks including, but not limited to feasibility of tie-in
costs, equipment and plant performance, metallurgical, environmental, volatility and/or porous nature of
reserves, cost estimation accuracy, market prices of oil and gas and workforce performance and
dependability will all affect the proﬁtability of an operating project. Arapahoe plans to mitigate these
risks by hiring experienced professionals to assist in the various stages of exploration and development
Changing governmental ﬁscal policy and regulations also pose a threat to oil and gas companies. The
Company has incurred losses since its inception and will not achieve proﬁtable options until several of
its projects produce oil or gas at stable levels that would exceed the monthly operating costs to bring the
property to proﬁtable operations. Arapahoe will require additional funds to meet its 2005 commitments
and external ﬁnancing, primarily through the issuance of common shares which will be required to fund
its exploration plans. There can be no assurance, however, that sufﬁcient funds will be raised.

The business of each of Banks and Arapahoe is subject to the risks encountered generally in the
oil and gas industry by many similar companies.

If the Amalgamation is approved, Shareholders of Banks (other than dissenting shareholders)
will receive Arapahoe shares in exchange for their Banks shares. An investment in Arapahoe Shares
should be considered speculative due to the nature of Arapahoe’s involvement in the exploration for, and
the acquisition, development, production and marketing of, oil and nattual gas and their current stages of
development. The reserve and recovery information contained in Arapahoe‘s independent engineering
report are only estimates and the actual production and ultimate reserves from Arapahoe‘s properties may
be greater or less than the estimates prepared in such report. Oil and natural gas operations involve many
risks which even a combination of experience and knowledge and careful evaluation may not be able to
overcome. There is no assurance that further commercial quantities of oil and natural gas will be
discovered or acquired by Arapahoe.

The petroleum industry is competitive in all its phases. Arapahoe will compete with numerous
other participants in the search for, and the acquisition of, oil and natural gas properties and in the
marketing of oil and natural gas. Competitors include oil companies which have greater ﬁnancial
resources, staff and facilities than those of Arapahoe. The ability of Arapahoe to increase reserves in the
future will depend not only on its ability to develop its present properties, but also its ability to select and
acquire suitable producing properties or prospects for exploratory drilling. Competitive factors in the
distribution and marketing of oil and natural gas include price and methods and reliability of delivery.

The marketability of oil and nattual gas acquired or discovered will be affected by numerous
factors beyond the control of Arapahoe. These factors include reservoir characteristics, market
ﬂuctuations, the proximity and capacity of oil and natural gas pipelines and processing equipment and
government regulation. Oil and natural gas operations (exploration, production, pricing, marketing and
transportation) are subject to extensive controls and regulations imposed by various levels of government
which may be amended from time to time, See “Industry Conditions". The oil and natural gas operations
of Arapahoe may also be subject to compliance with federal, provincial and local laws and regulations
controlling the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to the protection of the
environment. See “Industry Conditions. Environmental Regulation".

Both oil and natural gas prices are unstable and are subject to ﬂuctuation. Any material decline
in prices could result in a reduction of net production revenue and overall value of Arapahne and could
result in ceiling test write-downs. The economics of producing from some wells may change as a result
of lower prices, which could result in a reduction in the volumes of reserves of the combined entity.

46


Arapahoe might also elect not to produce from certain wells at lower prices. All of these factors could
result in a material decrease in net production revenue causing a reduction in oil and gas acquisition and
development activities. A decline in production rates or a sustained material decline in prices from
historical average prices could further reduce the borrowing base of Arapahoe and, as a result reduce
bank credit. if any, available to Atapaboe.

The future development of Arapahoe’s oil and natural gas properties may require additional
ﬁnancing and there are no assurances that such ﬁnancing will be available or, if available, will be
available upon acceptable terms.

Arapahoe and Banks use the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
Under this accounting method, capitalized costs are reviewed for impairment to ensure that the carrying
amount of these costs is recoverable based on expected future cash ﬂows. To the extent that such
capitalized costs (net of accumulated depreciation and depletion) less future income taxes exceed the
present value of estimated future net cash ﬂows from proved oil and natural gas reserves, those excess
costs would be required to be charged to operations.

As Arapahoe will be engaged in the oil and natural gas business its operations are subject to
certain unique provisions of the Tax Act and applicable provincial income tax legislation relating to
characterization of costs incurred in their businesses which effects whether such costs are deductible and,
if deductible, the rate at which they may be deducted for the purposes of calculating taxable income.
Arapahoe may potentially be subject to a higher than expected past or future tax liability as well as
interest and penalties in the event of a successful reassessment of either Arapahoe or Banks, and such
amount could be material.

From time to time, Arapahoe may enter into agreements to receive ﬁxed prices on its oil and
natural gas production to offset the risk of revenue losses if commodity prices decline; however, if
commodity prices increase beyond the levels set in such agreements, Arapahoe will not beneﬁt from such
increases. Arapahoe may nevertheless be obligated to pay royalties on such higher prices, even though
not received by it, after giving effect to such agreements.

From time to time, Arapahoe may enter into agreements to ﬁx the exchange rate of Canadian to
United Slates dollars in order to offset the risk of revenue losses if the Canadian dollar increases in value
compared to the United States dollar; however, if the Canadian dollar declines in value compared to the
United States dollar, Arapahoe will not beneﬁt from the ﬂuctuating exchange rate.

Oil and natural gas exploration operations are subject to all the risks and hazards typically

. associated with such operations, including hazards such as ﬁres, explosions, blowouts, cratering and oil
spills, each of which could result in substantial damage to oil and natural gas wells, producing facilities,
other property and the environment or in personal injury. In accordance with industry practice, Arapahoe
will not be fully insured against all of these risks, nor are all such risks insurable. Although Arapahoe
maintains liability insurance in an amount which it considers adequate. the nature of these risks is such
that liabilities could exceed policy limits, in which event Arapahoe could incur signiﬁcant costs that
could have a materially adverse affect upon its ﬁnancial condition. Oil and natural gas production
operations are also subject to all the risks typically associated with such operations, including premature
decline of reservoirs and the invasion of water into producing formations.

Oil and natural gas exploration and development activities are dependent on the availability of
drilling and related equipment in the particular areas where such activities will be conducted. Demand for
such limited equipment or access restrictions may affect the availability of such equipment and may
delay exploration and development activities. To the extent Arapahoe is not the operator of its oil and gas

47


properties, it will be dependent on such operath for the tinting of activities related to such properties
and will be largely unable to direct or control the activities of the operators.

Although title reviews will be done according to industry standards prior to the purchase of most
oil and natural gas producing properties or the commencement of drilling wells, such reviews do not
guarantee or certify thatran unforeseen defect in the chain of title will not arise to defeat the claim of
Arapahoe which could result in a reduction of the revenue received by Arapahoe.

There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of reserves and cash ﬂows to
be derived therefrom, including many factors that are beyond the control of Arapahoe. The reserve and
cash ﬂow information set forth herein represents estimates only. The reserves and estimated future net
cash ﬂow from the properties of Arapahoe and Banks or their respective subsidiaries have been
independently or internally evaluated at the dates referred to therein. These evaluations include a number
of assumptions relating to factors such as initial production rates, production decline rates, ultimate
recovery of reserves, timing and amount of capital expenditures, marketability of production, future
prices of oil and natural gas, operating costs and royalties and other government levies tlmt may be
imposed over the producing life of the reserves. These assumptions were based on price forecasts in use
at the date the relevant evaluations were prepared and many of these assumptions are subject to change
and are beyond the control of Arapahoe. Actual production and cash ﬂows derived therefrom will vary
from these evaluations, and such variations could be material. The foregoing evaluations are based in part
on the assumed success of exploitation activities intended to be undertaken in future years. The reserves
and estimated cash ﬂows to be derived therefrom contained in such evaluations will be reduced to the
extent that such exploitation activities do not achieve the level of success assumed in the evaluations.

From time to time, Arapahoe may enter into transactions to acquire assets or the shares of other
corporations. These transactions may be ﬁnanced partially or wholly with debt, which may increase debt
levels of Arapahoe above industry standards. Depending on future exploration and development plans;
Arapahoe may require additional ﬁnancing which may not be available or, if available, may not be
available on favourable terms.

Certain directors of Arapahoe are or may become directors of other oil and gas companies and as
such may, in certain circumstances, have a conﬂict of interest requiring them to abstain from certain
decisions. Conﬂicts of interest, if any, which arise will be subject to and governed by procedures
prescribed by the corporation’s governing corporate law statute which requires a director of a corporation
who is a party to, or is a director or an ofﬁcer of, or has some material interest in any person who is a.
party to, a material contract or proposed material contract with Arapahoe to disclose his or her interest
and, in the case of directors, to refrain from voting on any matter in respect of such contract unless

, otherwise pemritted under such legislation.

The competition for qualiﬁed personnel in the oil and natural gas industry is intense and there
can be no assurance that Arapahoe will be able to continue to attract and retain all personnel necessary
for the development and operation of its business. Investors must rely upon the ability, expertise,
judgment, discretion, integrity and good faith of the management of Arapahoe, as the case may be.
Arapahoe does not have key person insurance in effect for management

The oil and natural gas industry is subject to extensive controls and regulations goveming its
operations (including land tenure, exploration, development, production, reﬁning, transportation and
marketing) imposed by legislation enacted by various levels of government and with respect to pricing
and taxation of oil and natural gas by agreements among the governments of Canada, Alberta and
Saskatchewan, all of which should be carefully considered by investors in the oil and gas industry. It is
not expected that any of these controls or regulations will affect the operations of Arapahoe in a manner
materially different than they would affect other oil and gas companies of similar size. All current

48


legislation is a matter of public record and Arapahoe is unable to predict what additional legislation or
amendments may be enacted. Outlined below are some of the principal aspects of legislation, regulations
and agreements governing the oil and gas industry.

The producers of oil are entitled to negotiate sales contracts directly with oil purchasers, with the
result that the market determines the price of oil. Such price depends in part on oil quality, prices of
competing oils, distance to market, the value of reﬁned products and the supply/demand balance. Oil
exporters are also entitled to enter into export contracts with terms not exceeding one year in the case of
light crude oil and two years in the case of heavy crude oil, provided that an order approving such export
has been obtained from the National Energy Board of Canada (the “NEB"). Any oil export to be made
pursuant to a contract of longer duration (to a maximum of 25 years) requires an exporter to obtain an
export license from the N'EB and the issue of such license requires the approval of the Governor in
Council.

The price of natural gas sold in interprovincial and international trade is determined by
negotiation between buyers and sellers. Natural gas exported from Canada is subject to regulation by the
NE and the Government of Canada. Exporters are tree to negotiate prices with purchasers, provided
that the export contracts rrnrst continue to meet certain other criteria prescribed by the NEB and the
Government of Canada. Natural gas exports for a term of less than two years or for a term of two to 20
years (in quantities of not more than 30,000 m3/day) must be made pursuant to an NEE order. Any
natural gas export to be made pursuant to a contract of longer duration (to a maximum of 25 years) or a
larger quantity requires an exporter to obtain an export license from the NEE and the issue of such
license requires the approval of the Governor in Council.

The governments of British Columbia, Alberta and Saskatchewan also regnrlate the volume of
natural gas which may be removed from those provinces for consumption elsewhere based on such
factors as reserve ability, transportation arrangements and market considerations. 7

The North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) among the governments of Canada, the
United States and Mexico became effective on January 1, 1994. NAFTA carries forward most of the
material energy terms that are contained in the Canada US. Free Trade Agreement. Canada continues to
remain free to determine whether exports of energy resources to the United States or Mexico will be
allowed, provided that any export restrictions do not: (i) reduce the proportion of energy resources
exported relative to domestic use (based upon the proportion prevailing in the most recent 36-month
period); (ii) impose an export price higher than the domestic price; or (iii) disrupt normal channels of
supply. All three countries are prohibited from imposing minimum export or import price requirements.

. NAFl‘A contemplates the reduction of Mexican restrictive trade practices in the energy sector
and prohibits discriminatory border restrictions and export taxes. The agreement also contemplates
clearer disciplines on regulators to ensrn'e fair implementation of any regulatory changes and to minimize
disruption of contractual arrangemenm, which is important for Canadian natin'al gas exports.

In addition to federal regulation, each province has legislation and regulations which govern land
tenure, royalties, production rates, environmental protection and other matters. The royalty regime is a
signiﬁcant factor in the proﬁtability of crude oil, natural gas and related product production. Royalties
payable on production from lands other than Crown lands are determined by negotiations between the
mineral owner and the lessee, although production from such lands is subject to certain provincial taxes
and royalties. Crown royalties are determined by govearuneutal regulation and are generally calculated as
a percentage of the value of the gross production. The royalty rate payable generally depends in part on
prescribed reference prices, well productivity, geographical location, ﬁeld discovery date and the type or
quality of the petroleum product produced.

49


From time to time. the governments of the western Canadian provinces create incentive programs
for exploration and development. Such programs often provide for royalty rate reductions, royalty ,
holidays and tax credits, and are generally introduced when commodity prices are low. The programs are
designed to encourage exploration and development activity by improving earnings and cash ﬂow within
the industry. '

In the Province of Alberta, a producer of oil or natural gas is entitled to a credit against the
royalties payable to the Crown by virtue of the Alberta royalty tax credit (“ARTC”) program The ARTC
program is based on a price ssitive formula and the ARTC rate varies between 75% at prices at and
below $100 per m3 and 25% at prices atvand above $210 per m3. The ARTC rate is applied to a
maximum of $2,000,000 of Alberta Crown royalties payable for each producer or associated group of
producers. Crown royalties on production from producing properties acquired from a corporation
claiming maximum entitlement to ARTC will generally not be eligible for ARTC. The rate will be
established quarterly based on the average “par price", as determined by the Alberta Department of
Energy for the previous quarterly period.

Crude oil and natural gas royalty holidays for speciﬁc wells and royalty reductions reduce the
amount of Crown royalties paid by Arapahoe to the provincial governments. In general, the ARTC
program provides a rebate on Alberta Crown royalties paid in respect of eligible producing properties.

Crude oil and natural gas located in the western provinces is owned predominantly by the
respective provincial governments. Provincial governments grant rights to explore for and produce oil
and natural gas pursuant to leases, licenses and permits for varying terms from two years and on
conditions set forth in provincial legislation including requirements to perform speciﬁc work or make
payments. Oil and natural gas located in such provinces can also be privately owned and rights to explore
for and produce such oil and natural gas are granted by lease on such terms and conditions as may be
negotiated. V

The oil and gas industry is currently subject to environmental regulation pursuant to a variety of
provincial and federal legislation. Such legislation provides for restrictions and prohibitions on the
release or emission of various substances produced in association with certain oil and gas industry
operations. In addition, such legislation requires that well and facility sites be abandoned and reclaimed
to the satisfaction of provincial authorities. Compliance with such legislation can require signiﬁcant
expenditures and a breach of such requirements may result in suspension or revocation of necessary
licenses and authorizations. civil liability for pollution damage and the imposition of material ﬁnes and
penalties.

. Environmental legislation in the Province of Alberta has been consolidated into the
Environmental Protection and Enhancement Act (the “EPEA”), which came into force on September 1,
1993. The EPEA imposes stricter environmental standards, requires more stringent compliance, reporting
and monitoring obligations and signiﬁcantly increases penalties. Arapahoe is committed to meeting its
responsibilities to protect the environment wherever it operates and anticipates making increased
expenditures of both a capital and expense nature as a result of the increasingly stringent laws relating to
the protection of the environment and will be taking such steps as required to ensure compliance with the
EFEA and similar legislation in other jurisdictions in which it operates. Arapahoe believes that it is in
material compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations. Arapahoe also believes that it is
reasonably likely that the trend towards stricter standards in environmental legislation and regulation will
continue.

In 1994, the United Nations‘ Framework Convention on Climate Change came into force and
three years later led to the Kyoto Protocol which will require, upon ratiﬁcation, nations to reduce their
emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. Canada has ratiﬁed the Kyoto Protocol, and as a

50


result, reductions in greenhouse gases from Arapahoe’s operations may be required which could result in
increased capital expenditures and reductions in production of oil and gas.

There are a number of trends that have been developing in the oil and gas industry during the
past three years that appear to be shaping the near future of the business. The ﬁrst trend is the
consolidation phase that'the industry has been going through. This has affected companies of all sizes
from the small emerging companies to the senior integrated organizations. This trend appears to be
accelerating as a number of publicly traded companies are trading below asset or break-up value and as a
result it is less expensive for companies to grow by acquiring companies than by focusing entirely on
drilling and prospect generation. At a time of high commodity prices and relatively low stock valuations
there appears to be a valuation disconnect that has resulted in increased merger and acquisition activity.

The second trend is the scarce access to external capital that the industry is experiencing. This
can be partly attributed to the outstanding returns that have been experienced in other sectors of the
market, however during the last two years this trend has been correcting and institutional investors
appear to be beginning to refocus on traditional sectors for investment opportunities. However, external
capital is being directed to a greater extent toward the royalty trust area of the oil and gas sector.

The third trend relates to the size of companies that investors are focusing on. The larger market
capitalization companies provide for greater liquidity and as result appear to be more attractive; however
the smaller companies may present potentially larger returns as they have not yet fully appreciated in
value. This may change in the near future as investors look for higher rates of returns, which may
encourage them to consider investment in smaller oil and gas companies. ..

The fourth trend is the current inﬂuence of foreign exploration and production companies in the
Canadian oil and gas industry. The main inﬂuence has been from American companies that are acquiring
companies and assets in Canada in order to build on long-rem natural gas supplies to the United States?
While there may be some short term disposition activity by this group. ultimately their participation will
inﬂuence valuation paramenars of Canadian assets and will result in global values for Canadian
companies.

A ﬁfth trend is the continuing tight supply demand balance for both natural gas and crude oil.
Natural gas is a commodity inﬂuenced by factors in North America Despite record drilling, a strong
economy, weather and demand for electrical generation have kept supply tight and prices high. Crude oil
is inﬂuenced by a world economy and OPEC’s ability to adjust supply to world demand. Recent success
by OPEC has kept crude oil prices high. High prices provide producers with sufﬁcient cash ﬂow to the
extent that the lack of external capital has not been a signiﬁcant restriction on growth.

The Canadian/US. exchange rate also inﬂuences commodity prices for Canadian producers as
there is a high correlation between Canadian and U.S. oil and natural gas prices. A recent strengthening
of the Canadian dollar is a negative trend and this effect on pricing is growing in significance.

PART IV
INFORMATION CONCERNING ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION

Arapahoe is a corporation incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the ABCA on January 14,
1997. Arapahoe is actively involved in the oil and gas industry, is a reporting issuer in certain Canadian
jurisdictions and is subject to the reporting requirements under the securities laws of such jurisdictions.
The shares of Arapahoe are listed on the TSXV.

51


Detailed information on Arapahoe and its assets is set forth in Appendix B - Information
Concerning Arapahoe Energy Corporation

The pro-forma financial statements of Arapahoe, having given effect to the Amalgamation, are
set forth in Appendix D? Pro-Forma Financial Statements.

Information relating to Arapahoe and Subco set forth in the Appendices hereto and
elsewhere in this Information Circular, has either been provided by the management of Arapahoe
or taken from or based upon publicly available documents or records on ﬁle with Canadian
securities regulatory authorities or public sources. Although Banks had no knowledge that would
indicate that any statements contained herein provided by the management of Arapahoe or taken
from or based on such public documents and records are untrue or incomplete, Banks does not
assume any responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of the information provided by the
management of Arapahoe or taken from or based upon such public documents and records, or for
any failure by Arapahoe to disclose events which may occur or effect the signiﬁcance or accuracy
or any such information but which are unknown to Banks.

PART V
INFORMATION CONCERNING 38659 YUKON INC.

Subco was incorporated on July 29, 2005 under the YBCA. Subco is a wholly—owned subsidiary
of Arapahoe and has not previously carried on business. It was organized solely for the purpose of the
Amalgamation, has no liabilities and presently has $1.00 of share capital. Pursuant to the Amalgamation
Agreement, Subco will amalgamate with Banks to form Arnaloo, the sole shareholder of which will be
Arapahoe. .

The head ofﬁce of Subco is located at Suite 2703, 1100-8th Street S.W., Calgary, Alberta, TZP
3T8 and the registered and records ofﬁce of Subco is located at 3000 Shell Centre, 4004th Avenue SW,
Calgary. Alberta, T2P 014.

PART VI
INFORMATION CONCERNING BANKS ENERGY INC.

Banks is a corporation continued and subsisting pursuant to the provisions of the YBCA. Banks

is currently a publicly-traded company whose common shares are listed on the TSXV. Banks is engaged
, in the business of acquisition, exploration, development and marketing of petroleum and natural gas
properties in Western Canada.

The head ofﬁce of Banks is located at Suite 2410 — 650 West Georgia Street, PO Box 11524,
Vancouver, BC, V63 4N7 and the registered ofﬁce of Banks is located at Suite 800 — 885 West Georgia
Street, Vancouver, B.C., V6C 3H1. Reference is made to Appendix C. Information Concerning Banks
Energy Inc. for a detailed description of Banks and its assets. Certain ﬁnancial statements of Banks
previously ﬁled with the applicable securities regulatory authorities are enclosed with this Information
Circular.

OTI-HER MA'I'I‘Egg

Management of the Company is not aware of any other matter to come before the Meeting other than as

set forth in the Notice of Meeting. If any other matter properly comes before the Meeting, it is the
52


intention of the persons named in the enclosed form of proxy to vote the shares represented thereby in
accordance with their best judgment on such matter.
BOARD APPROVAL 7
The contents and sending of this Information Circular have been approved by the Board of Directors of
the Company.
CERTIFICATE
The foregoing contains no untrue statement of a material fact and does not omit to state a material fact
that is required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in the light of the
circumstances in which it was made.
DATED this 7th day of September, 2005‘
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Per: “D. Barry Lee ”
D. Barry Lee
President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
‘ "Chris Cooper"
Chris Coupe:
Director 7
53


APPENDIX A
AMAWAMATION AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
ARAI'AI-IOE ENERGY CORPORATION
AND
BANKS ENERGY INC.

A—l


APPENDIX A
, 7 ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION
and
38659 Yukon Inc.
7 and
BANKS ENERGY INC.
AMAIGAMATION AGREENENT
Dated as of August 9, 2005 ’
CAL umssmm V


TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS AND 
Section 1.1 Deﬁnitions. 
Section 1.2 Om'ency. 
Section 1.3 Interpretation Not Affected By Headings.
Section 1.4 Number and 
Section 1.5 Date for Any Action. 
Section 1.6 
Section 1.7 
Section 1.8 Schedules.
ARTICLE 2 THE 
Section 2.1 Implementation Steps. 
Section 2.2 Circular.
Section 2.3 Securities Compliance.
Section 2.4 Preparation of
Section 2.5 Filing of Articles of Amalgamation.  10
Section 2.6 Effect of  10
Section 2.7 Amalgamated  11
Section 2.8 Stated 
ARTICLE 3 RIGHTS OF DISSENT.......................................................................c..............................................13
Section 3.1 Banks Dissent Rights. 
ARTICLE 4 CERTIFICATES ....e.............................................MM»...-...............................................................14
Section 4.1 Issuance of Certiﬁcates Representing Arapahoe Common Shares. 14
Section 4.2 Distributions with respect to UnsIn-rendered Certiﬁcates.  14
Section 4.3 Lost Certiﬁcates.  15
Section 4.4 Extinguishrnent ofRights.15,
Section 4.5 Withholding  15
Section 4.6 Termination of Depositary.  16
ARTICLE 5 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF 16
Section 5.1 Organization and  16
Section 5.2 Authority Relative to this Agreement.  16
Section 5.3 No 
Section 5.4 Capitalization 
Section 5.5 No Material Adverse  18
Section 5.6 Financial Statements.  13
Section 5.7 Minute  18
Section 5.8 Ownership of Subsidiaries.  18
Section 5.9 Compliance with Applicable Laws.  18
’ Section 5.10 Conduct of Operations.  19
Section 5.11 Petroleum and Natural Gas Propmy Interests.
Section 5.12 Title to 011 and Gas 
Section 5.13 Documents of Title. 
Section 5.14 Environmental Matters.
Section 515 Reserve 
Section 5.16 Tax 
Section 5.17 Debt and Working Capital. 
Section 5.18 
Section 5.19 Financial
Section 5.20 No Default Under Lending Agreements.
Section 5.21 Flow Through 
Section 5.22 No Shareholders‘ Rights Protection 
Section 5.23 No Undisclosed Material Liabilities. 
CALLibrary:36723.10


_ ij .
Section 524 Material 
Section 5.25 Employee 
Section 5.26 Employment
Section 5.27 Leasest Other Obligations.
Section 5.28 Processing and Transportation Commitments.
Section 5.29 US. 
Section 5.30 Employee Beneﬁt Plans.  24
Section 5.31 Litigation. Etc. 
Section 5.32 Financial 
Section 5.33 Transaction 
Section 5.34 Disclosure.
Section 5.35 No Guarantees or Indemnities. 
Section 5.36 No 
Section 5.37 No Net Proﬁs or Other Interests. 
Section 5.38 Reporting
Section 5.39 No Cease Trade 
Section 540 Public 
Section 5.41 No Material
Section 5.42 No Swaps.
Section 5.43 No Unanimous Shareholder Ageement. 
Section 5.44 Conﬁdentiality Agreements
Section 5.45 Restrictions on Business.
Section 5.46 Outstanding Acquisitions or Disposition
Section 5.47 
Section 5.48 Fairness ofAmaIgamation. 
Section 5.49 Survival ofRepraentations and 
ARTICLE 6 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF ARAPAHOE....................................................27
Section 6.1 Organization and 
Section 6.2 Authority Relative to this Agreement.
Section 6.3 No 
Section 6.4 Capitalization of Arapahoe and Newoo. 
Section 6.5 No Material Adverse 
Section 6.6 Financial Statements. 
Section 6.7 Minute 
Section 6.8 Ownership of Subsidiaries. 
Section 6.9 Compliance with Applicable
Section 6.10 Conduct of Operations. 
Section 6.11 Petroleum and Natural Gas Property Interests.
Section 6.12 Title to Oil and Gas 
Section 6113 Documents of Title. 
Section 6.14 Environmental Matters. 
' Section 6.15 Reserve 
Section 6116 Tax Matters. 
Section 6.17 Debt and Working Capital.
Section 6.18 
Section 6.19 Financial Commitments. 
Section 6.20 No Default Under Lending Agreements.
Section 6.21 Flow Through Obligations.
Section 6.22 No Shareholders’ Rights Protection 
Section 6.23 No Undisclosed Material Liabilities.
Section 6.24 Material
Section 6.25 Litigation, Etc.
Section 6.26 Disclosure. 
Section 6.27 Leases and Other Obligations
Section 6.28 Processing and Transportation Commitments.
CAL Limry:36723.iu


_  _
Section 6.29 Reporting 
Section 6.30 No Cease Trade 
Section 6.31 Financial 
Section 6.32 No 
Section 6.33 No Net Proﬁts or Other Interests. '
Section 6.34 Public 
Section 6.35 Arapahoe Shares to be Issued. 
Section 6.36 No Material 
Section 6.37 No 
Section 6.38 Restrictions on Business.
Section 6.39 
Section 6.40 No Unanimous Shareholder Agreement.  .
Section 6.41 Survival ofRepresentations and 
ARTICLE 7 COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS...............................................................................................38
Section 7.1 Mutual Covenants. 
Section 7.2 Covenanu of Banks. 
Section 7.3 Covenam of
Section 7.4 Access to 
Section 7.5 Closing 
ARTICLE 8 CONDITIONS 
Section 8.1 Mutual Conditions 
Section 8.2 Additional Conditions Precedent to the Obligations of the Ampahoe Parties. 
Section 8.3 Additional Conditions Precedent to the Obligations of
Section 8.4 Merger of 
ARTICLE 9 AMENDMENT AND 
Section 9.1 
Section 9.2 
Section 9.3 Termination for Alternative Transaction.
Section 9.4 Effect 
Section 10.1 Investigation.
Section 10.2 
Section 10.3 Assets and Liabilities.
Section 10.4 Assignment. 
Section 10.5 Binding 
Section 10.6 Third Party Beneﬁciaries.
Section 10.7 Waiver and Modiﬁcation.
Section 10.8 No Personal Liability.
Section 10.9 Further Assurances.
Section 10.10 Expenses.
Section 1011 Public Announcements
Section 10.12 Governing Law; Consent to Jurisdiction. 
Section 10.13 Entire 
Section 10.14 Time of
Section 10.15 Severability.
Section 10.16 
SCHEDULE “A” Form ofNewco Amalgamation 
SCHEDULE “B” Form of Banks Amalgamation Resolution 
SCI-EDULE “(7’ Banks 
SCHEDULE “D” Form of Lock-Up  61
SCHEDULE “13” Post Transaction Capitalization of Arapahoe 
CALLibrary:36723.10


_ iv .
SQJEDU‘LB “F” Authorized Share Capital of 
Wuhan/36723.10


AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT

THIS AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT dated as of the 9‘” day of August, 2005,
AMONG: v
ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION, a corporation existing pursuant to the provisions of the
Business Corporations Act (Alberta)
(hereinafter referred to as “Arapahoe“)
, and 7
38659 Yukon Inc., a corporation existing pursuant to the provisions of the Business Corporation Act
(Y ukon)
(hereinaﬁer referred to as “Newcn")
_ and s
BANKS ENERGY INC., a corporation existing pursuant to the provisions of the Business Corporation
Act (Yukon)
(hereinafter referred to as “Banks”)
WITNESSES THAT:

WHEREAS Arapahoe and Banks wish to combine their businesses; 7

AND WHEREAS, the board of directors of Banks has determined that the Amalgamation to be
effected pursuant to this Agreement is advisable and in the best interests of Banks and has approved the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement and determined to recommend approval of the
Amalgamation and the other transactions contemplated hereby to the Holders of Banks Shares;

AND WHEREAS, in furtherance of the Amalgamation, the board of directors of Banks has
agreed to submit the Amalgamation Resolution in accordance with Section 185 of the YBCA to the
Holders of Banks Shares for approval;

7 AND WHEREAS, Arapahoe, as the sole shareholder of Newco, will approve the Amalgamation,
in accordance with Section 185 of the YBCA;

AND WHEREAS, upon the Amalgamation becoming effective, the Banks Shares will be
exchanged for the corresponding Arapahoe Common Shares and the Newco Common Shares will be
exchanged for Arnalco Common Shares in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE' in consideration of the premises and the respective covenants and
agreements herein contained, and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufﬁciency of
which are hereby acknowledged by each of the parties hereto, the parties hereto hereby covenant and
agree as follows:

CALubmy:36723.m


. _ 2 _
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

Section 1.1 Deﬁnitions.

In this Agreemént. unless there is something in the subject matter or context inconsistent
therewith, the following capitalized words and terms shall have the following meanings:
“ABCA” means the Business Corporation: Act (Alberta), as amended;
“afﬁliate” has the meaning ascribed thereto in the Securities Act unless otherwise expressly stated herein;
“Agrent” means this amalgamation agreement, provided for in Section 184 of the YBCA, including
the schedules hereto;
“Amalco” means Arapahoe Energy Holdings Ltd, the amputation continuing from the Amalgamation
upon the Effective Date;
“Amalco Common Shares" means common shares in the capital of Amalco;
“Amalgamation” means the amalgamation of Newco and Banks pursuant to Section 184 of the YBCA as
provided for in this Agreement;
“Appropriate Regulatory Approvals” means all of the rulings, consents. orders, exemptions, permits
and other approvals of Governmental Entities and the TSXV required or necessary for the completion of
the transactions provided for in this Agmement and the Amalgamation;
"Arapahoe" means Arapalme Energy Corporation, a corporation existing pursuant to the provisions of
the ABCA; .
“Arapahoe Amalgamation Options” means the stock options as may be issued to the directors, ofﬁcers,
employees and consultants of Banks by Arapahoe in connection with the Amalgamation pursuant to the
Arapahoe Stock Option Plan;
“Arapahoe Pro-Amalgamation Options" means the 1,752,348 stock options of Arapahoe curretu
issued and outstanding pursuant to the Arapahoe Stock Option Plan, each of which entitles the holder
thereof to purchase one Arapahoe Common Share;
“Arapahoe Common Shares" means the common shares in the capital of Arapahoe;
“Arapahoe Disclosure Letter” means the letter of even date herewith from Arapahoe to Banks delivered

, concurrently with this Agreement;

“Arapahoe Parties" means collectively, Arapahoe and Newco;
“Arapahoe Securities” means, collectively, the Arapahoe Common Shares, the Ampahoe Pre-
Amalgamation Options. the Arapahoe Amalgamation Options and the Arapahoe Warrants;
“Arapahoe Stock Option Plan” means the stock option plan under which options to purchase Arapahoe
Common Shares may be issued in accordance with the policies of the TSXV;
“Arapahoe Subsidiaries“ means Terrence Resources Ltd. and Newco;
“Arapahoe Transfer Agent" means Computershare Trust Company of Canada;
CAL Ubtaryllﬁ723J0


. 3 .
“Arapahoe Warrants” means the 1,132,322 purchase warrants of Arapahoe currently issued and
outstanding, each of which entitles the holder thereof to purchase one Arapahoe Common Share;
“Articles of Amalgamation" means the articles of amalgamation in respect of the Amalgamation in the
form required by the YBCA, to be sent to the Registrar, subject to the conditions of this Agreement,
following the approval of the Banks Amalgamation Resolution by the Holders of Banks Shares and the
approval of the Newco Amalgamation Resolution by Arapahoe, as applicable;
“Banks” means Banks Energy Inc., a corporation existing pursuant to the provisions of the YBCA;
“Banks Amalgamation Resolution" means the special resolution of the Holders of Banks Shares
approving the Amalgamation, to be substantially in the form and content of Schedule “B” hereto;
“Banks’ Debt" has the meaning speciﬁed in Section 5.17;
“Banks Disclosure letter” means the letter of even date herewith horn Banks to Arapahoe delivered
concurrently with this Agreement;
“Banks Dissent Rights“ has the meaning speciﬁed in Subsection 3.1(a):
“Banks Dissenting Shareholder” means a holder of Banks Shares who dissents from the Banks
Amalgamation Resolution in compliance with the Banks Dissent Rights;
“Banks Financial Statements" means the unaudited comparative interim ﬁnancial statements of Banks
as at and for the nine-month period ended January 31, 2005;
“Banks Letter of Transmittal" means the letter of transmittal to be provided by Banks to Holders of
Banks Shares together with the Circular,
“Banks Meeting" means the annual general and special meeting of the Holders of Banks Shares»
(including any adjom‘nment(s) or postponements thereot) to be called and held for, among other purposes,
considering and, if deemed advisable, approving the Banks Amalgamation Resolution;
“Banks Pie-Amalgamation Options" means the 2,610,000 stock options of Banks currently issued and
outstanding pursuant to the Banks Stock Option Plan, each of which entitles the holder thereof to
purchase one Banks Common Share;
“Banks Principals“ means the holders of the Banks Shares listed in Schedule “C” hereto;
“Banks Shares" means all of the outstanding common shares in the capital of Banks;

7 “Banks Stock Option Plan" means the 2003 Stock Option Plan (Amended) amended and approved by
Banks shareholders at the annual general meeting of shareholders held on June 1, 2004, under which
options to ptn'chase Banks Shares may be issued in accordance with the policies of the TSXV;

“Banks Transfer Agent” means Computershare Trust Company of Canada;

“Banks Warrants" means the 8,193,000 purchase wan-ants of Banks currently issued and outstanding,
each of which entitles the holder thereof to purchase one Banks Common Share;

“BOE” means barrels of oil equivalent of natural gas and crude oil converted on the basis of 1 BOE for
6 Met" of natural gas and “MBOE” means 1,000 BOEs;

“Business Day" means a day on which commercial banks are generally open for business in Calgary,
Alberta other than a Saturday, Sunday or a day observed as a holiday in Calgary, Alberta under the Laws
of the Province of Alberta or the federal Laws of Canada;

CALLituuyzssnuo


. 4 .

“Chapman Arapahoe Report” means, collectively, the three reports dated April 1, 2004, November 1,

2004 and January 1, 2005 of Chapman evaluating the crude oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas

reserves of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries;

“Chapman” means Chapman Petroleum Engineering Ltd;

“Charter Documentsﬁmeans, as applicable, the articles and bytlaws, memorandum and articles of

association, amendments, and re-statements, or other similar constating documents of any body corporate;

“Circular” means the notice of the Banks Meeting and accompanying management proxy and

information circular, including all schedules and exhibits thereto, to be sent to the Holders of Banks

Shares in connection with the Banks Meeting;

“Corporate Laws” means all applicable corporate laws, including those set forth in the ABCA and the

YBCA;

“Disclosed Information” means all written information disclosed to Arapahoe (or its agents or

representatives) in respect of the business, operations and affairs of Banks or disclosed to Banks (or its

agents or representatives) in respect of the business, operations and affairs of Arapahoe, as the case may

be, at or prior to the date of this Agreement;

“Documents of 'Iitle" means, collectively, any and all certiﬁcates of title, leases, permits, licences, unit

agreements, assignments, trust declarations, royalty agreements, operating agreements or procedures,

participation agreements, farm»in and farm-out agreements, sale and purchase agreements, pooling

agreements and other agreements by virtue of which the Banks Interests or the Arapahoe Interests, as the

case may be, are derived;

“Employee Obligations" means the obligations of Banks to its directors, ofﬁcers, employees and

consultants for retention, severance, termination or bonus payments in connection with a termination of

employment or change of control of Banks pursuant to any written agreements or resolution of the Banks

Board, pension plans or other plans, Banks‘ severance, retention or other policies or otherwise in

accordance with applicable law, including but not limited to the Tenax Obligation;

“Effective Date" means the date shown on the certiﬁcate of amendment and the certiﬁcate of

amalgamation issued by the Registrar pursuant to Subsection 266(2) of the YBCA giving effect to the

Amalgamation;

“Effective Time” means 12:01 am (Calgary time) on the Effective Date;

“Encombrance” includes whether or not registered or recorded, any and all mortgages, liens, licenses,
7 charges, security interests, pledges, conditional sales contracts, options or other rights to acquire any

interest in any property, and any adverse claims or rights in any property;

“Gilbert” means Gilbert Lausten Jung Associates Ltd.;

“Gilbert Banks Report" means the report dated Jlme 6, 2005 of Gilbert evaluating the crude oil, natural

gas, liquids and natural gas reserves of Banks effective April 30, 2005;

“Governmental Entity“ means any (a) multinational, federal, provincial, territorial, state, regional,

municipal, local or other government, governmental or public department, central bank, court, tribunal,

arbiu‘al body, commission, board, bureau or agency, domestic or foreign, (b) subdivision, agent,

commission, board, or authority of any of the foregoing, or (c) quasi-governmental or private body

exercising any regulatory, expropriation or taxing authority under, or for the account of, any of the

foregoing;

CAL Lamas-123.10


_ 5 _
“Holders” means, when used with reference to the Banks Shares, the Banks Options, the Banks Warrants,
the Newco Common Shares, the Arapahoe Common Shares or the Amalco Common Shares, the holders
of such Banks Shares, Banks Options, Banks Warrants, Newco Common Shares, Arapahoe Common
Shares or Amalco Common Shares, as applicable. shown from time to time in the registers maintained by
or on behalf of Banks, Newco, Arapahoe or Amalco, as applicable, in respect of such Banks Shares,
Banks Options, Banks ’Warrants, Newco Common Shares, Arapahoe Common Shares or Amalco
Common Shares, as applicable;
“Laws” means all statutes, regulations, statutory rules, orders, judgments, decrees and terms and
conditions of any grant of approval, permission, authority, permit or license of any court, Governmental
Entity, statutory body or self-regulatory authority (including the TSXV);
“Lock-up Agreements“ means agreements in the form attached hereto as Schedule “D” pursuant to
which, among other things, the Banks Principals agree to irrevocably vote the Banks Shares owned by
them, directly or indirectly, or over which they exercise control or direction, in favour of the Banks
Amalgamation Resolution and to otherwise support the Amalgamation;
“Material Adverse Change” means any change (or any condition, event or development involving a
prospective change) in the business, operations, results of operations, assets, capitalization, ﬁnancial
condition, prospects, licenses, permits, concessions, rights, liabilities or privileges, whether contractual or
otherwise, of Banks, Arapahoe or Newco, as the case may be, that is, or could reasonably be expected to
be, materially adverse to the business of Banks, Arapahoe or Newco, as the case may be, and their
subsidiaries considered as a whole, which represents a negative change of $100,000, other than a change:
(a) that relates to or arises out of a matter that has, prior to the date hereof, been publicly disclosed or
otherwise disclosed in writing to the other party hereto; (b) that relates to or arises out of conditions
affecting the oil and gas industry as a whole; (c) that relates to or arises out of general economic,
ﬁnancial, currency exchange, securities or commodity market conditions in Canada or elsewhere; or (d)
that relates to or arises out of any change in the market price of crude oil, natural gas or related,
hydrocarbons;
“Mater'ml Adverse Effect", when used in connection with Banks, Arapahoe or Newco, means any
change, effect, event or occurrence with respect to its condition (ﬁnancial or otherwise), properties,
assets, liabilities, obligations (whether absolute, accrued, conditional or otherwise), businesses, prospects,
operations or results of operations or those of its subsidiaries, that is, or would be reasonably expected to
be, material and adverse to the current or future business, operations, regulatory status, ﬁnancial condition
or results of operations of Banks, Arapahoe or Newco, as the case may be, and their respective
subsidiaries taken as a whole, which represents a negative change of $100,000, but shall, for greater
certainty, exclude (a) any decrease in the trading price or value of the conunon shares of either Banks or
Arapahoe immediately following and reasonably attributable to the announcement of the Amalgamation
' or (b) any change, effect, event or occurrence relating to the North American economy as a whole or
secrn'ities markets in general;
“Material Fact” has the meaning ascribed thereto in the Securities Act,-
‘ﬁnisrepresentation” has the meaning ascribed thereto in the Securities Act;
“Newco” means 38659 Yukon Inc., a corporation incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the YBCA;
“Newco Common Shares" means the common shares in the capital of Newco;
“Newco Amalgamation Resolution” means the special resolution of Newco, to be signed by Arapahoe
in its capacity as the sole Holder of the Newco Common Shares, approving the Amalgamation, to be
substantially in the form and content of Schedule “A” hereto;
mummamsio


. 5 _
“Person” means and includes an individual, ﬁrm, sole pioprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, unincorporated syndicate, unincorporated organization, trust, body corporate,
a trustee, executor, administrator or other legal representative, Governmental Entity, or other entity,
whether or not having legal status;
“Registrar” means the R'egistrar of Corporations appointed under Section 263 of the YBCA;
“Securities AC1” means the Securities Act (Alberta), as amended;
“Securities Authorities” means the appropriate securities commissions or similar regulatory authorities
in each of the provinces of Canada;
“Securities Laws” means all securities laws, statutes, rules and regulations and all notices, blanket orders,
blanket rulings, rules and policies of the TSXV and the Securities Authorities and all securities laws,
statutes, rules and regulations applicable in the United States;
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to a speciﬁed body corporate, a body corporate of which more than
50% of the outstanding shares ordinarily entitled to elect a majority of the directors thereof, whether or
not shares of any other class or classes shall or might be entitled to vote upon the happening of any event
or contingency, are at the time owned, directly or indirectly, by such speciﬁed body corporate, and
includes a body corporate in like relation to a subsidiary;
“Swaps” means any transaction which is a rate swap transaction, basis swap, forward rate transaction,
commodity swap, hedges, commodity option, equity or equity index swap, equity or equity index option,
bond option, interest rate option, foreign exchange transaction, cap transaction, ﬂoor transaction, collar
transaction, currency swap transaction, cross-currency rate swap transaction, currency option, forward
sale, exchange traded futures contract or any other similar transaction (including any option with respect
to any of these transactions or any combination of these transactions); ,
“Take-over Proposal” means a proposal or offer (other than by Arapahoe), whether or not subject to a
due diligence condition and whether or not in writing, to acquire in any manner, directly or indirectly.
beneﬁcial ownership of all or a material portion of the assets of Banks or to acquire in any manner,
directly or indirectly, beneficial ownership of on control or direction over more than 20% of the
outstanding Banks Shares, whether by an arrangement, amalgamation, merger, consolidation or other
business combination, by means of a sale or exchange of shares, sale of assets, tender offer or exchange ‘
offer or similar transaction involving Banks, including without limitation any single or multi-stcp
transaction or series of related transactions that is structured to permit such third party to acquire
beneﬁcial ownership of all or a material portion of the assets of Banks or to acquire in any manner,
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the outstanding Banks Shares (in all cases other than the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement);
“Tax” and “Taxes” means, with respect to any Person, all income taxes (including any tax on or based
upon net income, gross income, income as specially defuied, earnings, proﬁts or selected items of income,
earnings or proﬁts) and all capital taxes, gross receipts taxes, environmental taxes, sales taxes, use taxes,
ad valorem taxes, value added taxes, transfer taxes, franchise mes, license taxes, withholding taxes
(including source withholdings in respect of income taxes, Canada Pension Plan and employment
insurance premiums), Payroll taxes, employment taxes, pension plan premiums, excise, severance, social
security premiums, workers’ compensation premiums, unemployment insurance or compensation
premiums, stamp taxes, occupation taxes, premium taxes, property taxes, windfall proﬁts taxes,
alternative or addon minimum taxes, goods and services tax, customs duties or other taxes, fees, imports,
assessments or charges of any kind whatsoever, together with any interest and any penalties or additional
amounts imposed by any taxing authority (domestic or foreign) on such entity, and any interest, penalties,
additional taxes and additions to tax imposed with respect to the foregoing;
CAL Lita-imam“


_ 7 _
“Tax Act" means the Income Tax Act (Canada) and the regulations thereunder, as amended;
“Tax Returns” means all returns, declarations. reports, information returns and statements ﬁled or
required to be ﬁled with any Governmental Entity relating to Taxes;
‘Tenax Obligation” means the obligation of Banks to pay Tenax Energy Inc. an amount equal to
$581,805 upon completion of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement;
‘Termination Time" means the time that this Agreement is terminated;
“lime of Closing" shall have the meaning ascribed to mach term in Section 7.5(a) of this Agreement;
“Trinity” means Trinity Ventures Ltd, a corporation existing under the Business Corpomlions Act
(British Columbia);
“Trinity Shareholders” means Banks, the registered and beneﬁcial shareholder of the Trinity Shares;
“Trinity Shares” means all of the issued and outstanding shares in the capital of Trinity;
“TSXV” means the TSX Venture Exchange; and
“YBCA” means the Business Corporations Act (Y ukon), as amended.
Section 1.2 Currency.

All amounts of money which are referred to in this Agreement are expressed in lawful money of
Canada unless otherwise speciﬁed.

Section 1.3 Interpretation Not Aifected By Headings.

The division of this Agreement into articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs and suhparagraphs
and the insertion of headings are for convenience of reference only and shall not affect the construction or
interpretation of the provisions of this Agreean The terms “this Agreement”, “hereof”, ‘herein”,
“hereunder” and similar expressions refer to this Agreement and the schedules hereto as a whole and not
to any particular article, section, subsection, paragraph or subparagraph hereof and include any agreement
or instrument supplementary or ancillary hereto.

Section 1.4 Number and Gender.

7 Unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the singular number only shall include the
plural and vice versa and words importing the use of any gender shall include all genders.
Section 1.5 Date for Any Action.

In the event that any date on which any action is required to be taken hereunder by any of the
parties is not a Business Day, such action shall be required to be taken on the next succeeding day which
is a Business Day.

CAL Uhraryﬁﬁ'lleO


_ s _
Section 1.6 Meanings.

Words and phrases used herein and deﬁned in the YBCA shall have the same meaning herein as
in the YBCA, unlessvotherwise deﬁned herein or the context otherwise requires. Unless otherwise
speciﬁcally indicated or the context otherwise requires, “include”, “includes” and “including” shall be
deemed to be followed by the words "without limitation”.

Section 1.7 Knowledge.

Where any matter is stated to be “to the knowledge” or “to the best of the knowledge" of Banks
or words to like effect in this Agreement, Banks shall be required, in addition to making any other
reasonable inquiries, to make inquiries of senior ofﬁcers of Banks, or if the matter relates to Trinity, to
make inquiries of senior ofﬁcers of Trinity.

Where any matter is stated to be “to the knowledge” or “to the best of the knowledge" of an
Arapahoe Party or the Arapahoe Parties or words to like eﬁect in this Agreement, the Arapahoe Party or
Arapahoe Parties, as the case may he, shall be required, in addition to making any other reasonable
inquiries, to make inquiries of senior oﬂicers of the Arapahoe Party or Arapahoe Parties, as the case may
be.

Section 1.8 Schedules.

The following Schedules are annexed to this Agreement and are hereby incorporated by reference

into this Agreement and form part hereof:
' Schedule “A” - Form of Newco Amalgamation Resolution 7
Schedule “B” - Form of Banks Amalgamation Resolution
Schedule “C” - Banks Principals
Schedule “D” - Form of 10ck~Up Agreement
Schedule “E” - Post Transaction Capitalization of Arapahoe
Schedule “F” - Authorized Share Capital of Arnaloo
ARTICLE 2
THE AMALGAMATION
Section 2.1 Implementation Steps.
' (3) Banks covenants in favour of Arapahoe and Newco that Banks shall lawfully convene
and hold the Banks Meeting for the purpose of considering the Banks Amalgamation
Resolution as soon as reasonably practicable and, in any event, no later than
September 30, 2005, subject to adjournments or postponements, as may be agreed to by
Banks and Arapahoe.

(b) Arapahoe covenants in favour of Banks and Newco that Arapahoe shall in its capacity as
the sole shareholder of Newco sign the Newco Amalgamation Resolution as soon as
reasonably practicable and, in any event, no later than September 30, 2005, or such other
date as may be agreed to by Banks and Arapahoe.

CALLibm-yzamaia


. 9 _
Section 2.2 Circular.

As promptly as reasonably practicable, Banks shall prepare the Circular together with any other
documents required by the Securities Act Corporate Laws, applicable Securities Laws or other applicable
laws in connection with the approval of the Banks Amalgamation Resolution and matters related thereto.
Banks shall give Ampahoe timely opportunity to review and comment on all such documentation and all
such documentation shall be reasonably satisfactory to Arapahoe before it is ﬁled or distributed to the
Holders of Banks Shares; provided, that Arapahoe will provide Banks with its cements and any
proposed additions and deletions within three Business Days after each receipt of a draﬂ Circular from
Banks.

As promptly as reasonably practicable, Arapahoe shall prepare disclosure regarding its business,
ﬁnancial position and affairs for inclusion in the Circular' together with any other documents required by
Securities Laws or other applicable Laws in connection with the approval of the Banks Amalgamation
Resolution and matters related thereto. Ampahoe shall g've Banks timely opportunity to review and
comment on all such documentation and all such documentation shall be reasonably satisfactory to Banks
before it is ﬁled or distributed to the Holders of Banks Shares; provided, that Banks will provide
Arapahoe with its comments and any proposed additions and deletions within three Business Days after
each receipt of such disclosure from Arapahoe

As promptly as practicable after the date hereof, Banks shall cause the Circular and other
documentation required in connection with the Banks Meeting to be sent to each holder of Banks Shares
on or before August 19, 2005, or such other date as Banks and Arapahoe may agree.

Section 23 Securities Compliance.

Arapahoe shall use reasonable best efforts to obtain all orders required from the applicable
Governmental Entities and the TSXV to permit the issuance and ﬁrst resale of the Arapahoe Common
Shares issuable pursuant to the Amalgamation as well as the Arapahoe Common Shares issuable upon the
exercise of the Arapahoe Amalgamation Options. the Banks PreAmalgamation Options and the Banks
Warrants without qualiﬁcation with, or approval of, or the ﬁling of any prospectus or similar document,
or the taking of any proceeding with, or the obtaining of any further order, ruling or consent from, any
Governmental Entity under any Canadian federal, provincial or territorial securities or other Laws or
pursuant to the rules and regulations of any Governmental Entity administering such Laws, or the
fulﬁllment of any other legal requirement in any such jurisdiction (other than, with respect to such ﬁrst
resales, any restrictions on transfer by reason of, among other things, a holder being a “control person” for

r purposes of Canadian federal, provincial or territorial securities Laws).
Section 2.4 Preparation of Filings.

(a) Arapahoe and Banks shall cooperate in:

(i) the preparation of any application for the orders and the preparation of any
documents reasonably deemed by Arapahoe or Banks to be necessary to
discharge their respective obligations under Securities Laws in connection with

- the Amalgamation and the other transactions contemplated hereby;
CAL Limos-121 10


_ 10 _

(ii) the taking of all such action as may be required under any applicable Securities
Laws (including “blue sky laws”) in connection with the issuance of the
Arapahoe Common Shares in connection with the Amalgamation; provided.

7 however, that with respect to the United States “blue sky” and Canadian
provincial qualiﬁcations neither Arapahoe nor Banks shall be required to register
or qualify as a foreign corporation or to take any action that would subject it to
service of process in any jrn-isdiction where such entity is not now so subject,
except as to matters and transactions arising solely from the offer and sale of the
Arapahoe Common Shares; and

(iii) the taking of all such action as may be required under the YBCA in connection
with the transactions contemplamd by this Agreement.

(b) Each of Arapahoe and Banks shall promptly furnish to the other all information
concerning it and its security holders as may be required for the effectuation of the
actions described in Sections 2.2 and 2.3 and the foregoing provisions of this Section 24,
and each covenants that no information furnished by it (to its knowledge in the case of
information concealing its shareholders) in connection with such actions or otherwise in
connection with the consummation of the Amalgamation and the other n’ansactions
contemplated by this Agreement will contain any misrepresentation or any name
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to he stated in any
such document or necessary in order to make any information so furnished for use in any
such document not misleading in the light of the circumstances in which it is ﬁnnished.

(c) Each of Arapaho: and Banks shall promptly notify the other if at any time before or after
the Effective Time it becomes aware that the Circular or an application for an order,
described in Section 2.3 contains any misrepresentation or any untrue statement of a
material fact or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to
make the statements contained therein not misleading in light of the circumstances in
which they are made, or that otherwise requires an amendment or supplement to the
Circular or such application In any such event Arapahoe and Banks shall cooperate in
the preparation of a supplement or amendment to the Circular or such other document, as
required and as the case may be, and. if required, shall cause the same to be distributed to
the Holders of Banks Shares or ﬁled with the relevant securities regulatory authorities

Section 2.5 Filing of Articles of Amalgamation.

7 Subject to the rights of termination contained in Article 9 hereof. upon the Holders of Banks
Shares approving the Banks Amalgamation Resolution and; upon Arapahoe, as the sole shareholder of
Newco, approving the Newco Amalgamation Resolution, in accordance with the provisions of the YBCA,
on the Effective Date Banks and Newco shall jointly ﬁle with the Registrar the Articles of Amalgamation
and such other documents as are required to be ﬁled under the YBCA for acceptance by the Registrar to
give effect to the Amalgamation, pursuant to provisions of the YBCA.

Section 2.6 Effect of Amalgamation.

At the Effective Time, the following shall occur and shall be deemed to occur in the following

order without any further act or formality:
CAL Libraryoémio


_ 11 _

(a) Banks and Newco shall amalgamate to form Amalco and shall continue as one
corporation under the Y'BCA in the manner set out in Section 2.7 hereof and with the
effect set out in Section 188 of the YBCA, unless the Amalgamation does not proceed or
Banksrotherwise agrees in writing;

(b) immediately upon the amalgamation of Banks and Newco to form Amalco as set forth in
Subsection 2.6(c):

(i) each Banks Common Share issued and outstanding on the Effective Date (other
than Banks Shares held by Dissenting Shareholders, to whom Subsection 3.1(b)
applies) shall be exchanged for 0.50 of an Arapahoe Common Share;

(ii) each Newco Common Share issued and outstanding on the Effective Date shall
be converted into one (1.0) Amalco Common Share;

(c) with respect to each Banks Share exchanged in accordance with Subsections 2.6(b)(i):

(i) the Holders thereof shall cease to be the holder of such Banks Shares and the
name of such holder shall be removed from the register of Holders of such Banks
Shares;

(ii) the certiﬁcates (if any) representing such Banks Shares shall be deemed to have
been cancelled as of the Effective Date;

(iii) the Holders thereof shall be deemed to have executed and delivered all consents;
releases, assignments and waivers, statutory or otherwise, required to exchange
or transfer such shares in accordance with Subsection 2.6(d); and

(d) in consideration of the issue of the Arapahoe Common Shares to effect the
Amalgamation, Arnalco will issue to Arapahce one (10) fully-paid and non—assessable
Amalco Common Share for each Arapahoe Common Share so issued pursuant to
Subsection 2.6(b)(i);

provided that none of the foregoing shall occur or shall be deemed to occur unless all of the foregoing
OCCUIS.
Section 2.7 Amalgamated Corporation.

Unless and until otherwise determin' ed in the manner required by law, by Amalco or by its

direc‘ tors or the Holder or Holders of the Ann: on Common Shares, the following provisions shall apply:

(a) Name. The name of Amalco shall be “Arapahoe Energy Holdings Ltd.”;

(b) Registered Ofﬁce The municipality where the registered ofﬁce of Amalco shall be
located is Whitehorse, Yukon. The address of the registered ofﬁce of Amalco shall be
Suite 200, 304 Jarvis Street Whitehorse, Yukon, Canada YlA 21-12;

CALLibralyc357leO ’


. 12 _

(c) Business and Powers. There shall be no restrictions on the business that Amalco may
carry on or on the powers it may exercise;

(d) Authorised Share Capital. Amalco shall be authorized to issue an unlimited number of
common'shares and an unlimited number of preferred shares as set forth in Schedule “F”
hereto;

(e) Share Restrictions.

(i) Transfer. The transfer of shares in the capital of Amalco shall be restricted in
that no share shall be transferred without either (A) the consent of the directors of
Amalco expressed by resolution passed by the board of directors or by an
instrument or instruments in writing signed by all of such directors, or (B) the
consent of the Holders of shares in the capital of Amalco to which are attached
more than 50% of the voting rights attaching to all shares for the time being
outstanding entitled to vote at such time expressed by a resolution passed by such
shareholders at a meeting duly called and constituted for that purpose or by an
instrument or instruments in writing signed by all of such shareholders;

(ii) Number of Shareholders. The number of shareholders of Amalco, exclusive of
Persons who are in its employment and exclusive of Persons who, having been
formerly in the employment of Amalco, were, while in that employment, and
have continued after termination of that employment to be, shareholders of such
Amalco, is limited to not more than 50, two or more Persons who are the joint
registered owners of one or more shares in the capital of Amalco being counted'
as one shareholder; and

(iii) Public Distributions. Any invitation to the public to subscribe for any securities
of Amalco is prohibited;

(f) Number of Directors. The number of directors of Amalco shall be not less than one (1)
and not more than ten (10) as the shareholders of Amalco may from time to time
determine by special resolution or, if empowered to do so by special resolution, as the
directors of Amalco may from time to time determine;

, (g) Initial Directors and Officers. The initial directors and ofﬁcers of Amalco shall he as
follows:
m“

Jeff Smden 2703, 1100 - " Avenue S.W., President, Chief Executive
Calgary, Alberta. T2P 3T9 Ofﬁcer and Director
B Lee Suite 283 - 1755 Robson Street, Director
any Vancouver, B.C. V66 3137
3777 Southridge Avenue, West
Barry Hemwordl vancouver‘ EC" vw 3H9 w
CALubmyzas'mJn


_ 13 _
. . Suite 300, S70 Granville Street, .
Mmhﬂe‘ Ammo“ vamouver’ BIC. V6v 3P1
Bmda'Snm at 810, 1001 - 13 Avenue S.W., Chief Financial Ofﬁcer and
, g Calgary, Alberta. T2R 0L5 Secretary

(h) By-laws. The hy-laws of Amalco, until repealed, amended or altered, shall be the same
as the by—laws of Newco with such amendments thereto as may be necessary to give
effect to this Agreement; and

(i) Auditors. The auditors of Amalco, until the ﬁrst annual general meeting of shareholders
of Amalco, shall be PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPY Chartered Accountants, unless and
until such auditors resign or are removed in accordance with the provisions of the YBCA.

(j) Amalco Property. All of the property (except amounts receivable from, or shares of,
Newco and Banks) of Newco and Banks immediawa before the Amalgamation shall
become the property of Amalco.

(k) Amalco Liabilities. All of the liabilities (except amounts payable to Newco 01' Banks) of
Newco and Banks before the Amalgamation shall become the liabilities of Amalcu.

Section 2.8 Stated Capital.

(it) ~ The amount added to the stated capital in respect of the Amalco Common Shares issuable,
by Arnalco pursuant to Subsections 2.601) and (d) shall be the aggregate of (i) the paid-up
capital (within the meanrn' g of the Tax Act), deuermtn‘ ed immediately before the Effective
Time, of the Newco Common Shares converted into Arnalco Common Shares pursuant to
Subsection 2.60:), and (ii) the paid-up capital (within the meanm' g of the Tax Act),
determined immediately before the Effective Time, of the Banks Shares exchanged for
Arapahoe Common Shares pursuant to Subsection 2.6(b).

(b) The amount added to the stated capital of Arapahoe in respect of the Arapahoe Common
Shares issuable by Arapahoe pursuant to Subsection 2.60)) shall be the aggregate of the
paid~up capital (within the meaning of the Tax Act). determined immediately before the

' Effective Time, of the Banks Shares exchanged for Arapahoe Common Shares pursuant
to Subsection 2.6(b).
ARTICLE 3
RIGHTS OF DISSENT
Section 3.1 Banks Dimnt Rights.

(a) A Holder of Banks Shares may exercise rights of dissent with respect to such Banks
Shares pursuant to and in the manner set forth in Section 193 of the YBCA (the “Banks
Dissent Rights”) in connection with the Amalgamation. A Holder of Banks Shares who
duly exercises such Banks Dissent Rights (including the sending of a notice of dissent to
Banks) ceases to have any rights as a Holder of Banks Shares other than the right to be

CALLthuryr36723JD


. 14 .
paid the fair value of such holder’s Banks Shares pursuant to Section 193 of the YBCA
except in certain circumstances, including where such Holder withdraws the notice of
dissent or Banks rescinds the Banks Amalgamation Resolution before the resolution
becomes effective, before the shareholder makes an agreement with Banks to sell its
shares, or before the Supreme Court of the Yukon Territory makes an order that Banks
must purchase such Holder‘s Banks Shares.
(h) In the event a Holder of Banks Shares validly withdraws its dissent or Banks validly
rescinds the Banks Amalgamation Resolution as described in Subsection 3.1(a), or if a
Banks Dissenting Shareholder is ultimately determmed' not to be entitled, for any reason,
to be paid fair Value for their Banks Shares, a Holder of Banks Shares shall be deemed to
have participated in the Amalgamation, as of the Effective Time, on the same basis as a
non-Banks Dissenting Shareholder.
ARTICLE 4
CERTIFICATES
Section 4.1 Issuance of Certiﬁcates Representing Arapahoe Common Shares.
At or promptly after the Effective Time, Arapahoe shall deposit with the Arapahoe Transfer
Agent, for the beneﬁt of the Holders of Banks Shares who will receive Arapahoe Common Shares in
connection with the Amalgamation, certiﬁcates representing the maximum number of Arapahoe Common
Shares that are issuable in connection with the Amalgamation. Upon surrender to the Transfer Agent for
transfer to Arapahoe of a certiﬁcate which immedime prior to or upon the Effective Time represented
Banks Shares in respect of which the holder is entitled to receive Arapahoe Common Shares in
connection with the Amalgamation, together with a duly completed Banks Letter of Transmittal
(conforming that the holder is waiving all Banks Dissent Rights), and such other documents and
instruments as would have been required to effect the transfer of the securities formerly represented by
such certiﬁcate under the YBCA and the by-laws of Banks, the holder of such surrendered certiﬁcate
shall be entitled to receive in exchange therefor, and after the Effective Time the Transfer Agent shall
deliver to such holder, a certiﬁcate representing that number of Arapahoe Common Shares which such
Holder has the right to receive and any certiﬁcates so surrendered shall forthwith be cancelled. No
dividends and distributions, will be payable to Holders of certiﬁcates in respect of Banks Shares. In the
event of a transfer of ownership of Banks Shares that was not registered in the securities register of
Banks, a certiﬁcate representing the proper number of Arapahoe Common Shares may be issued to the
transferee if the certiﬁcate representing such Banks Shares is presented to the Arapahoe Transfer Agent as
7 provided above, accompanied by all documents required to evidence and effect such transfer and to
evidence that any applicable stock transfer taxes have been paid. Until surrendered, as contemplated by
this Section 4.1, each certiﬁcate which immediame prior to or upon the Effective Time represented one
or more Banks Shares under the Amalgamation, that were exchanged or were deemed to be exchanged for
Arapahoe Common Shares pursuant to Section 2.6, shall be deemed at all times aﬂer the Effective Time,
to represent only the right to receive upon such surrender a certiﬁcate representing that number of
Arapahoe-Common Shares which such holder has the right to receive.
Section 4.2 Distributions with respect to Unsurrendered Certiﬁcates.
No dividends or other distributions paid, declared or made with respect to Ampahoe Common
Shares with a record date after the Effective Time, shall be paid to the holder of any unsurrendered
certiﬁcate which immediately prior to the Effective Time represented outstanding Banks Shares that were
CAL libnrry:36723.l0


. 15 .
exchanged for Arapahoe Common Shares pursuant to Section 2.6 unless and until the holder of such
certiﬁcate shall comply with the provisions of Section 4.1. Subject to applicable law, at the time such
holder shall have complied with the provisions of Section 4.1, (or, in the case of clause (ii) below, at the
appropriate payment date), there shall be paid to the holder of the certiﬁcates formerly representing Banks
Shares, without interest,_(i)' the amount of dividends or other distributions with a record date after the
Effective Time [heretofore paid with respect to the Arapahoe Common Shares to which such holder is
entitled pursuant hereto and (ii) on the appropriate payment date, the amount of dividends or other
distributions with a record date after the Effective Time but prior to the date of compliance by such holder
with the provisions of Section 4.1 and a payment date subsequent to the date of such compliance and
payable with respect to such Arapahoe Common Shares.
Section 4.3 Lost Certiﬁcates.

In the event any certiﬁcate which immediately prior to the Effective Time represented one or
more outstanding Banks Shares that were exchanged pursuant to Section 2.6 shall have been losL stolen
or destroyed, upon the making of an afﬁdavit of that fact by the Holder of Banks Shares claiming such
certiﬁcate to be lost, stolen or destroyed. the Arapahoe Transfer Agent will issue in exchange for such
lost stolen or destroyed certiﬁcate. one or more certiﬁcates representing one or more Arapahoe Common
Shares pursuant to Section 4.1 (and any dividends or distributions with respect to the Banks Shares) in
each case deliverable in accordance with Section 2.6. When authorizing such payment in exchange for
any lost, stolen or destroyed certiﬁcate, the holder to whom certiﬁcates representing Arapahoe Common
Shares are to be issued shall, as a condition precedent to the issuance thereof, give a bond satisfactory to
Arapahoe and Banks and their respective transfer agents in such sum as Ampahce and Banks may jointly
direct or otherwise indemnify Arapahoe and Banks in a manner satisfactory to Arapahoe and Banks
against any claim that may be made against Arapahoe or Banks with respect to the certiﬁcate alleged to
have been lost, stolen or destroyed. 7
Section 4.4 Extinguishment of Rights.

Any certiﬁcate which immediately prior to the Effective Time represented outstanding Banks
Shares that are not held by a Banks Dissenting Shareholder who is ultimately entitled to be paid fair value
of the Banks Shares held by such Banks Dissenting Shareholder but was exchanged or was deemed to
have been exchanged pursuant to Section 2.6, that has not been deposited with all other instruments
required by Section 4.1 on or prior to the earlier of the sixth anniversary of the Effective Date shall cease
to represent a claim or interest of any kind or nature as a holder of Arapahoe Common Shares. On such
date, the Ampahoe Common Shares (and any dividends or distribution with respect thereto) to which the
former holder of the certiﬁcate referred to in the preceding sentence was ultimately entitled shall be

' deemed to have been surrendered for no consideration to Arapahoe, together with all entitlements to
dividends, distributions and interest in respect thereof held for such former holder. None of Arapahoe,
Banks or the Arapaho: Transfer Agent shall be liable to any Person in respect of any Arapahoe Common
Shares (or dividends and/or distribution) delivered to a public ofﬁcial pursuant to and in compliance with
any applicable abandoned property, escheat or similar law.
Swtion 4.5 Withholding Rights. »

Arapahoe, Banks and the Arapahoe Transfer Agent shall be entitled to deduct and withhold from
any dividend or consideration otherwise payable to any holder of Arapahoe Common Shares 01” Banks
Shares such amounts as Arapahoe, Banks or the Arapahoe Transfer Agent is required to deduct and
withhold with respect to such payment under the Tax Act, or any provision of federal, provincial,
CAL mamasmno


. 16 .

ten'itorial, state, local or foreign tax law, in each case, as amended. To the extent that amounts are so
withheld, such withheld amounts shall be treated for all purposes hereof as having been paid to the Holder
of the securities in respect of which such deduction andeithholding was made, provided that such
withheld mounts are actually remitted to the appropriate taxing authority. To the extent that the amount
so required to be deducted or withheld from any payment to a holder exceeds the cash portion of the
consideration otherwise payable to the holder, Arapahoe, Banks and the Arapahoe Transfer Agent are
hereby authorized to sell or otherwise dispose of such portion of the consideration as is necessary to
provide sufﬁcient ﬁmds to Banks, Arapahoe or the Arapahoe Transfer Agent, as the case may be, to
enable it to comply with such deduction or withholding requirement and Arapahoe, Banks or the
Arapahoe Transfer Agent shall notify the holder thereof and remit any uunpplied balance of the net
proceeds of such sale.

Section 4.6 Termination of Deposilary.

Any Arapahoe Common Shares that remain undistributed by the Arapahoe Transfer Agent to
former Holders of Banks Shares 18 months after the Effective Date shall he delivered to Arapahoe, upon
demand therefor, and Holders of certiﬁcates previously representing Banks Shares who have not
theretofore complied with Section 41 shall thereafter look only to Arapahoe for payment of any claim to
Arapahoe Common Shares or dividends or distributions, if any, in respect thereof.

ARTICLE 5
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTES 0F BANKS

Banks hereby represents and warrants to Arapahoe as follows and acknowledges that Arapahoe is
relying upon such representations and warranties in connection with the execution and delivery of this
Agreement. 7
Section 5.1 Organization and Qualiﬁcation.

Banks and Trinity have been duly incorporated or amalgamated and organized and are validly
subsisting under the laws of their jurisdiction of incorporation or amalgamation and have the requisite
corporate power and capacity to carry on their business as it is now being conducted. Each of Banks and
Trinity is duly registered to do business and is in good standing in each jurisdiction in which the character
of its properties, owned or leased, or the nature of its activities make such registration necessary, except
where the failure to be so registered or in good standing would not have a Material Adverse Effect on
Banks.

Section 5.2 Authority Relative to this Agrent.

Subject to the approval of the Banks Amalgamation Resolution, Banks has the requisite corporate
power and capacity to enter into this Agreement and to carry out its obligations hereunder. The execution
and delivery of this Agreement and the performance by Banks of its obligations hereunder have been duly
authorized by the Banks Board of Directors, and other than the approval of the Banks Amalgamation
Resolution no other corporate proceedings on the part of Banks are necessary to authorize this Agreement
or the performance by Banks of its obligations hereunder. This Agreeth has been duly executed and
delivered by Banks and constitutes a legal, valid and binding obligation of Banks enforceable against
Banks in accordance with its terms, subject to banln'uptcy, insolvency, fraudulent transfer, reorganization,
moratorium and other laws relating to or affecting creditors’ rights generally and to the general principles
of equity.

CALLibrary136723Jﬂ


. 17 .
Section 5.3 No Violations.

(a) Subject to receipt of consent of Banks’ bankers to the Amalgamation and related
_ transactions, neither the execution and delivery of this Agreement by Banks, the
consummation by it of the transactions contemplated hereby nor compliance by Banks
with an)7 of the provisions hereof will: (i) violate, conflict with, or result in the breach of
any provision of, require any consent, approval or notice under, or constitute a default (or
an event which, with notice or lapse of time or both, would constitute a default) or result
in a right of termination or acceleration under, or result in a creation of any lien, security
interest, charge or encumbrance upon any of the properties or assets of Banks under any
of the terms, conditions or provisions of (A) the articles on- by-Iaws of Banks, or (B) any
material note, bond, mortgage, indenture, loan agreement, deed of trust, agreement, lien,
contract or other instrument or obligation to which Banks is a party or to which Banks, or
any of its properties or assets, may be subject or by which Banks is bound; or (ii) subject
to compliance with Corporate Laws and Securities Laws, violate any judgment, ruling,
order, writ, injunction, determination, award, decree, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation
applicable to Banks (except, in the case of each of clauses (i) and (ii) directly above, for
such violations, conﬂicts, breaches, defaults, terminations which, or any consents,
approvals or notices which if not given or received, would not have any Material Adverse
Effect on Banks and would not have material adverse effect on the ability of Arapahoe

and Banks to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby).

(b) Other than in connection with or in compliance with the provisions of Corporate Laws
and Securities Laws: (i) there is no legal impediment to the performance by Banks of its
obligations under this Agreement or to the execution and delivery of this Agreement by
Banks and (ii) no ﬁling or registration with, or authorization, consent or approval of, any,
domestic or foreign public body or authority is necessary by Banks in connection with the
consummation of the Amalgamation, except for such ﬁlings or registrations which, if not
made, or for such authorizations, consents or approvals, which, if not received, would not
have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks and would not have a material adverse effect on
the ability of Arapahoe and Banks to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby.

Section 5.4 Capitalization of Banks.
As of the date hereof, the authorized share capital of Banks consists of an unlimited number of
Banks Shares and an unlimited number of preferred shares, issuable in series, of which 28,644,682 Banks
Shares are issued and outstanding. As of the date hereof, 2,610,000 Banks Options and 8,193,000 Banks
' Warrants have been issued and are outstanding. Except as set forth above, there are no securities of
Banks outstanding and no options, warrants or other rights, zip—cements or commitments of any character
whatsoever requiring the issuance, sale or transfer by Banks of any shares of Banks (including the Banks
Shares) or any securities convertible into, or exchangeable or exercisable for, or otherwise evidencing a
right to acquire, any shares of Banks (including the Banks Shares), nor are there any outstanding stock
appreciation rights, phantom equity or similar rights, agreements, arrangements or commitments based
upon the book value, income or other attributes of Banks. All outstanding Banks Shares have been duly
authorized and are validly issued, as fully paid and non-assessable and are not subject to, nor were they
issued in violation of, any preemptive rights, and all Banks Shares issuable upon exercise of outstanding
Banks Options will, when issued, be duly authorized and validly issued as fully paid and non assessable
shares.
CALI—ihmry:36723.10


. 13 .
Section 5.5 No Material Adverse Change.

There has not been any material change in the assets, liabilities or obligations (absolute,
contingent or otherwise).of Banks from the position set forth in the Banks Financial Statements and there
has not been any Material Adverse Change in respect of Banks since January 31, 2005; and since that date
there have been no mate'rial facts, transactions, events or commences which could materially adversely
affect the capital, assets, liabilities (absolute, accrued, contingent or otherwise), business, operations or
condition (ﬁnancial or otherwise) or results of the operations of Banks or that could affect Banks‘ ability
to consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.

Section 5.6 Financial Statements.

The Banks Financial Statements fairly present, in accordance with Canadian GAAP (other than
note disclosure in respect of ﬁnancial statements that are unaudited), consistently applied, the ﬁnancial
position and condition of Banks at the dates thereof and the results of the operations of Banks for the
periods then ended and reﬂect all assets, liabilities or obligations (absolute, accrued, contingent or
otherwise) of Banks as at the dates thereof.

Section 5.7 Minute Books,

Except as set forth in the Banks Disclosure Letter and to the knowledge of each of Banks and
Trinity, the corporate records and minute books of each of Banks and Trinity have been maintained in
accordance with all applicable statutory requirements and are true, correct, accurate and up-to-date in all
material respects.

Section 5.8 Ownership of Substdr' ‘aries.

(3) Banks is the registered and beneﬁcial owner of 100% of the outstanding shares of Trinity
with good and valid title to all such shares, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
(other than in favour of Banks‘ bankers) and no person, ﬁrm, corporation or other entity
holds any securities convertible or exchangeable into securities of Trinity or now has any
agreement, warrant, option, right or privilege (whether preemptive or contractual) being
or capable of becoming an agreement for the pinchase, subscription or issuance of any
unissued shares, securities (including convertible securities) or warrants of Trinity.

(b) The only subsidiary of Banks is Trinity and Banks is not affiliated with, nor is it a

’ holding corporation of any other body corporate.
Section 5.9 Compliance with Applicable Laws.

Each of Banks and Trinity has conducted and is conducting its business in compliance in all
material respects with all applicable laws, rules and regulations and, in particular, all applicable licensing
and environmental legislation, regulations or by-laws or other lawful requirement of any governmental or
regulatory bodies applicable to each of each jurisdiction in which they carry on business (except to the
extent that the failure to so comply would not have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks and Trinity, taken
as a whole) and holds all licences, registrations and qualiﬁcations in all jurisdictions in which they carry
on business which are necessary to carry on their business (other than those that, the failure of which to so
hold, would not have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks and Trinity, taken as a whole), as now
CAL umaem. 10


. 19 .
conducted and as presently proposed to be conducted and all such licenses, registrations or qualiﬁcations
are valid and existing and in good standing and none of such licenses, registrations or qualiﬁcations
contains any btudensome term, provision. condition or limitation which has or would reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Eﬁect on Banks or Trinity (taken as a whole), as now conducted or
as proposed to be conducted.
Section 5.10 Conduct of Operations.

Any and all operations of Banks and Trinity and, to the knowledge of Banks, any and all
operations, in all material respects, by third parties. on or in respect of the assets and properties of Banks
and Trinity, have been conducted in accordance with good oilﬁeld practices.

Section 5.11 Petroleum and Natural Gas Property Interests.

The interests of Banks and Trinity in their respective petroleum and natural gas properties (the
“Banks Interests”) are free and clear of adverse claims created by, through or under Banks or Trinity, as
the case may be, except as disclosed in the Banks Financial Statements or those arising in the ordinary
course of business and that would not have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks and that, to its
knowledge, Banks and Trinity hold the Banks Interests under valid and subsisting licenses, leases,
permits, concessions, concession agreements, contracts, subleases, reservations or other agreements
except where the failure to so hold the Banks Interests would not have a Material Adverse Effect on
Banks.

Section 5.12 Title to Oil and Gas Properties.

Although it does not warrant title, Banks is not aware of any defects, failures or impairments to
the title to the Banks Interests, whether or not an action, suit, proceeding or inquiry is pending or
threatened and whether or not discovered by any third party which in the aggregate could reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks on: (i) the quantity and pre—tax present worth values
of the oil and gas reserves shown in the Gilbert Banks Report; (ii) the current production attributable to
such properties; or (iii) the current cash ﬂow from such properties.

Section 5.13 Documents of Title.
To the knowledge of Banks. Banks has made available to Arapahoe all Docummts of Title and
7 other documents and agreements in its possession affecting the title of Banks and Trinity to Banks
Interests. _
Section 5.14 Environmental Matters.

Except to the extent that any vioIation or other matter referred to in this subparagraph does not
have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks and Trinity, taken as a whole, in respect of each of Banks and
Trinity:

(a) to the knowledge of Banks, Banks is not in violation of any applicable federal, provincial.
municipal or local laws, regulations, orders, government decrees or with ances with
respect to environmental, health or safety matters (collectively, “Environmental Laws”);

CAL UbntﬁBJO


_ 20 _

(b) to the knowledge of Banks, Banks has operated its business at all times and has received,
handled, used. stored, treated, shipped and disposed of all contaminants without violation
of Environmental Laws;

(c) to the knowledge of Banks, there have been no spills, releases, deposits or discharges of
hazardous or toxic substances, contaminants or wastes into the earth, air or into any body
of water or any mimicipal or other sewer or drain water systems by Banks that have not
been remedied;

(d) no orders, directions or notices have been issued and remain outstanding pursuant to any
Environmental Laws relating to the business or assets of Banks;

(e) Banks has not failed to report to the proper federal, provincial, municipal or other
political subdivision, government, department, commission, board, bureau, agency or
instrumentalily, domestic or foreign (“Government Authority”) the occurrence of any
event which is required to be so reported by any Environmental Law; and

(t) Banks holds all licenses, permits and approvals required under any Environmental Laws
in connection with the operation of its business and the ownership and use of its assets,
except for such licenses, permits or approvals which. if not held or obtained, would not
have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks, all such licenses, permits and approvals are in
full force and effect, and except for notiﬁcations and conditions of general application to
assets of reclamation obligations under the Environmental Protection and Enhancement
Act (Alberta). Banks has not received any notiﬁcation pursuant to any Environmental
Laws that any work, repairs, constructions or capital expenditures are required to be
made by it as a condition of continued compliance with any Environmental Laws, or any
license, permit or approval issued pursuant thereto, or that any license, permit or appron
referred to above is about to be reviewed, made subject to limitation or conditions,
revoked, withdrawn or terminated,

Section 5.15 Reserve Report.

Banks made available to (Elbert, prior to the issuance of the Gilbert Banks Report, for the
purpose of preparing the Gilbert Banks Report, all information requested by Gilbert, which information.
taken as a whole, did not contain any misrepresentation at the time such information was provided.

' ‘ Banks has no knowledge of a material adverse change in the information, taken as a whole, provided to
Gilbert since the date that such information was provided Banks believes that the Gilbert Banks Report
reasonably presented the quantity and pro-tax present worth values of oil and gas reserves of Bank: as at
April 30, 2005 based upon information available at the time the Gilbert Banks Report was prepared and
the assumptions as to commodity prices and costs contained therein.

Section 5.16 Tax Matters.

(a) All Tax Returns required to be ﬁled by or on behalf of Banks and Trinity have been duly
ﬁled on a timely basis and such Tax Returns were complete and correct in all material
respects. All Taxes shown to be payable on the Tax Returns or on subsequent
assessments with respect thereto have been paid in full on a timely basis and no other

mustangs-113.10


_ 21 _
Taxes are payable by Banks or Trinity with respect to items or periods covered by such
Tax Returns.

(b) Banks has paid or provided adequate accruals for Taxes as at April 30, 2005 in
conformity with Canadian GAAP applied on a basis consistent with those of prior years,

(c) For all periods covered by the ﬁled Tax Returns disclosed in the Disclosed Information,
Arapahoe has been furnished by Banks true and complete copies of: (i) material portions
of income tax audit reports, statements of deﬁciencies, closing or other agreements
received by Banks or Trinity or on behalf of Banks or Trinity relating to Taxes; and (i)
all material federal, provincial, state, local or foreign income or francldse tax returns for
Banks and Trinity.

(d) No material deﬁciencies exist or have been asserted with respect to Taxes paid by Banks
or Trinity. Neither Banks nor Trinity is a party to any action or proceeding for
assessment or collection of Taxes, nor has such event been asserted or to Banks‘
knowledge threatened against Banks or Trinity or any of their respective assets. No
waiver or extension of any statute of limitations is in effect with respect to Taxes or Tax
Returns of Banks. There is no audit in process, pending or, to the knowledge of Banks,
threatened by a Governmental Entity relating to the Tax Retums of Banks for the last
three (3) years except for the Province of Saskatchewan pending audit of the PST as
disclosed in the Banks Disclosure Letter.

(e) Banks and Trinity have withheld from each payment made to any of its present or former
employees, ofﬁcers and directors, and to all persons who are non-residents of Canada for
the purposes of the Tax Act all amounts required by law and will continue to do so until
the Effective Time and has remitted such withheld amounts within the prescribed periods
to the appropriate Governmental Entity. Banks and Trinity have remitted all Canada
Pension Plan contributions, unemployment insurance premiums, employer health taxes
and other Taxes payable by it in respect of its employees and has or will have remitted
such amounts to the Governmental Entity within the time required by applicable law,
Banks has charged, collected and remitted on a timely basis all Taxes as required by
applicable law on any sale, supply or delivery whatsoever, made by Banks.

(0 To Banks‘ knowledge, all ad valorem, property, production, severance and similar taxes

' and assessments based on or measured by the ownership of property or the production of
its hydrocarbon substances, or the receipt of proceeds therefrom, payable in respect of its
oil and gas assets prior to the date hereof have been properly and fully paid and
discharged in all material respects, and there are no unpaid taxes or assessments which
could resulr in a lien or charge on its oil and gas assets.

Section 5.17 Debt and Working Capital.

As at June 30, 2005, Banks’ consolidated aggegate debt (“Banks’ Debt”), including accounts
payable, amounts drawn and outstanding under its credit facility and a non-revolving
acquisition/development demand loan, was not greater than $2,600,000.

CAL umuyssmro


_ 22 _
Section 5.18 Sales.

Banks’ consolidated production as at July 18, 2005 was not less than 350 EOE/day. ,
Section 5.19 Financial Commitments.

Except for operating costs incurred in the ordinary course of business, as of the date hereof,
neither Banks nor Trinity have any outstanding authorities for expenditures or other ﬁnancial
commitments in respect of the Banks Interests.

Section 5.20 No Default Under Lending Agreements.

No event of default or breach of any covenant has occurred under Banks’ existing banking and
lending agreements.

Section 5.21 Flow Through Obligations.

Other than those set out in the Banks Disclosure Letter, Banks has not entered into any
agreements or made any covenants with any parties with respect to the issuance of “ﬂow-through" shares
or the incurring and renunciation of Canadian exploration expense or Canadian development expense,
which amounts have not been fully expended and renounced as required thereunder and which are
reﬂected in the Banks Financial Statements.

Section 5.22 No Shareholders’ Rights Protection Plan. ,

Banks is not a party to, and prior to the completion of the Amalgamation, Banks will not
implement, a shareholder rights plan or any other form of plan, agreement, contract or instrument that will
trigger any rights to acquire Banks Shares or other securities of Banks or rights, entitlements or privileges
in favour of any person upon the entering into of this Agreement or the making or consummﬁon of the
Amalgamation.

Section 5.23 No Undisclosed Material Liabilities.

Except: (a) as disclosed or reﬂected in the Banks Financial Statements; and (b) for liabilities and

obligations: (i) incurred in the ordinary and normal course of business; or (ii) pursuant to the terms of this
7 Agreement, neither Banks nor Trinity have incurred any liabilities of any nature, whether accrued,

contingent or otherwise (or which would be required by Canadian GAAP to be reﬂected on the balance

sheet of Banks) that have constituted or would be reasonably likely to constitute a Material Adverse

Change in respect of Banks.

Section 5.24 Material Contracts.

Except for Documents of Title, this Agreement or as disclosed in the Banks Disclosure Letter,
there are no material contracts or agreements to which Banks is a party or by which it is bound. For the
purposes of this subparagraph, any contract or agreement pursuant to which Banks will, or may
reasonably be expected to result in, a requirement of Banks to expend more than an aggregate of
$100,000 or receive or be entitled to receive revenue of more than $100,000 in either case in the next 12
months, or is out of the ordinary course of business of Banks will be considered to be material.
CALUhrsry:36723.lO


_ 23 .
Section 5.25 Employee Obligations.

Banks reasonably estirmtes that the aggregate amounts payable by Banks for Employee
Obligations will not exceed the sum of $45,000 plus GST and the amount of the Tenax Obligation, and
the full particulars of all Employee Obligations have been disclosed in full by Banks to Arapahoe in the
Banks Disclosure Letter:

Section 5.26 Employment Agreements.

Except as disclosed in the Banks Disclosure Letter, Banks is not a party to any written
employment or consulting agreement or any verbal employment or consulting agreement, which may not
be terminated on one months’ notice or which provides for a payment on a change of control of Banks or
severance of employment.

Section 5.27 Leases and Other Obligations.

All of Banks‘ outstanding material leases, ofﬁce leases, ofﬁce equipment and computer leases,
geophysical and other technical software leases and arrangements, ﬁeld equipment leases and leased
vehicles have been provided to Arapahoe in the Disclosed Information or are set forth in the Banks
Disclosure Letter.

Section 5.28 Procesing and Transportation Commitments.

Other than as disclosed in the Banks Disclosure Letter, Banks has no third party processing or
transportation agreements or any obligations to deliver sales volumes to any other person. 7
Section 5.29 US. Matters.

(:1) Banks is a “foreign private issuer” within the meaning of Rule 405 of Regulation C

adopted by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission under the United
States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “U.S. Securities Act").
(b) Banks is not registered or required to be registered as an investment company under the

Investment Company Act of 1940.

V (c) As of 30 days before the mailing of the Cireu ar, less than 10% of the Banks Shares will
be held by persons resident in the United States, as determined pursuant to Rule l2g3-
2(a) under the Us. Securities Act. excluding (i) Banks Options exercisable into Banks
Shares; (ii) Banks Shares held by Arapahoe; and (iii) Banks Shares held by holders of
more than 10% of the Banks Shares.

(d) Banks is not incorporated in the United States and the principal ofﬁces of Banks are not

located within the United States.
CAL Lima/36729.10


_ 24 _
(e) Banks does not hold more than U.S.$50 million worth of assets in the United States,
measured by fair market value, and has not made aggregate sales in or into the United
States exceeding U.S.$50 million during in most recent ﬁscal year.
Section 530 Emplnyce Beneﬁt Plans.

Banks has no deﬁned beneﬁt plans or other employee beneﬁt plans and has made no agreements
or promises in respect of any such plan.
Section 5.31 Litigation, Etc.

As at the date hereof, there are no actions, suits or proceedings pending, or to the knowledge of
Banks threatened, against Banks or Trinity before or by any federal, provincial, state, local, foreign,
municipal or other governmental department, commission, board, bureau, agency. court or
instnnnentality, which action, suit or proceeding involves the possibility of any judgment against or
liability of Banks or any other person which, if successful, would have a Material Adverse Effect on
Banks or materially affect the ability of Banks to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby.
Section 5.32 Financial Advisor.

Woodstone Capital Inc. has been retained as Banks’ ﬁnancial adviser in connection with certain
matters contemplated by this Agreement. Banks has delivered to Arapahoe true and correct copies of all
agreements between Banks and its ﬁnancial adviser which could give rise to a payment of any fees to
such ﬁnancial adviser. Other than the foregoing, Banks has not incurred any obligation or liability,
contingent or otherwise, for brokerage fees, ﬁnder‘s fees, agents’ commission or other forms of
compensation with respect to the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.

Section 5.33 Transaction Costs.

All transaction costs (including all advisory, legal, engineering, audit or other expenses related to
the Amalgamation and transactions contemplated hereby but other than Employee Obligations and the
Tenax Obligation) of Banks related to the Amalgamation and the transactions contemplated hereby will
not exceed $270,000, with the fees and disbursements of Banks’ legal counsel in connection with the
Amalgamation and all matters related thereto not exceeding $120,000.

' Section 5.34 Disclosure.

Banks has disclosed to Arapahoe in the Disclosed Information any information in its possession
of which it is aware regarding any event circumstance or action taken which could reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks.

The data and information with respect to Banks and Trinity including, without limitation, their
assets, reserves, liabilities, business prospects, affairs and operations provided by Banks in the Disclosed
Information was and is accurate and correct in all material respects as at the respective dates thereof and
does not omit any material dam or information necessary to make the data or information provided, taken
as a whole, not misleading in any material respect as at the respective dates thereof.

CAL ubnry:36723.10


. 25 _
Section 5.35 No Guarantees or Indemniﬁes.

Neither Banks nor Trinity is a party to or bound by any agreement of guarantee, indenmification
(other than an indemniﬁcation of directors and ofﬁcers in accordance with the hy-laws of Banks and
applicable laws and other than standard indemniﬁes in favorn of purchasers of assets in purchase and sale
agreements and underwriters and agents in connection with offerings of securities, Banks’ registrar and
transfer agent, inderm-rities and guarantees in favour of Banks’ bankers and indemriities to support Banks’
obligations pursuant to agreements entered into in the ordinary course of business), or any other like
commitment of the obligations, liabilities (contingent or otherwise) of indebtedness of any other person.
Section 5.36 No Loans.

Except as disclosed in the Banks Financial Statements and the Banks Disclosure Letter, neither
Banks nor Trinity has any loans or other indebtedness currently outstanding which have been made to or
from any of its shareholders, ofﬁcers, directors or employees or any other person not dealing at arm’s
length with Banks or Trinity, as the case may be.

Section 5.37 No Net Proﬁts or Other Interests.

Except as disclosed in the Banks Disclosure Letter, no ofﬁcer, director, employee or any other
person not dealing at arm’s length with Banks or Trinity or, to the knowledge of Banks, any associate or
afﬁliate of any such person, owns, has or is entitled to any royalty, net proﬁts interest, carried interest or
any other encumbrances or claims of any nature whatsoever which are based on production from the
properties or assets of Banks or Trinity or any revenue or rights attributed thereto.

Section 538 Reporting Issuer.

Banks is a repomn' g issuer in the provinces of British Columbia and Alberta, the issued and
outstanding Banks Shares are listed and posted for trading on the TSXV and Banks is in maten'a
compliance with the by-laws, rules and regulation of the TSXV,

Section 5.39 No Cease Trade Orders.

No securities commission or similar regulatory authority has issued any order preventing or
suspending trading of any securities of Banks and Banks is not in default of any requirement of applicable
Securities Laws that would have a material adverse effect on the transactions contemplated by this

7 Ayeement.
Section 5.40 Public Record.

The information and statements ﬁled by or on behalf of Banks with the securities corrnnissions
and similar regulatory authorities in Canada in compliance, or intended compliance, with applicable
Securities Laws were true, correct and complete, in all material respects, and did not contain any
misrepresentation, as of the respective dates of such information or statements, and no material change
occurred in relation to Banks which has not been publicly disclosed, and Banks has not ﬁled any
conﬁdential material change reports which continue to be conﬁdential.

CALLibrary:36723.10


. 25 _
Section 5.41 No Material Transactions.

Except as publicly disclosed prior to the date of this Agreement, since January 31, 2005 Banks
has not incurred, assumed or suffered any liability (absolute, accrued, contingent or otherwise) or entered
into any transaction, which is or may be material to Banks, which is not in the ordinary course of
business.

Section 5.42 No Swaps.

Banks currently has no outstanding Swaps.
Section 5.43 No Unanimous Shareholder Agreement.

To its knowledge, neither Banks nor any of its shareholders is a party to any unanimous
shareholders agreement, pooling agreement, voting trust or other similar type of arrangements in respect
of outstanding securities of Banks.

Section 5.44 Conﬁdentiality Agreements.

Banks has entered into conﬁdentiality agreements with persons other than Arapahoe respecting
the conﬁdentiality of information provided to such persons or reviewed by such persons as set out in the
Banks Disclosure Letter. Banks has not negotiated any Take-over Proposal with any person who has not
entered into a conﬁdentiality agreement or provided access to the conﬁdential information in respect of
Banks in relation to any proposed, possible or actual Take-over Proposal to any person who has not
entered into a conﬁdentiality agreement. Banks has not amended, modiﬁed or provided any consents
under such conﬁdentiality agreements or provided any release from, or relaxation of, the obligations
under such conﬁdentiality agreements to any of the other parties thereto. Banks has not waived the
applicability of any “standstill” or other provisions of any conﬁdentiality agreements entered into by
Banks.

Section 5.45 Restrictions on Business.

There is no non-competition, exclusivity or other similar agreement, commitment or
understanding in place to which Banks or Trinity is a party or by which it is otherwise bound that would
now or hereafter in any way limit its business or operations in a particular manner or to a particular

7 locality or geographic region or for a speciﬁed period of time and the execution, delivery and
performance of this Agreement does not and will not result in any restriction of Banks or Trinity from
engaging in their respective business or from competing with any person or in any geographic area.
Section 5.46 Outstanding Acquisitions or Disposition.

Banks has no rights to purchase any assets, properties or undertakings of third parties nor have
any obligation to sell (other than in relation to Swaps) assets, properties or undertakings with a value in
excess of $25,000, in the aggregate.

CAL Library-36723.10


_ 27 .
Section 5.47 Insurance.

Policies of insurance in force as of the date hereof naming Banks as an insured adequame cover
all risks reasonably and prudently foreseeable in the operation and conduct of the business of Banks to the
extent customary in respect of the business carried on by Banks. All such policies of insurance will
remain in force and effect and will not be cancelled or otherwise terminated as a result of the transactions
contemplated hereby or by the Amalgamation.

Section 5.48 Fairn of Amalgamation.

The board of directors of Banks, upon consultation with its ﬁnancial advisor and having received
the verbal opinion of such ﬁnancial advisor that the consideration offered pursuant to the Amalgamation
is fair. from a ﬁnancial point of view, to the Banks Shareholders, has determined that the Amalgamation
is fair to the Banks Shareholders. that the Amalgamation is in the best interests of Banks and the holders
of the Banks Shares, has unanimously approved the Amalgamation and the entering into of this
Agreement and has resolved to unanimously recommend that holders of Banks Shares vote in favour of
the Amalgamation.

Section 5.49 Survival of Representations and Warranties.

The representations and warranties of Banks conmined in this Agreement shall be true at the
Effective Time as though they were made by Banks at the Effective Time. Notwithstanding the foregoing
a claim for any breach of any of the representations and warranties contained in this Agreement involving
fraud or a fraudulent misrepresentation by Banks may be made at any time following the Effective Time
against Banks subject only to applicable limitation periods imposed by law. 7

ARTICLE 6
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF ARAPAHOE

Each of Arapahoe and Newco jointly and severally represents and warrants to and in favour of
Banks as follows and acknowledges that Banks is relying upon such representations and warranties in
connection with the execution and delivery of this Agreement.

Section 6.1 Organization and Qualiﬁcation.

Each of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries is duly incorporated or amalgamated under the

' laws of its jurisdiction of incorporation or amalgamation and has the requisite corporate power and

capacity to carry on its business as it is now being conducted. Each of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe

Subsidiaries is duly registered to do business and is in good standing in each jurisdiction in which the

character of its properties, owned or leased, or the nature of its activities make such registration

necessary, except where the failure to be so registered or in good standing would not have a Material

Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries (taken as a whole).

Secﬁon 6.2 Authority Relative to this Agreement.

Each of Arapahoe and the Ampahoe Subsidiaries has the requisite corporate power and capacity
to enter into this Agreement and to carry out its obligations hereunder. The execution and delivery of this
Agreement and the performance by Arapahoe of its obligations hereunder have been duly authorized by
CAL unwasmlo


. 23 .
the board of directors of Arapahoe, and no other corporate proceedings on the part of Arapahoe are
necessary to authorize this Agreement (except for obtaining director approval to the form of Offer
Documents) or the performance by Arapahoe of its obligations hereunder. This Agreement has been duly
executed and delivered by Arapahoe and constitutes a legal, valid and binding obligation of Arapahoe
enforceable against Arapahoe in accordance with its terms, subject to bankruptcy, insolvency, fraudulent
transfer, reorganization, moratorium and other laws relating to or affecting creditors‘ rights generally and
to the general principles of equity.
Section 6.3 No Violations.
(a) Subject to receipt of consent of Arapahoe’s bankers and lenders to the Amalgamation and
related transactions, neither the execution and delivery of this Agreement by Arapahoe or
Newco, the consummation by them of the transactions contemplated hereby nor
compliance by each of Arapahoe and Newco with any of the provisions hereof will: (i)
violate, conﬂict with, or result in the breach of any provision of, require any consent,
approval or notice under, or constitute a default (or an event which, with notice or lapse
of time or both, would constitute a default) or result in a right of termination or
acceleration under, or result in a creation of any lien, security interest, charge or
encumbrance upon any of the properties or assets of Arapahoe, Newco or any of their
subsidiaries or afﬁliates under any of the terms, conditions or provisions of (A) the
articles or by—laws of Arapahoe or Newco, or (B) any material note, bond, mortgage,
indenture, loan agreement, deed of trust, agreement, lien, contract or other instrument or
obligation to which Arapahoe, Newco or any of their subsidiaries are a party or to which
Arapahoe, Newco or any of their wbsidiaries, or any of their respective properties or
assets, may be subject or by which Arapahoe, Newco or any of their subsidiaries is
bound; or (ii) subject to compliance with Corporate Laws and Securities Laws, violate
any judgment, ruling, order, writ, injunction, determination, award, decree, statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to Arapahoe, Newco or any of their subsidiaries
(except, in the case of each of clauses (i) and (ii) directly above, for such violations,
conﬂicts, breaches, defaults, terminations which, or any consents, approvals or notices
which if not given or received. would not have any Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe,
Newco and their subsidiaries (taken as a whole) and would not have material adverse
effect on the ability of Ampahoe or Newco to consummate the transactions contemplated
hereby).
(b) Other than in connection with or in compliance with the provisions of Corporate Laws
7 and Securities Laws: (i) there is no legal impediment to the performance by Arapahoe or
Newco of their obligations under this Agreement or to the execution and delivery of this
Agreement by Arapahoe and (ii) no ﬁling or registration with, or authorization, consent
or approval of, any domestic or foreign public body or authority is necessary in
connection with the Amalgamation, except for such ﬁlings or registrations which, if not
made, or for such authorizations, consents or approvals, which, if not received, would not
have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries (taken as a whole) and
would not have a material adverse effect on the ability of Arapahoe and Arapahoe to
consummate the transactions contemplated hereby.
commas-123.10


. 29 .
Section 6.4 Capitalization of Arapahoe and Newco.

As of the date hereof, the authorized share capital of Arapahoe consists of an unlimited number of
Arapahoe Shares and an unlimited number of preferred shares, issuable in series, of which 22,317,939
Arapahoe Shares are issued and outstanding. As of the date hereof, options to purchase 1,678,181
Arapahoe Shares have been granted and are outstanding. Except as set forth above or in the Arapahoe
Disclosure Letter, there are no securities of Arapahoe outstanding and no options, warrants or other rights,
agreements or commitments of any character whatsoever requiring the issuance, sale or transfer by
Arapahoe of any Arapahoe Shares or any securities convertible into, or exchangeable or exercisable for,
or otherwise evidencing a right to acquire. any Arapahoe Shares, nor are there any outstanding stock
appreciation rights, phantom equity or similar rights, agreements, arrangements or commitments based
upon the book value, income or other attributes of Arapahoe except for 1,132,322 warrants to acquire
Arapahoe Shares. All oulstanding Arapahoe Shares have been duly authorized and are validly issued, as
fully paid and non-assessable and are not subject to, nor were they issued in violation of, any preemptive
rights, and all Arapahoe Shares issuable upon exercise of outstanding Arapahoe Options will, when
issued, be duly authorized and validly issued as fully paid and non assessable shares.

As of the dare hereof, the authorized share capital of Newco consists of an unlimited number of
Newco Shares and an unlimited number of preferred shares, issuable in series, of which one Newco Share
is issued and outstanding. There are no options, warrants or other rights, agreements or commitments of
any character whatsoever requiring the issuance, sale or transfer by Newco of any Newco Shares or any
securities convertible into, or exchangeable or exercisable for, or otherwise evidencing a right to acquire,
any Newco Shares, nor are there any outstanding stock appreciation rights, phantom equity or similar
rights, agreements, arrangements or commitments based upon the book value, income or other attributes
of Newco.

Section 6.5 No Material Adverse Change.

There has not been any material change in the assets, liabilities or obligations (absolute,
contingent or otherwise) of Arapahoe from the position set forth in the Arapahoe Financial Statements
and there has not been any Material Adverse Change in respect of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe
Subsidiaries since March 31, 2005; and since that date there have been no material facts, transactions,
events or occurrences which could materially adversely affect the capital, assets, liabilities (absolute,
accrued, contingent or otherwise), business, operations or condition (ﬁnancial or otherwise) or results of
the operations of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries (taken as a whole) or that could affect
Arapahoe’s ability to consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.

Section 6.6 Financial Statements.

The Arapahoe Financial Statements fairly present. in accordance with Canadian GAAP (other
than note disclosure in respect of ﬁnancial statements that are unaudited), consistently applied, the
ﬁnancial position and condition of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis at the
dates thereof and the results of the operations of Arapahoe and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis for
the periods then ended and reﬂect all assets, liabilities or obligations (absolute, accrued, contingent or
otherwise) of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe on a consolidated basis as at the dates thereof.

CAL Library:36723.lo


. 30 .
Section 6.7 Minute Books.

The corporate records and minute books of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries have been
maintained in accordance with all applicable statutory requirements and are true, correct, accurate and
up-to—date in all material respects
Section 6.8 Ownership of Subsidiaries.

(a) Arapahoe is the registered and beneﬁcial owner of 100% of the outstanding shares of
each of the Arapahoe Subsidiaries with good and valid title to all such shares, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances (other than in favour of Arapahoe’s bankers) and no
person, ﬁrm, corporation or other entity holds any securities convertible or exchangeable
into securities of any of such subsidiaries or now has any agreement, warrant, option,
right or privilege (whether preemptive or contractual) being or capable of becoming an
agreement for the purchase, subscription or issuance of any unissued shares, securities
(including convertible securities) or warrants of any of the Arapahoe Subsidiaries.

(b) The only subsidiaries of Arapahoe are the Arapahoe Subsidiaries and Arapahoe is not
afﬁliated with. nor is it a holding corporation of any other body corporate.

Section 6.9 Compliance with Applicable Laws.

Each of Arapahoe and the Arapaho: Subsidiaries has conducted and is conducting its business in
compliance in all material respects with all applicable laws, rules and regulations and, in particular, all
applicable licensing and environmental legislation, regulations or by-laws or other lawful requirement of,
any governmental or regulatory bodies applicable to Arapahoe and the Ampahoc Subsidiaries of each
jurisdiction in which Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries carries on its business (except to the extent
that the failure to so comply would not have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries,
taken as a whole) and holds all licences, registrations and qualiﬁcations in all jurisdictions in which
Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries carries on its business which are necessary to carry on the
business of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries (other than those that, the failure of which to so
hold, would not have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole), as
now conducted and as presently proposed to be conducted and all such licenses, registrations or
qualiﬁcations are valid and existing and in good standing and none of such licenses, registrations or
qualiﬁcations contains any burdensome term, provision, condition or limitation which has or would
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on the business of Arapahoe or any of its

7 subsidiaries (taken as a whole), as now conducted or as proposed to be conducted.
Section 6.10 Conduct of Operations.

Any and all operations of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries and, to the best of Arapahoe’s
knowledge, any and all operations, in all material respects, by third parties, on or in respect of the assets
and properties of Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries, have been conducted in accordance with good
oilﬁeld practices.

CAL umwzs. m


.31.
Section 6.11 Petroleum and Natural Gas Property Interests.

The interests of each of Ampahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries in their respective petroleum
and natural gas properties (the “Arapahoe Interests") are free and clear of adverse claims created by,
through or under Arapahoe or the Arapahoe Subsidiaries, except as disclosed in the Arapahoe Financial
Statements or those arising in the ordinary course of business and that would not have a Material Adverse
Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries (taken as a whole) and that, to its lmowledge, each of Arapahoe
and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries holds the Arapahoe Interests under valid and subsisting licenses, leases,
permits, concessions, concession agreements. contracts, subleases, reservations or other agreements
except where the failure to so hold the Arapahoe Interests would not have a Material Adverse Effect on
Arapahoe and its subsidiaries (taken as a whole).

Section 6.12 Title to Oil and Gas Properties.

Although it does not warrant title, Arapahoe is not aware of any defects, failures or irnpaimrents
to the title to the Arapahoe Interests, Whether or not an action, suit, proceeding or inquiry is pending or
threatened and whether or not discovered by any third party which in the aggregate could reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, on: (i) the
quantity and pre-tax present worth values of the oil and gas reserves shown in the Chapman Arapahoe
Report; (ii) the current production attributable to such properties; or (iii) the current cash ﬂow from such
properties.

Section 6.13 Documents of Title.

To the best of Arapahoe‘ knowledge, Arapahoe has made available to Banks all Documents of,
Title and other documents and agreements in its possession affecting the title of Arapahoe and the
Arapahoe Subsidiaries to Arapahoe Interests.

Section 6.14 Environmental Matters.

Except to the extent that any violation or other matter referred to in this subparagraph does not
have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, in respect of each of
Ampahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries:

(a) to the best of Ampahoe‘s knowledge, it is not in violation of any applicable federal,
provincial, municipal or local laws, regulations, orders, government decrees or
ordinances with respect to environmental, health or safety matters (collectively,
"Environmental Laws”);

(b) to the best of Arapahoe’s knowledge, it has operated its business at all times and has
received, handled, used, stored. treated, shipped and disposed of all contaminants without
violation of Environmental Laws;

(c) to the best of Arapahoe’s knowledge, there have been no spills, releases, deposits or
discharges of hazardous or toxic substances, contaminants or wastes into the earth, air or
into any body of water or any municipal or other sewer or drain water systems by
Arapahoe or the Arapahoe Subsidiaries that have not been remedied;

CALljbrary136723Jﬂ


.32.

(d) no orders, directions or notices have been issued and remain outstanding pursuant to any
Environmental hws relating to the business or assets of Arapahoe or the Arapahoe
Subsidiaries;

(e) it has not failed to report to the proper federal, provincial, municipal or other political
subdivision, government, department, commission, board, bureau, agency or
instrumentality, domestic or foreign (“Government Authority”) the occurrence of any
event which is required to be so reported by any Environmental Law; and

(f) it holds all licenses, permits and approvals required under any Environmental Laws in
connection with the operation of its business and the ownership and use of its assets,
except for such licenses, permits or approvals which, if not held or obtained, would not
have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and its subsidiaries (taken as a whole), all
such licenses, permits and approvals are in full force and effect, and except for
notiﬁcations and conditions of general application to assets of reclamation obligations
under the Environmental Protection and Enhancement Act (Alberta), except as disclosed
in the Arapahoe Disclosure letter, neither Arapahoe nor its subsid'mries has received any
notiﬁcation pursuant to any Environmental Laws that any work, repairs, constructions or
capital expenditures are required to be made by it as a condition of continued compliance
with any Environmental Laws, or any license, permit or approval issued pursuant thereto,
or that any license, permit or approval referred to above is about to be reviewed, made
subject to limitation or conditions, revoked, withdrawn or terminated.

Section 6.15 Reserve Report. 7
Arapahoe made available to Chapman, prior to the issuance of the Chapman Arapahoe Report, for
the purpose of preparing the Chapman Arapahoe Report, all information remiested by Chapman, which
information, taken as a whole, did not contain any misrepresentation at the time such information was
provided. Arapahoe has no knowledge of a material adverse change in the information, taken as a whole,
provided to Chapman since the date that such information was provided, Arapahoe believes that the
Chapman Arapahoe Report reasonably presented the quantity and pro-tax present worth values of oil and
gas reserves of Arapahoe as at December 31, 2004 based upon information available at the time the
Chapman Arapahoe Report was prepared and the assumptions as to commodity prices and costs contained
therein.
* Section 6.16 Tax Matters.

For the purposes of this Section 6.15, the term “Arapahoe” means Arapahoe and the Arapahoe
Subsidiaries.

(a) All Tax Returns required to be ﬁled by or on behalf of Arapahoe have been duly ﬁled on
a timely basis and such Tax Returns were complete and correct in all material respects.
All Taxes shown to be payable on the Tax Returns or on subsequent assessments with
respect thereto have been paid in full on a timely basis and no other Taxes are payable by
Arapahoe with respect to items or periods covered by such Tax Returns.

CAL unmyzasmm


_ 33 .

(b) Arapahoe has paid or provided adequate accruals for Taxes as at March 31, 2005 in its
ﬁnancial statements as at and for the period ended dated March 31, 2005. in conformity
with Canadian GAAP applied on a basis consistent with those of prior years.

(c) For all pieriods covered by the ﬁled Tax Returns disclosed in the Disclosed Information,
Arapalioe has made available to Banks true and complete copies of all material federal,
provincial, state, local or foreign income or franchise Tax Returns for Arapahoe.

(d) No material deﬁciencies exist or have been asserted with respect to Taxes paid by
Ampahoe. Arapahoe is not a party to any action or proceeding for assessment or
collection of Taxes, nor has such event been asserted or to Arapahoe’s knowledge
threatened against Arapahoe or any of its assets No waiver or extension of any statute of
limitations is in effect with respect to Taxes or Tax Returns of Ampahoe. There is no
audit in process, pending or, to the knowledge of Arapahoe, threatened by a
Governmental Entity relating to the Tax Returns of Arapahoe or its subsidiaries for the
last three (3) years

(c) Arapahoe has withheld from each payment made to any of its present or former
employees, ofﬁcers and directors, and to all persons who are non‘residents of Canada for
the purposes of the Tax Act all amounts required by law and will continue to do so until
the Expiry Time and has remitted such withheld amounts within the prescribed periods to
the Governmental Entity. Arapahoe has remitted all Canada Pension Plan contributions.
unemployment insurance premiums, employer health taxes and other Taxes payable by it
in respect of its employees and has or will have remitted such amounts to the
Governmental Entity within the time required by applicable law. Arapahoe has charged;
collected and remitted on a timely basis all Taxes as required by applicable law on any
sale, supply or delivery-whamoever, made by Arapahoe.

(f) To Arapahoe’s knowledge, all ad valorem property. producu'on. severance and similar
taxes and assessments based on or measured by the ownership of property or the
production of its hydrocarbon substances, or the receipt of proceeds therefrom payable in
respect of its oil and gas assets prior to the date hereof have been properly and fully paid
and discharged in all material respects, and there are no unpaid taxes or assessments
which could result in a lien or charge on its oil and gas assets.

7 Section s17 Debt and Working CapitaL
As at June 30, 2005, Arapahoe’s total indebtedness for borrowed money including Arapahoe’s
working capital deﬁcit, calculated in accordance with Canadian GAAP, was not in excess of $1,500,000.
Section 6.18 Sales.
Arapahoe‘s consolidated average daily sales of production for the ten day period ending June 30,
2005 was not less than 5 EOE/day.
CAL Library:36723.10


. 34 _
Section 6.19 Financial Commitments.

Other than those set out in the Arapahoe Disclosure Letter, and except for operating costs
inclined in the ordinary course of business, as of the date hereof, neither Arapahoe nor the Arapahoe
Subsidiaries have any outstanding authorities for expenditures or other ﬁnancial commitments in respect
of the Arapahoe Interests.

Section 6.20 No Default Under Lending Agreements.

No event of default or breach of any covenant has occurred under Arapahoe‘ existing banking
and lending agreements.

Section 6.21 Flow Through Obligations.

Other than those set out in the Arapahoe Disclosure Letter. Arapahoe has not entered into any
agreements or made any covenants with any parties with respect to the issuance of “flow-through" shares
or the incurring and renunciation of Canadian exploration expense or Canadian development expense,
which amounts have not been fully expended and renounced as required thereunder and which are
reﬂected in the Ampahoe Financial Statements. -

Section 6.22 No Shareholders’ Rights Protection Plan

Neither Arapahoe nor Newco is a party to, and prior to the completion of the Amalgamation,
neither Arapahoe nor Newco will implement, a shareholder rights plan or any other form of plan.
agreement, contract or instrument that will trigger any rights to acquire Arapahoe Shares or Newcoe
Common Shares or other securities of Arapahoe or Newco or rights, entitlements or privileges in favour
of any person upon the entering into of this Agreement or the making or consummation of the
Amalgamation.

Section 6.23 No Undisclosed Material Liabilities.

Except: (a) as disclosed or reﬂected in the Arapahoe Financial Statements; and (b) for liabilities
and obligations: (i) incurred in the ordinary and normal course of business; or (ii) pursuant to the terms of
this Agreement, neither Arapahoe nor the Arapahoe Subsidiaries has incrn-red any liabilities of any nature,
whether accrued, contingent or otherwise (or which would be required by Canadian GAAP to be reﬂected

r on the balance sheet of Ampahoe) that have constituted or would be reasonably likely to constitute a
Material Adverse Change in respect of Arapahoe.
Section 6.24 Material Contracts.

Except for Documents of Title, this Agreement or as disclosed in the Arapahoe Disclosure Letter,
there are no material contracts or agreements to which either Arapahoe or Newco is a party or by which it
is bound. For the purposes of this subparagraph, any contract or agreement pursuant to which Arapahoe
will. or may reasonably be expected to result in, a requirement of Arapahoe to expend more than an
aggregate of $100,000 or receive or be entitled to receive revenue of more than $100,000 in either case in
the next 12 months, or is out of the ordinary course of business of Arapahoe will be considered to be
material.

CALLibrary:Zﬁ723.lﬂ


_ 35 _
Section 6.25 Litigation, Etc.

As at the date hereof, there are no actions, suits or proceedings pending, or to the knowledge of
Arapahoe threatened. against Arapahoe or any of the Arapahoe Subsidiaries before or by any federal,
provincial, state, local, foreign, municipal or other governmental department. commission, board, bureau,
agency, court or instrumentality, which action suit or proceeding involves the possibility of any judgment
against or liability of Arapahoe or any of the Arapahoe Subsidiaries or any other person which, if
successful, would have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe and the Arapahoe Subsidiaries (taken as a
whole) or materially affect the ability of Arapahoe to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby.
Section 6.26 Disclosure.

Arapahoe has disclosed to Banks in the Disclosed Information any information in its possession
of which it is aware regarding any event, circumstance or action taken which could reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe or its subsidiaries, taken as a whole.

The dam and information with respect to Arapahoe and its subsidiaries including, Without
limitation, their respective assets, reserves, liabilities, business prospects, affairs and operations provided
by Arapaboe in the Disclosed Information was and is accurate and correct in all material respects as at the
respective dates thereof and does not omit any material data or information necessary to make the data or
information provided, taken as a whole, not misleadm' g in any material respect as at the respective dates
thereof.

Section 6.27 Leasw and Other Obligations.

All of Arapahoe’ outstanding material leases, ofﬁce leases, ofﬁce equipment and computer
leases, geophysical and other technical software leases and arrangements, ﬁeld equipment leases and
leased vehicles have been provided to Banks in the Disclosed Information or are set forth in the Arapahoe
Disclosure letter.

Section 6.28 Processing and Transportation Commitments.

Arapahoe has no third party processing or transportation agreements or any obligations to deliver
sales volumes to any other person.
Section 6.29 Reporting Issuer.

Arapahoe is a reporting issuer in the provinces of British Columbia and Alberta, the issued and
outstanding Arapahoe Shares are listed and posted for trading on the TSXV, and Arapahoe is in materia
compliance with the by-laws. rules and regulation of the TSXV,

Section 6.30 No Cease Trade Orders.

No securities commission or similar regulatory authority has issued any order preventing or
suspending trading of any securities of Arapahoe and Arapahoe is not in default of any requirement of
applicable Secm'ities Laws that would have a material effect on the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement
CALIjbr-ary:36723.10


. 36 .
Section 6.31 Financial Advisor.

Arapahoe has not retained nor will it retain any ﬁnancial advisor, broker. agent or ﬁnder or paid
or agreed to pay any ﬁnancial advisor, broker, agent or ﬁnder on account of this Agreement, the
Amalgamation, any transaction contemplated hereby or any transaction presently ongoing or
contemplated, except that Arapahoe has retained Davis & Company LLP as Arapahoe’ legal advisors in
connection with the transaction contemplated hereinr
Section 6.32 No Loans.

Other than as disclosed in the Arapahoe Disclosure Letter, neither Arapahoe nor any of the
Arapahoe Subsidiaries has any loans or other indebtedness currently outstanding which have been made
to or from any of its shareholders, ofﬁcers, directors or employees or any other person not dealing at
arm's length with Arapahoe.

Section 6.33 No Net Proﬁts or Other Interests.

Except as disclosed in the Arapahoe Disclosure Letter, no ofﬁcer, director, employee or any other
person not dealing at arm’s length with Ampahoe or the Arapahoe Subsidiaries or. to the knowledge of
Arapahoe, any associate or afﬁliate of any such person, owns, has or is entitled to any royalty, net proﬁts
interest, carried interest or any other encumbrances or claims of any nature whatsoever which are based
on production ﬂoor the properties or assets of Arapahoe or and Arapahoe Subsidiaries or any revenue or
rights attributed thereto.

Section 6.34 Public Record. ’

The information and statements ﬁled by or on behalf of Arapahoe with the securities
commissions and similar regulatory authorities in Canada in compliance, or intended compliance, with
applicable Securities Laws were true, correct and complete, in all material respecm, and did not contain
any misrepresentation, as of the respective dates of such information or statements, and no material
change occurred in relation to Arapahoe which has not been publicly disclosed, and Arapahoe has not
ﬁled any conﬁdential material change reports which continue to be conﬁdential.

Section 6.35 Arapahoe Shares to he Issued.

7 The board of directors of Arapahoe has reserved and allotted to holders of Banks Shares that
number of Arapahoe Shares as are issuable upon the completion of the Amalgamation and, when issued
in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, such Arapahoe Shares will be issued as fully paid and
nonaassessable.

The board of directors of Arapahoe has reserved and allotted to holders of Banks
Pre -Amalgamation Options and Banks Warrants that number of Arapahoe Shares as may be issuable
upon the exercise thereof following the completion of the Amalgamation and, upon exercise thereof in
accordance with their respective terms, such Arapahoe Shares will be issued as frilly paid and
non-assessable.

CALLibrary:36713.lﬂ


. 37 .
Section 6.36 No Material Transactions.

Except as publicly disclosed prior to the date of this Agreean since January 31, 2005 Arapahoe
has not incurred, assumed or suffered any liability (absolute, accrued, contingent or otherwise) or entered
into any transaction, which is or may be material to Arupahoe, which is not in the ordinary course of
business.

Section 6.37 No Swaps.

Arapahoe currently has no outstanding Swaps.
Section 6.38 Restrictions on Buness.

Other than as disclosed in the Arapahoe Disclosure Letter, there is no non-competition,
exclusivity or other similar agreement. commitment or understanding in place to which Arapahoe is a
party or by which it is otherwise bomd that would now or hereafter in any way may limit its business or
operations in a particular manner or to a particular locality or geographic region or for a speciﬁed period
of time and the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement does not and will not result in any
restriction of Arapahoe from engaging in its business or from competing with any person or in any
geographic area.

Section 639 Insurance.

Policies of insurance in force as of the date hereof naming Arapahoe as an insured adequately
cover all risks reasonably and prudently foreseeable in the operation and conduct of the business of?
Arapahoe to the extent customary in respect of the business carried on by Arapahoe. All such policies of
insurance will remain in force and effect and will not be cancelled or otherwise terminated as a result of
the transactions contemplated hereby or by the Amalgamation.

Section 6.4!] No Unanimous Shareholder Agreement

Neither Arapahoe, Newco nor any of the Arapahoe Subsidiaries is a party to any unanimous
shareholders agreement, pooling agreement, voting trust or other similar type of arrangements in respect
of its respective outstanding securities. ‘

’ Section 6.41 Survival of Representations and Warranties.

The representations and warranties of the Arupahoe Parties contained in this Agreement shall
survive the completion of the transactions contemplated under this Agreement and remain in full force
and effect thereafter for the beneﬁt of Banks for a period of two years. Notwithstanding the foregoing a
claim for any breach of any of the representations and warranties contained in this agreement involving
fraud or a fraudulent misrepresentation by Arapahoe or Newco may be made at any time following the
Time of Closing against Arapahoe and Newco subject only to applicable limitation periods imposed by
law.

CAL Library:36723.10


_  _
ARTICLE 7
COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
Section 7.1 Mutual Covenants.

(a) Each (3me and Arapahoe agrees as follows rmtil the earlier of the Effective Date or
the termination of this Agreement in accordance with Article 9 in each case except (i)
with the consent of the other party to any deviation therefrom or (ii) as expressly
contemplated by this Ageement:

(i) it and its respective Subsidiaries shall

(A) carry on its businesses in the usual and ordinary course consistent with
past practices and in a manner consistent with industry practice,

(13) use reasonable best efforts to preserve intact its present business
organization and material rights and franchises, to keep available the
services of its current ofﬁcers and employees, and to preserve its
relationships with customers, suppliers and others having business
dealings with it, and

(C) maintain and keep its material properties and assets in as good repair and
condition as at the date hereof, subject to ordinary wear and tear, all to
the end that its goodwill and ongoing businesses shall not be impaired in
any material respect at the Effective Time.

(ii) it shall not, and it shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to:

(A) declare or pay any dividends on, make other distributions or return
capital in respect of any of its capiml stock or any other equity interests,
except for dividends, distributions or return of capital payable by a
subsidiary to such party or a wholly-owned subsidiary of such party;

(B) split, combine or reclassify any of its capital stock or issue or authorize
or propose the issuance of any other securities in respect of, in lieu of or
in substitution for, shares of its capital stock;

7 (C) issue, sell, pledge, reserve, set aside, dispose of or enernnber, repurchase,
redeem or otherwise acquire, any shares of its capital stock or any
securities or obligations convertible into. exercisable or exchangeable
for, or any rights, warrants, calls, subscriptions or options to acquire,
shares of its capital stock, except pursuant to fully vested stock options
and warrants outstanding on the date hereof; or

(D) enter into or announce any agreement or arrangement with respect to the
sale. voting. registration or repurchase of any shares of its capiml stock
or any security convertible into or exchangeable for such shares.

(iii) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to,
CAL mmoms. 10


. 39 _

(A) incur any indebtedness for borrowed money or purchase money
indebtedness or assume, guarantee, endorse or enter into a “keepweu” or
similar arrangement with respect to, any indebtedness, other than

~ 7' - indebtedness between such party or any of its Subsidiaries and another of

_ its Subsidiaries, or

(B) enter into any material operating lease or create any mortgages. liens,
security interests or other encumbrances on the property of such party or
any of its Subsidiaries in connection with any indebtedness.

(iv) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to:

(A) increase the amount of (or accelerate the payment or vesting of) any
beneﬁt or amount payable under, any employee beneﬁt plan or any other
contract, agreement, commitment, arrangement plan or policy providing
for compensaan or beneﬁts to any former, present or future director,
ofﬁcer or employee of such party or any of its subsidiaries, other than
run on insurance for directors and ofﬁcers for six years;

(B) increase (or enter into any commitment or arrangement to increase) the
compensation or beneﬁts, or otherwise to extend, expand or enhance the
engagement, employment or any related rights, of any former, present or
future director, ofﬁcer, employee or consultant of such party or any of its
subsidiaries;

(C) except as agreed to by the parties, whether through its board of directors
or otherwise, accelerate the vesting of any unvested stock options of
accelerate the release of, or the expiry date of any hold period relating to,
as applicable, any Banks Shares or Arapahoe Common Shares, or
otherwise amend, vary or modify any plans or the terms of any stock
option; or

(D) adopt, establish, enter into or implement any employee beneﬁt plan,
policy, severance m- termination agreement providing for any form of
beneﬁts or other compensation to any former, presmt or future director,
ofﬁcer or employee of such party or any of its subsidiaries or amend any
employee beneﬁt plan, policy, severance or termination agreement.

’ (v) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, amend or propose to
amend its Charter Documents.

(vi) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, pay. discharge. satisfy.
compromise or settle any material claims or material liabilities prior to the same
being due.

(vii) except as required by applicable Laws, it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its
Subsidiaries to, enter into, terminate or waive any provision of, exercise any
material option or relinquish any material contractual rights under, or modify in
any material respect any material contract, agreement, guarantee, lease
commitment or arrangement.

CAL Library:367Z3.l0


.40.

(viii) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make any changes to the
existing accounting practices, methods and principles relating to such party or
any Subsidiary of such party except as required by Law or by Canadian generally

7 accepted accounting principles as advised by such party’s or such Subsidiary’s
regular independent accountants, as the case may be.

(ix) it shall not. nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make or rescind any
material tax election.

(x) it shall not nor shall it permit any Subsidiary to. (a) enter into any conﬁdentiality
or standstill agreement (other than in respect of conﬁdentiality agreements
entered into in the ordinary course of business), or (b) amend or release any third
party from its obligations or grant any consent under, any conﬁdentiality or
standstill provision or fail to frilly enforce any such provision.

(xi) it shall not1 nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to. take or fail to take any
action which would cause any of such party’s representations or warranties
hereunder to be untrue or would be reasonably expected to prevent or materially
impede, interfere with or delay the Amalgamation.

(xii) it shall not, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, agree in writing or
otherwise to take any of the actions as destn'ibed above in clauses (ii) through
(xi).

(b) Each of Banks and Arapahoe shall promptly advise the other party in writing:

(i) of any event, condition or circumstance that might be reasonably expected to
cause any representation or warranty of such party contained in this Agreement
to be untrue or inaccurate on the Effective Date (or, in the case of any
representation or warranty made as of a speciﬁed date, as of such speciﬁed date);

(ii) of any Material Adverse Effect on such party or any event, occurrence or
development which would be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse

Effect on such party; and

(iii) of any material breach by such party of any covenant1 obligation or agreement
contained in this Agreement

7 (c) Each of Banks and Arapahoe shall use its reasonable best efforts to, and shall use its
reasonable best efforts to cause its Subsidiaries to, perform all obligations required to be
performed by such party or any of its Subsidiaries under this Agreement, cooperate with
the other party hereto in connection therewith, and do all such other acts and things as
may be necessary or desirable in order to consummate and make effective, as soon as
reasonably practicable, the transactions contemplated in this Agreement and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each of Banks and Arapahoe shall:

(i) use reasonable best efforts to satisfy or cause to be satisﬁed as soon as reasonably
practicable all the conditions precedent that are set forth in Article 8 hereof;

CAL nmamzam


. 41 .

(ii) apply for and use reasonable best efforts to obtain as promptly as practicable. all
Appropriate Regulatory Approvals relating to such party or any of its
Subsidiaries and, in doing so, to keep the other party hereto reasonably informed

' as to the status of the proceedings related to obtaining the Appropriate
Regulatory Approvals, including providing such other party with copies of all
related applications and notiﬁcations, in draft form, in order for such other party
to provide its reasonable comments;

(iii) use reasonable best efforts to comply promptly with all requirements which
applicable laws may impose on such party or such party’s Subsidiaries with
respect to the transactions contemplated hereby;

(iv) use reasonable best efforts to defend all lawsuits or other legal, regulatory or
other proceedings to which it is a party challenging or affecting this Agreement
or the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby;

(v) use reasonable best eﬁorts to have lifted or rescinded any injunction or
restraining order or other order which may adversely affect the ability of the
parties to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby;

(vi) effect all necessary registrations. ﬁlings and submissions of information required
by Govemmentul Entities from such party or any of such party‘s Subsidiaries in
connection with the transactions contemplated hereby; and

(vii) use reasonable best efforts to obtain all waivers, consents and approvals from
other parties to loan agreements, leases or other contracts required to be obtained
by such party or any of such party’s Subsidiaries to consummate the transactions
contemplated hereby which the failure to obtain would materially and adversely
affect the ability of such party or such party’s Subsidiaries to consummate the
transactions contemplated hereby.

Section 7.2 Covenants of Banks.

(:1) Subject to Section 9.3, the board of directors of Banks shall recommend to the Holders of
Banks Shares the approval of the Banks Amalgamation Resolution.

(1:) Subject to Section 9.3, Banks shall, at the request and cost of Arapahoe, solicit from the

7 Holders of Banks Shares proxies in favour of approval of the Banks Amalgamation

Resolution.

(c) Subject to Section 9.3, Banks shall not adjourn, postpone or cancel (or propose
adjournment, postponement or cancellation of) the Banks Meeting without Arapahoe’s
prior written consent except as required by Laws or, in the case of adjournment, as may
be required by the Holders of Banks Shares as expressed by majority resolution.

(d) Without the prior written consent of Arapahoe, not to be unreasonably withheld, Banks
shall not make any payments or otherwise satisfy Employee Obligations or create any
new Employee Obligations other than run on insurance for directors and officers.

CALLibnry:36723.lO


. 42 _

(e) Banks hereby agrees until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of this
Agreement pursuant to Article 9 not to, and to cause Trinity not to, initiate, propose,
assist or participate in any activities or solicitations in opposition to or in competition
with the Amalgamation, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, not to
induce or attempt to induce any other person to initiate any shareholder proposal or
“takeover bid," exempt or otherwise, within the meaning of the Securities Act, for
securities of Banks or Trinity, nor to undertake any transaction or negotiate any
transaction which would be or potentially could be in conﬂict with the Amalgamation
and not to take actions of any kind which may reduce the likelihood of success of the
Amalgamation, except as required by statutory obligations.

Section 73 Oovenanm of Arapahoe.

(a) Arapahoe shall appoint Barry Lee to the board of directors of Arapahoe on the Effective
Date or as soon as reasonably possible thereafter and shall appoint one other nominee
identiﬁed by Banks and agreed to by Arapahoe that shall be “independent” as deﬁned
under Securities Laws.

(b) Arapahoe shall approve the Newco Amalgamation Resolution.

(0) Subject to the ﬁduciary obligations of the board of directors of Arapahoe and other
applicable laws, Ampahoe shall use, following the Effective Date, its ﬁnancial resources
primarily in the development of the Amalco business.

(d) Arapahoe agrees until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of this
Agreement pursuant to Article 9 it shall not permit Newco to sell, pledge, encumber,
lease (whether such lease is an operating or capital lease) or otherwise dispose of any
assets.

(e) Arapahoe agrees until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of this

' Agreement pursuant to Article 9 it shall not permit Newco to, make or commit to make
any capital expenditures (including capital lease obligations) without the written consent
of Banks.

(0 Arapahoe agrees until the earlier of the Effective Date and the termination of this
Agreement pursuant to Article 9 not to, and cause Newco not to, initiate, propose, assist
or participate in any activities or solicitations in opposition to or in competition with the
Amalgamation, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, not to induce or
attempt to induce any other person to initiate any shareholder proposal or “takeover bid,“
exempt or otherwise, within the meaning of the Securities Act, for securities of Arapahoe
or Newco, nor to undertake any transaction or negotiate any transaction which would be
or potentially could be in conﬂict with the Amalgamation and not to take actions of any
kind which may reduce the likelihood of success of the Amalgamation, except as required
by statutory obligations,

CAL Library:36723.lD


. 43 .

(g) Both prior and following the Effective Date, Arapahoe shall use its commercially
reasonable best efforts to conduct and complete an equity ﬁnancing for proceeds of $10
million.

(h) Arapahoe shall effect an amalgamation with Amalco as soon as reasonably practicable
(with reference to tax advice) following the Effective Time.

(i) Arapahoe shall honour the anti-adjustment provisions set out in the Banks Warrants and
the Banks Pre-Amalgamation Options.

(j) Arapahoe shall pay all amount outstanding to Quest Capital Corp. under the loan
agreement dated March 11, 2005 as soon as reasonably practicable and in any event prior
to the Effective Date.

Section 7.4 Access to Information.

(a) Subject to Subsection 7.40)) and applicable Laws, upon reasonable notice to an ofﬁcer of
such party, each of Banks and Arapahoe shall (and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to)
afford the ofﬁcers, employees, counsel, accountants and other authorized representatives
and advisors (“Representatives”) of the other party access, during normal business hours
from the date hereof and until the earlier of the Effective Date or the termination of this
Agreement. to its properties, books, contracts and records as well as to its management
personnel; provided that such access shall be provided on a basis that minimizes the
disruption to the operations of such party. During such period, each of Banks and»
Arapahoe shall (and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to) furnish promptly to the other
party all information concerning such party’s business, properties and personnel as the
other party may reasonably request.

(b) The Arapahoe Parties and Banks acknowledge that certain information received pursuant
to Subsection 7.4(a) will be non-public or proprietary in nature and that such parties shall
not disclose such information to third parties without the prior written consent of the
other party unless required to do so by Law.

(c) For the purposes of allowing Banks and Arapahoe to review the assets, premises,

7 business and ﬁnancials of each other so as to enable them to determine if there are any
facts relating to the assets and business of the other which, iflcnown, would cause them to
elect not to proceed with the Amalgamation, each of Banks and Arapahoe hereby permit
the other to conduct up to and including 4:30 pm on the third Business Day following
the delivery to Banks” legal counsel of the corporate minute book for Crazy Horse
Energy Ltd, in the case of the due diligence review being conducted by Banks, and the
third Business Day following the delivery by Banks to Arapahoe of the audited
comparative ﬁnancial statements of Banks as at and for the year ended April 30, 2005 in
the case of the due diligence review being conducted by Arapahoe (such periods referred
to as the "Due Diligence Period"), such investigations as they may deem reasonably
necessary or advisable in order to ensure that each of the representations, warranties,
covenants and agreements of Banks and Arapahoe as set out in this Agreement are true
and correct on the Effective Date. provided however, that Banks and Arapahoe shall be

CALLihrsryﬁﬂleﬂ


_ 44 _

allowed to extend the Due Diligence Period for up to an additional ﬁve Business Days,
upon written notice pursuant to the terms hereof, if in the opinion of Banks or Arapahoe,
as the case may be, acting reasonably, it has not received sufﬁcient information from the
other party to conﬁrm its decision to enter into this Agreement or if as a result of its due
diligence additional information and investigation is required. In the event that the Due
Diligence Period is extended pursuant to the above, the Effective Date shall be changed
to a date agreed to by Banks and Ampahoe, to be not later than October 15, 2005.

(d) In the event Banks’ board of directors are not satisﬁed with the results or findings of
Banks’ review of the business. premises, assets and ﬁnancials of Arapahoe, Banks shall
provide to Arapahoe before the expiration of the applicable Due Diligence Period written
notice signed by an ofﬁcer of Banks indicating same (the "Banks Due Diligence
Notice").

(e) In the event Arapahoe’s board of directors are not satisﬁed with the results or ﬁndings of
Arapahoe’s review of the business, premises, assets and ﬁnancials of Banks, Arapahoe
shall provide to Banks before the expiration of the applicable Due Diligence Period
written notice signed by an ofﬁcer of Arapahoe indicating same (the "Arapahoe Due
Diligence Notice").

Section 75 Closing Matters. .

(a) The completion of the transactions contemplated under this Agreement shall be closed at
the ofﬁces of Arapahoe’s counsel, Davis & Company LLP, 3000 Shell Centre, 400 - 4‘“
Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 014, at 10:00 am. (Calgary time) (the "ﬁne of
Closing") on or before the second Business Day following the approval of the Banks
Ama gamation Resolution or on such other date or at such other time and place as the
parties may agree.

(b) Each of the Arapahoe Parties and Banks shall deliver, at the Time of Closing, such
customary certiﬁcates, resolutions and other closing documents as may be required by the
other parties hereto, acting reasonably. For greater certainty, Banks and Arapahoe shall
also deliver evidence that all regulatory and TSXV approvals have been obtained, and
Banks shall deliver an executed copy of a resignation and mutual release of all of the
employees, if any, ofﬁcers and directors of Banks other than Barry Lee as a director of

. Banks, all without payment or liability to the Arapahoe Parties or Banks.
ARTICLE 8
CONDITIONS
Section 8.1 Mutual Conditions Precedent
The respective obligations of the Arapahoe Parties and Banks to complete the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement and to ﬁle the Articles of Amalgamation for acceptance by the Registrar
to give effect to the Amalgamation shall be subject to the satisfaction of each of the following conditions
at or prior to the Effective Date;
catubmyzssmio


. 45 _

(a) the Banks Amalgamation Resolution shall have been approved by not less titan two-thirds
(2/35) of the votes cast by Holders of Banks Shares at the Banks Meeting in accordance
with applicable Laws;

(b) the Nev'Jco Amalgamation Resolution shall have been approved by Arapahoe in
accordance with applicable Laws and this Agreement;

(c) the TSXV shall have approved the issuance by Arapahoe of the Arapahoe Ama gamation
Options in connection with the completion of the Amalgamation on the terms and
conditions of the Arapahoe Stock Option Plan;

(d) the TSXV shall have conditionally approved the listing thereon of the Arapahoe Common
Shares (i) to be issued pursuant to the Amalgamation as of the Effective Date, (ii)
issuable upon exercise of the Arapahoe Amalgamation Options granted in accordance
with this Agreement, and (iii) issuable upon exercise of the Banks Options and the Banks
Warrants;

(c) all other Appropriate Regulatory Approvals shall have been obtained or received from the
Persons having jurisdiction in the circumstances, and all other applicable regulatory
requirements and conditions shall have been complied with. the failure to obtain which
would, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe,
Banks or Amalco after the Effective Time;

(i) there shall not be in force any order or decree restraining or enjorn‘ 1n' g the consummation,
of the transactions contemplated under this Agreement and there shall be no proceeding,
whether of a judicial or administrative nature or otherwise, in progress that relates to or

results from the transactions contemplated under this Agreement that would, if
successful, result in an order or rulin' g that would preclude completion of the transactions
contemplated under this Agreement in accordance with the terms and conditions hereof
or thereof;

(g) there shall not exist any prohibition at Law against the completion of the Amalgamation;

r (h) none of the consents, orders, regulations or approvals contemplated herein shall contain
terms or conditions or require undertakm‘ gs or security deemed unsatisfactory or
unaccepmble by any of the parties hereto acting reasonably; and

(i) this Agreement shall not have been terminated under Article 9.

The foregoing conditions are for the mutual beneﬁt of the Arapahoe Parties and Banks and-may

be waived in writing, in whole or in part, by the Arapahoe Parties and Banks at any time.
CALUbr-aryﬂﬂBJO


. 46 .
Section 8.2 Additional Conditions Precedent to the Obligations of the Arapahoe Parties.

The obligations of the Arapahoe Parties to complete the transactions contemplated hereby and the
obligation of Newco to ﬁle the Articles of Amalgamation jointly with Banks and such other documents as
are required to be ﬁled under the YBCA for acceptance by the Registrar to give effect to the
Amalgamation shall also be subject to the satisfaction of each of the following conditions at or prior to the
Effective Date or such other time as is speciﬁed below:

(:1) Banks shall have performed or complied with. in all material respects, each of its
obligations, covenants and agreements hereunder to be perde and complied with by
it on or before the Effective Time and Banks shall provide to Arapahoe a Certiﬁcate of
two senior ofﬁcers certifying such compliance and Banks shall have no hrowledge to the
contrary;

(h) each of the representations and warranties of Banks under this Agreement (which for
purposes of this clause (b) shall be read as though none of them contained any Material
Adverse Effect or other materiality qualiﬁcation), shall be true and correct in all respects
on the date of this Agreement and as of the Effective Date as if made on and as of such
date except: (i) for such representations and warranties made as of a speciﬁed date, which
shall be true and correct as of such speciﬁed date, (ii) as affected by transactions
contemplated or permitted by this Agreement; or (iii) where the failure of such
representations and warranties in the aggregate to be true and correct in all respects
would not be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks or Trinity;

(c) since the date of this Agreement, there shall have been no Material Adverse Change with’
respect to Banks or Trinity or any event, occurrence or development, including the
commencement of any action. suit or other legal proceeding which would be reasonably
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Banks or Trinity;

(d) Arapahoe shall have received a certiﬁcate of Banks addressed to the Arapahoe Parties
and dated the Effective Date, signed on behalf of Banks by two senior executive ofﬁcers
of Banks, conﬁrming that the conditions in Subsections 8.2(a), (b), (c) and (e) have been
satisﬁed;

(e) Arapahoe shall have received a certiﬁcate of Banks addressed to the Arapalroe Parties

’ and dated the Effective Date, signed on behalf of Banks by two senior executive ofﬁcers
of Banks, confirming that the Banks’ Debt as at such date does not exceed $2.6 million
and that the legal fees. disbursements and associated taxes of Banks legal counsel for the
Amalgamation and all matters related thereto does not exceed $120,000;

(t) the audited comparative ﬁnancial statements of Banks as at and for the year ended
April 30. 2005 shall not have disclosed a Material Adverse Change in respect of Banks;

(g) on the date hereof, Arapahoe shall have received from Banks Lock-up Agreements, duly
executed by each Banks Principals in respect of all Banks Shares and Banks Pre»
Amalgamation Options owned by such person, directly or indirectly, or over which
control or direction is exercised by such person which shall, in the aggregate, represent

CAL lime/36723.10


_ 47 _
not less than 13% Banks Shares issued and outstanding and the Banks Shares issuable
upon exercise of Banks Pro-Amalgamation Options as of the date hereof:

(h) Holders of not more than 25% of the issued and outstanding Banks Shares shall have
exercised Banks Dissent Rights;

(i) Arapahoe shall not have delivered to Banks the Arapahoe Due Diligence Notice prior to
the expiration of the Due Diligence Period;

(j) since the date of this Agreement, no action, suit or proceeding shall have been taken
before or by any Governmenml Entity or by any private Person (including, without
limitation, any individual, corporation, ﬁrm, group or other entity or by any elected or
appointed public ofﬁcial in Canada or elsewhere against Banks or Trinity) (whether or
not purportedly on behalf of Banks) that would, if successful, have a Material Adverse
Effect on Banks or Trinity, in the sole discretion of Arapahoe, acting reasonably;

(k) there shall not be any action takenY any Law enacted, entered, enforced or deemed
applicable by any Governmental Entity or pending or threatened any suit. action or
proceeding by any Governmental Entity in connection with the grant of any Appropriate
Regulatory Approval or otherwise, (i) seeking to prohibit or restrict the acquisition by
Arapahoe or Newco of any Banks Shares, (ii) challenging or seeking to restrain or
prohibit the consummation of the Amalgamation or seeking to obtain from Banks,
Arapahoe or Newco any damages that are material in relation to Banks. (iii) seeking to
prohibit or materially limit the ownership or operation by Arapahoe or Newco of any» -
material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or any of their respective
Subsidiaries or to compel Arapahoe or Neweo to dispose of or hold separate any material
portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or Amalco or any of their respective
Subsidiaries, as a result of the Amalgamation, (iv) seeking to prohibit Arapahoe or
Newco from effectively controlling in any material respect the business or operations of
Banks. or (v) imposing any condition or restriction that in the judgment of Arapahoe,
acting reasonably, would be materially burdensome to the ﬁxture operations or business
of any business unit of Arapahoe or Amalco after the Effective Time;

(1) the board of directors and shareholders of Banks shall have adopted all necessary

7 resolutions, and all other necessary corporate action shall have been taken by Banks to
permit the consummation of the Amalgamation and the transactions contemplated herein;

(in) all consents and approvals under any agreements to which Banks may be a party or
bound which are required or necessary or desirable for the completion of the transactions
contemplated under this Agreement, including the consent of Banks’ bankers, shall have
been obtained or received;

(11) Banks shall not, from the date hereof and up to completion of the Amalgamation. without
prior written consent of Arapahoe, have effected or taken any steps to effect any
transaction or action out of the ordinary course of business;

CAL umscmio


. 43 .
(0) Banks shall not have and shall not have caused Trinity to make any capital expenditures
except as outlined in Banks’ capital budget provided to Arapahoc in an amount exceeding
$75,000 in the aggregate or $30,000 on an individual basis, except as otherwise agreed in
writing by Arapahoe;
(p) Banks shall not agree to pay and shall not make any agreement for Arapahoe to pay any
fees or commissions of brokers, ﬁnders or other third parties employed in connection
with the Amalgamation other than required to Woodstone Capital Inc.; and
(q) the post Amalgamation capitalization of Arapahoe being in accordance with the
capitalization table attached hereto as Schedule “E”.
The foregoing conditions are for the beneﬁt of the Arapahoe Parties and may be waived in
writing. in whole or in part, by the Arapahoe Parties at any time.
Section 83 Additional Conditions Precedent to the Obligations of Banks.

The obligations of Banks to complete the transactions contemplated hereby and the obligation of
Banks to ﬁle Articles of Amalgamation jointly with Newco and such other documents as are required to
be ﬁled under the YBCA for acceptance by the Registrar to give effect to the Amalgamation shall also be _
subject to the satisfaction of each of the following conditions at or prior to the Effective Date or such
other time as is speciﬁed below:

(a) the Arapahoe Parties shall have performed or complied with, in all material respects, each,
of their obligations, covenants and agreements hereunder to be performed and complied
with by them on or before the Effective Time; >

(b) each of the representations and warranties of the Arapahoe Parties under this Agreement
(which for purposes of this clause (b) shall be read as though none of them contained any
Material Adverse Effect or other materiality qualiﬁcation), shall be true and correct in all
respects on the date of this Agreement and as of the Effective Date as if made on and as
of such date except: (i) for such representations and warranties made as of a speciﬁed
date, which shall be true and correct as of such speciﬁed date, (ii) as affected by
transactions contemplated or permitted by this Agreement; or (iii) where the failure of

r such representations and warranties in the aggregate to be true and correct in all respects
would not be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe;

(c) since the date of this Agreement, there shall have been no Material Adverse Effect with
respect to Arapahoe or Arapahoe Subsidiaries or any event, occurrence or development
which would be reasonably expected to have a Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe or
Arapahoe Subsidiaries;

(d) Banks shall have received a certiﬁcate of each of Arapahoe and Newco addressed to
Banks and dated the Effective Date, signed on behalf of each of Arapahoe and Newco by
two senior executive ofﬁcers of Arapahoe and Newco, certifying that the conditions in
Subsections 8.3(a), (b), (c) and (e) have been satisﬁed;

CAL DWI36723.10


_ 49 _

(e) since the date of this Agreement, no action, wit or proceeding shall have been taken
before or by any Governmental Fartity or by any private Person (including, without
limitation, any individual, corporation, ﬁrm, group or other entity) or by any elected or
appointed public oﬂicial in Canada or elsewhere against Arapahoe or Newco) (whether
or not purportedly on behalf of Arapahoe or Newco ) that would, if successful, have a
Material Adverse Effect on Arapahoe or Newco, in the sole discretion of Banks, acting
reasonably;

(f) there shall not be any action taken, any Law enacted, entered, enforced or deemed
applicable by any Governmental Entity or pending or threatened any suit, action ’or
proceeding by any Governmental Endty in connection with the grant of any Appropriate
Regulatory Approval or otherwise, (i) seeking to prohibit or restrict the acquisition by
Arapahoe or Newco of any Banks Shares, (ii) challenging or seeking to restrain or
prohibit the consummation of the Amalgamation or seeking to obtain from Banks,
Arapahoe or Newco any damages that are material in relation to Arapahoe or Newco, (iii)
seeking to prohibit or mata'ially limit the ownership or operation by Arapahoe or Newco
of any material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or any of their
respective Subsidiaries or to compel Arapahoe or Newco to dispose of or hold separate
any material portion of the business or assets of Arapahoe, Banks or Amalco or any of
their respective Subsidiaries, as a result of the Amalgamation, (iv) except for the TSXV
imposing escrow conditions, seeking to impose limitations on the ability of Arapahoe or
Newco to acquire or hold, or exercise full rights of ownership of, any Banks Shares or
shares of Amalco, including the right to vote the Banks Shares or shares of Amalco
purchased by it on all matters properly presented to the shareholders of Banks or Amalco,
(v) seeking to prohibit Arapahoe or Newco from effectively controlling in any material
respect the business or operations of Banks, or (vi) imposing any condition or restriction'
that in the judgment of Banks, acting reasonably, would be materially burdensome to the
future operations or business of any business unit of Arapahoe or Amalco after the
Effective Time;

(g) the boards of directors of Arapahoe and Newco shall have adopted all necessary
resolutions, and all other necessary corporate action shall have been taken by Arapahoe
and Newco, to permit the consummation of the Amalgamation;

(h) Banks shall not have delivered to Arapahoe the Banks Due Diligence Notice prior to the
expiration of the Due Diligence Period;

(i) all consents and approvals under any agreements to which Arapahoe or Newco may be a
party or bound which are required or necessary or desirable for the completion of the
transactions contemplated under this Agreement shall have been obtained or received;

(j) the post Amalgamation capitalization of Arapahoe being in accordance with the
capitalization table attached hereto as Schedule “E”;

(k) Banks receive evidence satisfactory to it, acting reasonably, that Arapahoe Shares issued
upon Amalgamation shall be freely undeable under Canadian Securities Laws;

CAL Library:36773.10


. 5o .

(l) the Arapahoe Parties shall not, from the date hereof and up to completion of the
Amalgamation, without the prior written consent of Banks. have effected or taken any
steps to effect:

(i) 5 change in its articles, by-Laws or oonatating documents;

(ii) a subdivision, consolidation or other change to its outstanding shares (except as
speciﬁcally contemplated herein);

(iii) the payment of any dividend;

(iv) any transaction or action out of the ordinary course of business (except as
speciﬁcally contemplated herein); or

(v) the sale or purchase of any asset or the entering into of any transaction (except as
speciﬁcally contemplated haein); and

(m) the Ampahoe Parties shall not agree to pay and shall not make any agreement for the
Arapahoe Parties, upon or following completion of the Amalgamation to pay any fees or
commissions of brokers, ﬁnders or other third parties employed in connection with the
Amalgamation.

The foregoing conditions are for the beneﬁt of Banks and may be waived in writing, in whole or

in part, by Banks at any time.
Section 8.4 Merger of Conditions.

The conditions set out in Sections 8.1, 8.2 and 83 shall be conclusively deemed to have been
satisﬁed, waived or released on the ﬁling by Newco and Banks of the Articles of Amalgamation, and such
other documents as are required to be ﬁled under the YBCA for acceptance by the Registrar to give effect
to the Amalgamation and the issuance by the Registrar of a certiﬁcate of amalgamation.

ARTICLE 9
AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION
, Section 9.1 Amendment.

This Agreement may not be amended except by mutual written agreement of the parties hereto;
provided that after approval by the Holders of Banks Shares, no amendment may be made that by Law
requires further approval or authorization by the Holders of Banks Common without such find-let
approval or authorization.

Section 9.2 Termination.

This Agreement may be terminated and the amalgamation abandoned at any time prior to the
Effective Time (notwithstanding any approval of the Amalgamation Resolution by the Holders of Banks
Shares):

CALLibrary:36723.10


_ 51 .

(a) by the mutual written consent of Arapahoe and Banks (without further action on the part
of the Holders of Banks Shares if terminated after the Banks Meeting);

(b) by either Arapahoe or Banks, if there shall be any Law that makes consummation of the
Amalgamation illegal or otherwise prohibited, or if any judgment. injunction, order or
decree of a competent Governmental Entity enjoining Arapahoe or Banks from
consummating the Amalgamation shall be entered and such judgment, injunction, order
or decree shall have become ﬁnal and non-appealable;

(c) by either Arapahoe or Banks, if the Effective Date does not occur on or prior to
September 30, 2005 or such other date as Arapahoe and Banks may agree; provided,
however, that the right to terminate this Agreement under this Subsection 9.2(c) shall not
be available to any party whose failure or whose afﬁliate’s failure to perform any
material covenant, agreement or obligation hereunder has been the cause of, or resulted
in. the failure of the Effective Date to occur on or before such date;

(d) by Banks if the Newco Amalgamation Resolution is not submitted for approval prior to
September 30, 2005 or such later date as may be agreed to in writing by Banks;

(e) by Arapahoe if, (i) the board of directors of Banks fails to recommend or withdraws,
modiﬁes or changes its approval or recommendation of this Agreement and the
Amalgamation, in a manner adverse to Arapahoe, (ii) the board of directors of Banks fails
to afﬁrm its approval or recommendation of this Agreement, the Amalgamation and the
Banks Amalgamation Resolution, within ﬁve (5) Business Days of any written request to
do so from Arapahoe. (iii) the Banks Amalgamation Resolution is not submitted for
approval at the Banks Meeting, or the Banks Meeting is not held prior to September 30,
2005 or such later date to which the Banks Meeting shall have been adjourned or
postponed as may be agreed to in writing by Arapahoe;

(f) by either Arapahoe or Banks, if at the Banks Meeting, the requisite vote of the Holders of
Banks Shares to approve the Amalgamation Resolution shall not be obtained;

(g) by Arapahoe or Banks, by written notice to the other parties. if any of the conditions
precedent set out in Section 8.1 hereof have not been complied with or waived on or

' before the date required for performance thereof; provided, however, that no party may
rely on the failure to satisfy any of the conditions set out in Section 8.1 if the condition
would have been satisﬁed but for a material failure by such party in complying with its
obligations hereunder;

(h) by Arapahoe, by written notice to Banks, if any of the conditions precedent set out in
Section 8.2 hereof have not been complied with or waived on or before the date required
for performance diereof; provided, however, that Arapahoe may not rely on the failure to
satisfy any of the conditions set out in Section 8.2 if the condition would have been
satisﬁed but for a material failure by the Arapahoe Parties in complying with their
obligations hereunder;

CALLihrary236723JO


. 52 .

(i) by Arapahoe, if Banks has breached any of its representations, warranties, agreements or
obligations herein which breach would result in the failure to satisfy one or more
conditions set forth in Subsections 8.2(b) or (c) and such breach is not curable or if
curable; 'is not cured within 20 days after notice thereof has been received by the party
alleged to be in breach;

(j) by Banks, by written notice to the Arapahoe Parties, if any of the conditions precedent set
out in Section 8.3 hereof have not been complied with or waived on or before the date
required for performance thereof; provided, however, that Banks may not rely on the
failure to satisfy any of the conditions set out in Section 8.3 if the condition would have
been satisﬁed but for a material failure by Banks in complying with their obligations
hereunder; or

(k) by Banks, if either of the Arapahoe Parties has breached any of its representations,
warranties, agreements or obligations herein which breach would result in the failure to
satisfy one or more conditions set forth in Subsections 8.3(b) or (c) and such breach is not
curable or if curable, is not cured within 20 days after notice thereof has been received by
the party alleged to be in breach.

Section 93 Termination for Alternative Transaction.

In the event that Banks obtains a bona ﬁde and unsolicited offer from a third party to acquire the
assets or shares of Banks or to enter into a transaction or arrangement which would materially interfere
with the Amalgamation which Banks wishes to pursue (an “Alternative Transaction”), Banks may
terminate this Agreement upon written notice to Arapahoe and the making of a cash payment to Arnpahoe'
in the amount of $500,000, which payment constitutes compensation to Arapahoe and its shareholders for
the non-performance of this Agreement and the fees and expenses associated therewith.

Section 9.4 Effect of Termination.

If this Agreement is terminated in accordance width the provisions of Section 9.2, no party shall
have any further liability to perform its obligations hereunder except for the provisions of this Section 9.4
and Subsections 7.4(b) and Section 10.10; provided that neither the termination of this Agreement nor
anything contained in this Section 9.3 shall relieve any party from any liability for any breach by it of this
Agreement, including from any inaccuracy in its representations and warranties and any non-performance

, by it of its covenants and agreements made herein If it shall be judicially determined that termination of
this Agreement under Section 9.2 was caused by breach of this Agreement, then, in addition to any other
remedies at law or equity for breach of this Agreement, the party so found to have breached this
Agreement shall indemnify and hold harmless the other parties for their out-of—pocket costs, including
fees and expenses of their counsel. accountants, ﬁnancial advisers and other experts and advisors,
incident to the negotiation preparation and execution of this Agreement and related documentation.
CALLihrar-yzﬂﬁﬂllo


. 53 .
ARTICLE 10
GENERAL
Section 10.1 Investigation

Any investigation by a party hereto and its advisors shall not mitigate, diminish or affect the
representations and warranties of any other party to this Agreement.
Section 10.2 Notices.

All notices which may or are required to be given pursuant to any provision of this Agreement
shall be in writing and shall be deemed given when delivered personally, telecopied (which is continued)
or dispatched (postage prepaid) to a nationally recognized overnight courier service with overnight
delivery instructions, in each case addressed to the panicular party at:

(a) in the case of Arapahoe or Newco:

Arapahoe Energy Corporation

2703, 1100 - 8'“ Avenue S.W.

Calgary, Alberta

TZP 3T9

Attention: President

Telecopy number: (403) 920-0043

(b) With a copy to: 7

Davis & Company LLP

3000 Shell Centre

400 - 4Lh Avenue S.W.

Calgary, Alberta

T21> 014

Attention: Daniel Kenney

Teleoopy number: (403) 213—4460
CAL umrynmmo


_ 54 .

(c) in the case ofBanks:

Banks Energy Inc.

c/o FirstMerit Group

Scotia Tower, Suite 2410

RD. Box 11524

650 West Georgia Street

Vancouver, British Columbia

V613 4N7

Attention: President

Telecopy number. (604) 682-5564

With a copy, for information purposes only, to:

Benneu Jones LLP

4500 Bankers Hall East

855 - 2"‘1 Street s.w.

Calgary, Alberta

T2P 4K7

Attention: Noralee Bradley

Telecopy number: (403) 265—7219
or at such other address of which any party may, from time to time, advise the other parties by notice in
writing given in accordance with the foregoing.
Section 10.3 Assets and Liabilities.

Each of Newco and Banks shall contribute to Arnalco all of its assets, subject to its liabilities, as
they exist immediame before the Effective Date. Arnalco shall possess all of the property, rights,
privileges and franchises, as they exist immediately before the Effective Date, and shall be subject to all
of the liabilities, contacts, disabilities and debts of each of the Newco and Banks, as they exist
immediately before the Effective Date. All rights of creditors against the properties, assets, rights,
privileges and franchises of Newco and Banks and all liens upon their properties, rights and assets shall
be unimpaired by the Amalgamation and all debts, contracts, liabilities and duties of Newco and Banks
shall thenceforth attach to and may be enforced against Amalco. No action or proceeding by or against
either of Newco or Banks shall abate or be affected by the Amalgamation but. for all purposes of such

' action or proceeding, the name of Amalco shall be substituted in such action or proceeding in place of the
name of Newco or Banks, as applicable.
Section 10.4 Assignment.

No party may assign this Agreement or any of its rights, interests or obligations under this
Agreement or the Amalgamation (whether by operation of law or otherwise) without the prior written
consent of the other parties.

CALLibmry:36723.10


. 55 _
Section 10.5 Binding Effect.

This Agreement and the Amalgamation shall be binding upon and shall enure to the beneﬁt of the
Arapahoe Parties and Banks and their respective successors and permith assigns.
Section 10.6 Third Party Beneﬁciaries. ‘

Nothing in this Agreement, express or implied. shall be construed to create any third party
beneﬁciaries.

Section 10.7 Waiver and Modiﬁcation.

Banks and the Arapahoe Parties may waive or consent to the modiﬁcation of, in whole or in part,
any inaccuracy of any representation or warranty made to them hereunder or in any document to be
delivered pursuant hereto and may waive or consent to the modiﬁcation of any of the covenants or
agreements herein contained for their respective beneﬁt or waive or consent to the modiﬁcation of any of
the obligations of the other parties hereto. Any waiver or consent to the modiﬁcation of any of the
provisions of this Agreement, to be eﬁective, must be in writing executed by the party granting such
waiver or consent.

Section 10.8 No Personal Liability.

(a) No director, ofﬁcer, employee or agent of either Arapahoe Party or any of their respective
Subsidiaries shall have any personal liability whatsoever to Banks under this Agreement,
or any other document delivered in connection with the Amalgamation on behalf of any
Arapahoe Party.

(b) No director, ofﬁcer, employee or agent of either Banks or Trinity shall have any personal
liability whatsoever to either Arapahoe Party under this Agreement, or any other
document delivered in connection with the Amalgamation on behalf of Banks or Trinity.

Section 10.9 Further Assurances.

Each party hereto shall, ﬁom time to time, and at all times hereafter, at the request of the other

parties hereto, but without further consideration, do all such further acts and execute and deliver all such
7 further documents and instruments as shall be reasonably required in order to fully perform and carry out

the terms and intent hereof.

Section 10.10 Expenses.

Except as contemplated herein, each of Banks and Arapahoe shall pay their own costs and
expenses in connection with the Amalgamation including, without limitation, legal. accounting and
auditing fees, regulatory and exchange fees, meeting and mailing costs and any fees or commissions of
brokers, ﬁnders or other third parties employed in connection with the Amalgamation.

CALlJblm'yEﬂZBJD


. 55 _
Section 10.11 Public Announcements.

The initial press release concealing the Amalgamation shall be a joint press release of Arapahoe
and Banks and thereafter Arapahoe and Banks agree to consult with each other prior to issuing any news
releases or public statements with respect to this Agreement or the Amalgamation, and to use their
respective reasonable best efforts not to issue any news releases or public statements inconsistent with the
results of such consultations. Subject to applicable Laws, each party shall use its commercially
reasonable efforts to enable the other parties to review and comment on all such news releases prior to the
release thereof. The parties agree to issue jointly a news release with respect to this Amalgamation as
soon as practicable following the execution of this Agreement. Arapahoe and Banks also agree to consult
with each other in preparing and making any ﬁlings and communications in connection with any
Appropriate Regulatory Approvals.

Section 10.12 Governing Law; Consent to Jurisdiction.

This Agreement shall be governed by and be construed in accordance with the laws of the
Province of Alberta and the federal laws of Canada applicable therein and shall be treated in all respects
as an Alberta contract Each party hereby irrevocably attorns to the jurisdiction of the courts of the
Province of Alberta in respect of all matters arising under or in relation to this Agreement.

Section 10.13 Entire Agreement

This Agreement, and the other agreements and other documents referred to herein. constitute the
entire agreement between the Arapahoe Parties and Banks pertaining to the subject matter hereof and
supersedes all prior agreements. understandings, negotiations and discussions, whether oral or written,
between the Arapahoe Parties and Banks with respect to the subject matter hereof. 7
Section 10.14 Time of Essence.

Time is of the essence of this Agreement.

Section 10.15 Severability.

If any term or other provision of this Agreement is invalid, illegal or incapable of being enforced
by any rule of law or public policy, all other conditions and provisions of this Agreement shall
nevertheless remain in full force and effect so long as the economic or legal substance of the transactions

7 contemplated hereby is not affected in any manner materially adverse to any party. Upon sudi
determination that any term or other provision is invalid, illegal or incapable of being enforced, the parties
hereto shall negotiate in good faith to modify this Agreement so as to effect the original intent of the
parties as closely as possible in an accepmble manner to the end that transactions contemplated hereby are
fulﬁlled to the extent possible,

CAL ubmy:36723.10


. 57 .
Section 10.16 Counterparts.
This Agreement may be executed in one or more covmterpms, each of which shall be deemed to
he an original but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument.
WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the date
hereinbefote wtitten.
ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION
Per: gsigged! "Jeﬂ ﬁtanden”
Jeff Slanden
President & Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
38659 YUKON INC.
Per: 1sigged) "JdStanden"
Jeff Standen
President & Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
BANKS ENERGY INC.
Per. gsiged “D. Bum Lee"
D. Barry Lee
President ,
CAL umss72110


SCHEDULE “A”
Form of Newco Amalgamation Resolution

BE IT RESOLVED ASA SPECIAL RESOLUTION THAT:

1. The amalgamation of 38659 Yukon Inc. (“Newco”) and Banks Energy Inc. (“Banks”) (the
“Amalgamation") as provided for in and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the
amalgamation agreement (the “Amalgamation Agreement”) dated as of August 9, 2005 among
Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Atapahoe”), Newco and Banks, is hereby approved and
authorized, subject to the approval of the Exchange, all as more particularly described in the
management proxy and information circular of Banks dated August ~, 2005 (the “Circular”),

2. The Amalgamation Agreement, substantially in the form attached to the Circular as Schedule 1,
be and is hereby approved and authorized.

3. Notwithstanding that this resolution has been passed (and the Amalgamation Agreement and the
Amalgamation adopted) by the registered Holders of common shares in the capital of Newco
(“Newco Shareholders”), the Board of Directors of Newco is hereby authorized and empowered
without further notice to or approval of the Newco Shareholders (i) to amend the Amalgamation
Agreement to the extent permitted by the Amalgamation Agreement, and (ii) subject to the terms
and conditions of the Amalgamation Ageement, not to proceed with the Amalgamation.

4. Any director or ofﬁcer of Newco be, and such director or ofﬁcer of Newco hereby is, authorized,
insn'ucted and empowered, acting for, in the name of and on behalf of Newco, to do or to cause to
be done all such other acts and things in the opinion of such director or ofﬁcer of Newco as may
be necessary or desirable in order to fulﬁll the intention of this resolution and the matters
authorized hereby. ,

CAL umzmsro


SCHEDULE “B”
Form of Banks Amalgamation Resolution

BE IT RESOLVED ASA SPECIAL RESOLUTION THAT:

I. The amalgamation of 38659 Yukon Inc. (“Newco”) and Banks Energy Inc. (“Banks”) (the
“Amalgamation") as provided for in and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the
amalgamation agreement (the “Amalgamation Agreement“) dated as of August 9, 2005 among
Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Arapahoe”), Newco and Banks, is hereby approved and
authorized with such restrictions or conditions as may be required by the TSX Venture Exchange
(the “Excha.nge"), subject to the approval of the Exchange, all as more particularly described in
the management proxy and information circular of Banks dated August ', 2005 (the “Circular").

2. The Amalgamation Agreement. substantially in the form attached to the Circular as Schedule 1,
be and is hereby approved and authorized.

3. Notwithstanding that this resolution has been passed (and the Amalgamation Agreement and the
Amalgamation adopted) by the registered holders of Common Shares in the capital of Banks
(“Banks Shareholders”), the Board of Directors of Banks is hereby authorized and empowered
without further notice to or approval of the Banks Shareholders (i) to amend the Amalgamation .
Agreement to the extent permitted by the Amalgamation Agreement, and (ii) subject to the terms
and conditions of the Amalgamation Agreement, not to proceed with the Amalgamation.

4. Any director or ofﬁcer of Banks be, and such director or ofﬁcer of Banks hereby is, authorized,
instructed and empowered, acting for, in the name of and on behalf of Banks, to do or to cause to
be done all such other acts and things in the opinion of such director or ofﬁcer of Banks as may
be necessary or desirable in order to fulﬁll the intent of this resolution and the matters authorized
hereby.

CAL umasmio


SCHEDULE “C”
Banks Principals

D‘ Barry Lee ' '7

Chris Cooper '

Steven Bruk

Les Stach

I Mel Benson

I ohn Land

645893 Alberta Ltd. '

Richard Velhat

632959 Alberta Ltd

(w. ubmy:36723.ln _


SCHEDULE “B”
Form of Lock-Up Agreement
'7 7 Arapahoe Energy Corporation
‘ 2703. 1100s“ Avenue s.w.
Calgary, Alberta T2P 3T9
August 9, 2005
Name of Securityholder
(please print)
Address of Banks Securityholder
Re: Agreement to Vote
In consideration of the entry into of an amalgamation ageement (the "Amalgamation Agreement") dated
as of August 9, 2005 among Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Arapahoe”), Banks Energy Inc. ("Banks")
and 38659 Yukon Inc. (“Newco”) in connection with the business combination of Banks and Arapahoe
and the distribution of Arapahoe Shares to Banks Shareholders pursuant to an amalgamation of Banks and
Newco under applicable corporate law (hereinafter referred to as the "Amalgamation") and other good?
and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufﬁciency of which are hereby acknowledged by the
undersigned), the undersigned holder of securities of Banks (the "Secorityholder") covenants and agrees
with Arapahoe as set forth herein. For greater certainty the Securityholder is executing this agreement in
its capacity as a shareholder. Nothing contained herein shall restrict the Securityholder. if the
Securityholder is a director or ofﬁcer of Banks, from exercising such person's ﬁduciary duties as a
director or ofﬁcer of Banks including as provided in the Amalgamation Agreement
Unless otherwise deﬁned herein capitalized terms shall have the meanings given to them in the
Amalgamation Agreement.
1. Representations and Warranties of the Securityholder
The Secrnityholder represents and warrants to Arapahoe that:

(a) it is the beneﬁcial owner of, or controls, directly or indirectly, or has the irrevocable right
to vote or cause to be voted in respect of the Amalgamation, the number of Banks Shares
set forth opposite the Securityholder's name below (such Banks Shares and any Banks
Shares acquired upon exercise of Banks Options and Banks Warrants collectively
referred to as the "Securityholder's Shares“);

(b) the Securityholder is competent or duly authorized, as the case may be, to execute and
deliver this agreement and this agreement is a. valid and binding agreement enforceable
by Arapahoe against the Securityholder in accordance with its terms, subject to the usual

CALLibr-sry:36713.il)


_ 62 _
exceptions as to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium and other laws
relating to or affecting creditors' rights generally and the availability of equitable
remedies; and

(c) the execution and delivery of this agreement and the fulﬁlment of the terms hereof by the
Securityholder does not and will not result in a breach of any agreement or instrument to
which the Securityholder is a party or by which the Securityholder is contractually bound

2. Representations and Warranties of Arapahoe
Arapahoe represents and warrants to the Secrn'ityholder that

(a) it is duly authorized to execute and deliver this agreement and this agreement is a valid
and binding agreement enforceable by the Securityholder against Arapahoe in accordance
with its terms, subject to the usual exceptions as to bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization, moratorium and other laws relating to or affecting creditors' rights
generally and the availability of equitable remedies; and

(b) the execution and delivery of this agreement and the fulﬁlment of the terms hereof by
Arapahoe does not and will not result in a breach of any agreement or instrument to
which Arapahoe is a party or by which Arapahoe is contractually bound.

3. Covenants of the Securityholder

The Securityholder covenants and agrees with Arapahoe that, until the earlier of (i) the termination of this
agreement as provided for in Section4 hereof, and (ii)the Effective Date of the Amalgamation, the
Securityholder will:

(a) not (except as expressly permitted by this agreement or with the prior written consent of
Arapahoe) sell, assign, transfer or otherwise convey, dispose of, release or resh'ict in any
manner the right to vote in favour of the Amalgamation, or agree to sell assign. transfer,
convey, dispose of or release or restrict in any manner the right to vote in favour of the

e Amalgamation at a meeting of the holders of Banks Shares, any of the Seourityholder's
Shares or any other Banks Shares acquired by the Securityholder prior to the Effective
Date, (except to an afﬁliate of the Securityholder provided that such afﬁliate agrees to be
bound by the terms of this agreement and provided that the Securityholder remains liable
for the performance by such affiliate of all terms and obligations of the Securityholder
hereunder), including, without limitation, pursuant to an offer made by a person other
than Arapahoe or any person acting jointly or in concert with Arapahoe, except as
provided below;

(b) not exercise any shareholder rights or remedies available at common law or pursuant to
the Business Corporations Act (Yukon) or applicable secm-ities laws to delay, hinder,
upset or challenge the Amalgamation;

CALLibr-aryacmio


_ 53 _

(c) promptly notify Arapahoe upon any of Securityholder's representations or warranties
contained in this agreement becoming untrue or incorrect in any material respect during
the period commencing on the date hereof and expiring at the earlier of the Effective
Date and the termination of this Agreement, and for the purposes of this provision. each
representation and warranty shall be deemed to be given at and as of all times during such
period (irrespective of any language which suggests that it is only being given as at the
date hereof); and

(d) vote all of the Semrityholder‘s Shares in favour of the Amalgamation as contemplated by
the Amalgamation Agreement and any other matters presented for the approval of the
holders of the Banks Shares at any meeting thereof (including any adjourned meeting)
called to consider and approve the Amalgamation, which are not inconsistent with the
terms of this agreement or the terms of the Amalgamation, including any amendments
thereto as contemplated herein.

4. Termination
In the event that the Amalgamation Agreement is tem‘dnated in accordance with its terms by either
Arapahoe or Banks, either Arapahoe or the Securityholder may terminate this agreement upon delivery of
notice in accordance with Section 9 hereof.
5. Amendment
Except as provided herein, this agreement may not be amended, altered or supplemented except upon the
execution and delivery of a written amending agreement executed by Arapahoe and the Securityholder;
provided however that Arapahoe, Newco and Banks may amend, modify or supplement the
Amalgamation Agreement in any manner (other than to decrease or change the form of the consideration
to be received by a holder of Banks Shares pursuant to the Amalgamation) not inconsistent with the terms
of this agreement without the delivery of a written amending agreement to this agreement or the
requirement for the consent or approval of the Securityholder, written or otherwise.
6. Breach of Agreement

a Each of the parties recognizes and acknowledges that this agreement is an integral part of the
Amalgamation, that Arapahoe would not enter into the Amalgamation Agreement unless this agreement
was executed, and that a breach by any party of any covenants or other commitments contained in this
agreement will cause the other parties to sustain injury for which it would not have an adequate remedy at
law for monetary damages. Therefore, each of the parties agrees that in the event of any such breach, the
agyieved parties shall be entitled to the remedy of speciﬁc performance of such covenants or
commitments and preliminary and permanent injunctive and other equitable relief in addition to any other
remedy to which it or they may be entitled, at law or in equity, and the ponies further agree to waive any
requirement for the securing or posting of any bond in connection with the obtaining of any such
mjunctive or other equitable relief.
7. Costs and Expenses
CAL unmyzasmio


.64.
Arapahoe and the Securityholder shall each pay its respective legal, ﬁnancial advisory and accounting
costs and expenses incurred in connection with the preparation, execution and delivery of this agreement
and any other costs and expenses whatsoever and howsoever incurred in connection herewith.
8. Notice v
Any notice, document or other communication required or permitted to be given to the parties under this
Agreement shall be in writing and be either hand delivered or faxed (with a following letter) as follows:
(a) to the Seeurityholder at the address and fax number listed on the ﬁrst page of this
Agreement; and
(b) to Arapahoe:

Arapahoe Energy Corporation

2703, 1100 » 8‘“ Avenue S.W.

Calgary, Alberta T2P 2T9

Attention: Chief Executive Ofﬁcer

Fax: (403) 920-0043
9. Applicable Law
This agreement shall be govemed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province of
Alberta and of Canada applicable therein (without regard to conﬂict of laws principles).
10. Fascimile Delivery
Ampahoe and the Securityholder shall be entitled to rely on delivery of a. facsimile copy hereof which
shall be legally effective to create a valid and binding agreement of the Securityholder and Arapahoe in
accordance with the terms hereof.
11. Counterpart Execution
This agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts. each of which when so executed shall be
deemed to be an original and all of which taken together shall constitute one and the same agreement.
12. Entire Agreement
This agreement constitutes the entire agreement and undersmnding between the parties pertaining to the
subject matter of this agreement.
Signature of Witness Signature of Securityholder
on. umasmla


. 65 _

W W
W
W
W
The foregoing is agreed and accepted as of the _ day of August1 2005,

ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION

By: —
(ML ubmyﬁﬂlilo


SCHEDULE “E”
Post Transaction Capitalization of Arapahoe
ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORP
Post Transaction Capiﬂﬂizaﬁon of Arapahoe
ISSUED SHARES Shares
ARAPAHOE
Issued as at December 31, 2004 9,813,714
Issued to Quest Capital Corp 1,181,000
Issued Common Shares 2,500,000
Issued Flow Through Shares 8,823,225
To be issued for Debt 339,910
SUBTOTAL - ARAPAHOE 22,707,849
BANKS
Issued for Banks Energy outstanding shares -
28,644,682 * .50 14,322,341
Issued for Tenax Obligation '
1,616,125 * .50 808,063
POST TRANSACTION ISSUED SHARES M ,
WARRANTS
ARAPAI-IOE
Broker Warrants 1,132,322
BANKS
Warraan 8,196,000 * .50 4,096,500
STOCK OPTIONS
7 ARAPAHOE
Options 1,678,181
BANKS
Options 2,610,000 ‘ .50 1,305,000
POST TRANSACTION FULLY DILU'l‘Iﬂ) SHARES m
CA]. Lima-123m


. 67 .
SCHEDULE “F”
Authorized Share Capiml of Amalcn
TEE CLASSES OF SHARES AND ANY MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SHARES THAT AMALCO
IS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE ARE:
1. An unlimited numher of Common shares, without par value, the holders of which are
entitled:

(a) to receive notice of and to attend and vote at all meetings of shareholders, except
meetings at which only holders of a speciﬁed class of shares are entitled to vote;

0)) to receive any dividend declared by the Corporation on this class of shares; provided that
the Corporation shall be entitled to declare dividends on the Preferred shares, or on any of
such classes of shares without being obliged to declare any dividends on the Common
voting shares of the Corporation;

(c) subject to the rights. privileges, restrictions and conditions attaching to any other class of
shares of the Corporation, to receive the remaining property of the Corporation upon
dissolution in equal rank with the holders of all other Common shares of the Corporation;
and

(d) to the rights, privileges and restrictions norrna 1y attached to common shares; 7

2. An unlimited ninnher of Preferred shares, without par value, which as a class, have
attached thereto the following rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions:

(e) the Preferred shares may from time to time be issued in one or more series, and the
Directors may for from time to time before such issue the number of Preferred shares
which is to comprise each series and the designation. rights, privileges, restrictions and
conditions attaching to each series of Preferred shares including, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, any voting rights. the rate or amount of dividends or the
method of calculating dividends, the dates of payment thereof, the terms and conditions
of redemption, purchase and conversion if any, and any sinking fund or other provisions;

(0 the Preferred shares of each series shall, with respect to the payment of dividends and the
distribution of assets or return of capital in the event of liquidation, dissolution or
winding-up of the Corporation, whether voluntary or involuntary, or any other return of
capital or distribution of the assets of the Corporation amongst its shareholders for the
pinpose of winding up its affairs, be entitled to preference over the voting and non-voting
Common shares and over any other shares of the Corporation ranking by their terms

junior to the Preferred shares of that series. The Preferred shares of any series may also
be given such other preferences, not inconsistent with these Articles, over the Common
shares and any other such Preferred shares as may be ﬁxed in accordance with clause
(2X3): and

CALLibr-ary:36723.l0


_ 53 _

(g) if any cumulative dividends or amounts payable on the return of capital in respect of a
series of Prede shares are not paid in full, all series of Preferred shares shall
participate tamany in respect of accumulated dividends and return of capital.

CAL Limamzsm


APPENDIX B
MORMATION CONCERNING ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION

The following is intended to supplement the information under the heading “Information
Concerning Arapahoe 'Energy Corporation” in the Information Circular, Unless otherwise deﬁned
herein, all capitalized words and phrases used in this Appendix have the meaning given to such words
and phrases in the Glossary to the Information Circular.

Genera]

Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Arapahoe" or the “Corporation”) was incorporated under the
ABCA on January 14, 1997 as 723765 Alberta Ltd. On February 5, 1998, it changed its name to
“Charger Petroleums Inc." On September 15, 1998, its articles were amended to delete the “private
company" provisions and on July 23, 1999, it changed its name to “Charger Energy Inc." On April 11,
2003, it consolidated its outstanding common shares on a 10 for 1 basis and changed its name to
“Arapahoe Energy Corporation”.

Arapahoe has been engaged in the acquisition. exploration, development and production of oil
and natural gas since April 1997. Its common shares were ﬁrst listed on the Alberta Stock Exchange
(now the TSXV) on December 8, 1998.

Pursuant to the terms of an arrangement agreement entered into between Arapahoe and Crazy
Horse Energy Corporation (“Crazy Home"), on February 6, 2004, Arapahoe amalgamated with Crazy
Horse (the "Crazy Horse Amalgamation") and the amalgamated corporation continued under the name
“Arapahoe Energy Corporation" Under the arrangement agreement, the Crazy Horse Amalgamation was
completed on the basis of existing Arapahoe securityholders exchanging three common shares of the
predecessor entity that carried on business as Arapahoe (“Old Arapahoe") securities for one equivalent
security of Arapahoe and existing Crazy Horse securityholders exchanging one Crazy Horse security for
one equivalent security of Arapahoe. The business transactions contemplated by the arrangement
agreement resulted in a reverse takeover of the assets of Old Arapahoe and, as a consequence, historical
ﬁnancial statements of Arapahoe are those of Old Arapahoe, in respect of those periods ended prior to
the Crazy Horse Amalgamation.

Arapahoe is a reporting issuer under the Securities AC1 (Alberta) and the Securities Act (British
Columbia). The Arapahoe Common Shares are listed on the TSXV under the trading symbol “AAO”,

The head ofﬁce of Arapahoe is located at Suite 2703, 1100 — 8‘h Avenue S.W., Calgary. Alberta,
T2P 3T9. Its registered ofﬁce is located at 3000 Shell Centre, 400 — 4‘h Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta,
T2? 014.

Intercorporate Relationships

Arapahoe has two wholly owned active subsidiaries, Terrence Resources Inc. (“Torrence”) and
38659 Yukon Inc. (“38659”), (collectively referred to as the “Subsidiaries”). Torrenee was incorporated
pursuant to the ABCA on October I, 1997. 38659 was incorporated pursuant to the Business
Corporations Act of Yukon on July 29, 2005 for purposes of participating in the Amalgamation.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

Pursuant to Form 51-102175 of National Instrument 51-102 Continuous Disclosure Obligations
which governs the content to be included in this Information Circular, information in respect of Arapahoe
is incorporated by reference in this Information Circular from documents ﬁled with securities
commissions or similar authorities in Canada.

3-!


Copies of the documents incorporated herein by reference may be obtained by an Arapahoe
Shareholder on request prior to the Effective Time without charge from Arapahoe at Suite 2703, 1100 —
8‘“ Avenue SW. Calgary, Alberta, T2P 3T9, telephone (406) 9200040. In addition, the documents can
be obtained through the Internet on the Canadian System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval
(SEDAR) web site at www.sedar.com.

The following documents, ﬁled by Arapahoe with the securities commission or similar
authorities in Canada, are speciﬁcally incorporated by reference in and form an integral part of this
Information Circular:

1. Arapahoe’s material change report related to the Amalgamation dated August 22, 2005 and filed
on SEDAR August 22. 2005;

2. The information under the headings “Statement of Corporate Governance Practices", “Executive
Compensation", “Option Grants During the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2004",
“Aggregated Option Exerciser", "Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity
Compensation Plans” and “Interests of Management and Others in Material Transactions” in
Arapahoe's Notice of Meeting and Information Circular and Proxy Statement dated May 16,
2005 and ﬁled on SEDAR May 24, 2005;

3. The information under the heading “Statement of Reserves Data and Other Oil and Gas
Information” in Arapahoe’s Statement of Reserves Data and Other Oil and Gas Information
effective December 31, 2004 prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and ﬁled on SEDAR May
2, 2005 including the following material changes:

(a) the re-entry of the Blairmore 13-29-23-3 WSM well conducted during July and August,

2005 was unsuccessful. This well has now been abandoned and all reserves attributed to
this property should be removed from the corporate valuation. The reserves attributed to
this property at December 31, 2004 were all probable in nature and were comprised of
3.113 MMscf of natural gas and 85 Mbbls of natural gas liquids;

(b) the Rundle well at 12-13-234 WSM is currently drilling and no results are lmowu at this
date. However, subsequent to December 31, 2004, Arapahoe disposed of a portion of its
interest in this well. This will require that the reserves and revenues reported in the
engineering reports at December 31, 2004 be adjusted to reflect a reduction in working
interest from 30% to 19.25%. All reserves on this prospect are classiﬁed as probable.
Natural gas reserves have been reduced from 4,066 MMscf to 2,609 Wscf and natural

7 gas liquids reduced from 74 Mbbls to 47 Mbbls; and

(c) the Corporation acquired a 100% working interest in 20,000 acres of unproven lands (the
“Saroee Farm-out Lands") located on the Tsuu T‘ina Nation, west of Calgary, Alberta.
The Corporation now has a 75% working interest in these lands (15,600 net acres) at the
Effective Date. As at the Effective Date, the Corporation has 23,300 acres (gross) and
17,601 acres (net) of unproven acreage, all located in Alberta. The Corporation's work
commitments on its unproven acreage are as follows:

(i) the Corporation is required to drill at least two wells per year on the Sarcee
Farm-out Lands.

4. The information contained in the Report of Independent Qualiﬁed Reserves Evaluator or Auditor
effective December 31, 2004 prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and ﬁled on SEDAR May
2, 2005 ;

a-2


St The information contained in Banks‘ Report of Management and Directors effective December
31, 2004 prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and ﬁled on SEDAR May 2, 2005;

6. Arapahoe‘s unaudited comparative ﬁnancial statements for the six months ended June 30, 2005
ﬁled on SEDAR on August 29, 2005.

7. The infmnation under the heading “Management's Discussion and Analysis" in Arapahoe’s
management’s discussion and analysis for the six months ended June 30, 2005 and ﬁled on
SEDAR Augxst 7.9, 2005;

8. Arapahoe’s audited comparative consolidated ﬁnancial statements and the notes thereto for the
year ended December 3 1, 2004 together with the auditor’s report thereon ﬁled on SEDAR on
May 2, 2005,

9. The information under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” in Arapahoe’s
management’s discussion and analysis of the ﬁnancial condition and operations of Arapahoe for
the ﬁnancial year ended December 31, 2004 and ﬁled on SEDAR May 2, 2005 and Arapahoe's
management’s discussion and analysis of the ﬁnancial condition and operations of Arapahoe for
the ﬁnancial year ended December 31, 2003 and ﬁled on SEDAR May 18, 2004.

Financial information related to Arapahoe is provided in Arapahoe’s comparative ﬁnancial
statements and management's discussion and analysis for its most recently completed ﬁnancial year.
Any material change reports (excluding conﬁdential reports), comparative ﬁnancial statements and any
documents of the type referred to in the preceding paragraph ﬁled by Arapahoe with the securities
commission or similar authorities in Canada after the date of this Information Circular and prior to the
Effective Time shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference in this Information Circular.

Any statement contained herein or in a document incorporated or deemed to be
incorporated by reference herein shall be deemed to be modified or superseded for the purposes of
this Information Circular to the extent that a statement contained herein, or in any other

_ subsequently ﬁled document which also is or is deemed to he incorporated by reference herein,
mode or supersedes that statement. The modifying or superseding statement need not state that
it has modiﬁed or superseded a prior statement or include any other information set forth in the
document that it modiﬁes or supersedes. The making of a modifying or superscding statement
shall not be deemed an admission for any purposes that the modiﬁed or superseded statement,
when made, constituted a misrepresentation, an untrue statement or a material fact or an omission
to stating a material fact that is required to he stated or that is necessary to make a statement that

r is not misleading in light of the circumstances in which it was made. Any statement so modiﬁed or
superseded shall not he deemed, except as so modiﬁed or superseded, to constitute a part of this

Information (ﬁr-cular.

BUSINESS OF ARAPAHOE

General
Arapahoe is engaged in the exploration for, and the acquisition, development and production of,

oil and natural gas reserves primarily in the Province of Alberta.

General Development of the Business

Histm
Prior to the Crazy Horse Amalgamation, Arapahoe was engaged in the acquisition, exploration, -

development and production of oil and natural gas. Upon the acquisition of Terrence in 1997, Arapahoe

became the owner, via Terrence, of a 14.748596 working interest in one producing oil well and a

3-3


290937596 working interest in one suspended oil well, both located in the Drumheller area of southern
Alberta. Arapahoe also owned through Terrence, a 2.2% working interest in a gas well located in the
Zama area of northern Alberta. Production from these three wells is subject to Alberta oil and gas crown
royalties. In addition to. these producing properties, Arapahoe owned an interest in various minor non-
producing properties located in western Canada. These minor properties are either shut-in or not
productive. no value has been assigned to them and they have not been included in further reserve
information and reports.

Effective April 11, 2003, Ampahoe completed a 10 for 1 share consolidation and changed its
name to Arapahoe Energy Corporation. On April 15, 2003, the 01d Arapahoe shares traded on the TSXV
under the symbol “APR” to reﬂect the name change and consolidation. Crazy Horse was incorporated
under the ABCA on April 23, 2001. It was inactive until October 20, 2003 when it entered into a farm-
out agreement concerning farm—out lands on the Tsuu T'ina Nation (the “Sarcee Farm-out
Agreement"). Crazy Horse then entered into an arrangement agreement on November 12, 2003 with
Arapahoe. During its existence, Crazy Horse did not carry on, own or operate a business. Under the
terms of the Sarcee Farm-Out Agreement, Crazy Horse acquired the right to farm-in to project lands
subject to the Sarcee Farm-Out Agreement (the “Same Project Lands”) owned by Extreme Energy
Corporation (“Extreme”) by drilling and completing up to three wells on the properties Ampahoe and
Extreme were related by virtue of having a common director, namely Jeffrey L. Standen. Jeffrey L.
Stauden also beneﬁcially owned 1,039,213 common shares of Extreme.

On February 6, 2004, Arapahoe amalgamated with Crazy Horse and the amalgamated
corporation continued as Arapahoe under the name "Arapahoe Energy Corporation". ,

On July 1, 2004, Arapahoe entered into farm»out option agreements concerning Grouard and
Hotchkiss. Arapahoe did not exercise the options to drill to earn an interest in either of these areas.
Therefore, Arapahoe has no interest or rights to earn an interest in either of the Grouard or Hotchkiss
Areas.

Recent Develgrnents

On March 16, 2005, Arapahoe entered into a farm-out agreement with Tsuu T‘ina Energy
Corporation acquiring a 100% working interest in certain petroleum and natural gas rights underlying the
Sarcee Farm-out Lands located on the Tsuu T’ina Nation west of Calgary, Alberta. Arapahoe is obliged
to drill at least two wells per year on the Sarcee Farm-out Lands.

On March 11, 2005, Quest Capital Corp. (“Quest”) entered into an agreement with Arapahoe,

7 providing Arapaho: with a loan in the principal amount of $2,495,820 with interest accruing on the
amount outstanding at 12% per annum, calculated and compounded monthly (the “Loan Agreement”).
The interest is payable to Quest on the last business day of every month commencing March 31, 2005.
The outstanding balance of the loan, including any accrued interest, is due September 30, 2005.
Arapahoe issued 1,181,000 Arapahoe Common Shares to Quest as additional consideration for the loan
advance and provided Quest with a security interest in all of its assets, including its interest in the Sarcee
Farm-out lands. The loan was used by Arapahoe to acquire the Sarcee Farm-out Lands and for working
capital purposes. As at June 30, 2005, Arapahoe had repaid $1,421,851 of the principal. As at the
Effective Date, the balance owing to Quest is $1,073,969. It is anticipated that prior to the closing of the
Amalgamation, Arapahoe will have repaid all of the principal and accrued interest amounts owed to
Quest.

In April and May of 2005, Arapahoe closed a brokered private placement via three separate
tranches for total gross proceeds of $4,970,451.25. Arapaho: issued 8,823,225 ﬂow-through common
shares at a price of $0.45 per ﬂow—through connnon share and 2,500,000 connnon shares at a price of
$0.40 per common share. Dominick & Dominick Securities Inc. acted as agent and received a total fee

ea


equal to 7% of gross proceeds and broker warrants equal to 10% of the total number of common shares
and ﬂow-through common shares sold.

At June 30, 2005, Arapahoe sold a 25% interest in the Sarcee Farm-out Lands for $833,250 as
well as a 50% interest in these same Lands for $1,666,500. The consideration of $1,666,500 is to be paid
to the Corporation with‘ an instalment of $250,000 on or before September 1, 2005 and the balance
payable before December 31, 2005. The ﬁrst instalment of $250,000 was not made prior to September 1,
2005, resulting in the termination of the sale of the 50% interest in the Sarcee Farm-out Lands. Arapahoe
may sell an additional 25% interest in the Sarcee Farm—out Lands at a later date.

It is Arapahoe‘s intention to conduct a 3D seismic program and drill a minimum of two (2) wells
on the Sarcee Farm—out Lands prior to February 1, 2006.

Subsequent to June 30, 2005, Arapahoe participated for a 25.6% interest in the drilling and
casing of a potential multi zone oil/gas well in the Ferrier Area, Alberta. This well is currently awaiting
completion and further evaluation.

Arapahoe also participated for a 25% interest in the drilling and easing of a potential multi-none
oil/gas well in the Campbell area, Alberta. The well is currmtly awaiting completion and further
evaluation.

Arapahoe also participated for a 25% interest in the failed re-complen'on attempt of a well at 13-
29-23—3 W5M on the Sareee Project Lands. The well has subsequently been abandoned.

Arapahoe is also participating with a 27.5% interest in a Rundle well at 12-13-23-4 W5M that is
currently drilling to test the deeper (apprwdmately 3,300 meter) Mississippian formation in the Sarcee
Project Lands. It is anticipated that the drilling and casing of this well will occur prior to closing of the
Amalgamation.

Stated Business Objectives

The business plan of Arapahoe is to create sustainable and proﬁtable growth in the oil and gas
industry with properties located in the Province of Alberta. To accomplish this, Arapahoe is pursuing an
integrated growth strategy including acquisitions, development and exploration and drilling in Alberta.
Arapahoc will continue to be focused on its exploration and development of drilling programs in Alberta
as it expends available funds. In addition, Arapahoe will pursue further asset or corporate acquisitions of
crude oil and natural gas properties and may seek to enter into joint venture agreements when Arapahoe

r deems it advantageous to do so.

While Arapahoe believes it has the skills and resources necessary to achieve its objectives,
participation in the exploration for and development of commercially viable oil and natural gas producing
properties has a number of inherent risks. See “Risk Factors” on page 13-15.

In selecting exploration and development prospects, management of Arapahoe chooses those that
offer an appropriate combination of risk and economic reward, recognizing that all drilling involves
substantial risk and that a high degree of competition exists for prospects. Going forward, management
believes that the appropriate allocation of risk for such prospects is 50% to high risk projects and 50% to
low and medium risk projects. No assurance can be given that drilling will prove successful in
establishing conunercially recoverable reserves. Arapahoe acquires petroleum and natural gas rights
through Crown land sales and by farming-in to petroleum properties of other oil and natural gas
companies. Arapahoe will endeavor to establish new core areas of operation by following successful
drilling with strategic acquisitions of land, facilities and producing properties where warranted.

3.5


The board of directors of Arapahoe may. in its discretion, approve asset or corporate acquisitions
or investments that do not conform to these guidelines based upon the board’s consideration of the
qualitative aspects of the subject properties including risk proﬁle, technical upside, reserve life. and asset
quality. 7 7
Competitive Conditions

The petroleum industry is competitive in all its phases. See “Risk Factors — Competition" on
page 3-17.

SIGNIFICANT ACQUISITIONS

On February 6, 2004, Arapahoe amalgamated with Crazy Horse and the amalgamated
corporation continued as Arapaboe under the name “Arapahoe Energy Corporation". As a result of the
Crazy Horse Amalgamation, Arapahoe owns all of the right, title and interests in and to the resource
properties of Arapahoe and the rights of Crazy Horse under the Samee Farm-Out Agreement.

On March 16, 2005, Arapahoe acquired the right to earn an interest on the Sarcee Farm-Out
Lands.

TRENDS

There are a number of trends in the oil and gas industry that are anticipated to shape the near
term future of Arapahoe’s business.

Natural gas prices have been relatively volatile over the last 12 months. With the supply and
demand balance for natural gas being extremely tight, the market is experiencing a great deal of elasticity
in pricing due to a number of factors, including weather, drilling activity. declines, storage levels, fuel
switching and demand.

Oil prices are clearly dependent on the world economy and the global supply—demand balance.
The current environment of goo-political unrest has increased prices well above those supported by
current supply~demand balances. While pricing in the future may more accurately reﬂect supply-demand
fundamentals, it would appear that the current tight supply environment is highly sensitive to political
and terrorist risks as evidenced by the risk premium in the current price structure The magnitude of this
risk premium may change over time.

Equity ﬁnancings may become more difﬁcult and selective in the future forcing companies to

. work within existing cash ﬂows and opportunities that can be internally generated. This may result in
further industry consolidation, as companies have to focus on cost savings and operational controls in
order to perform to market expectations.

A ﬁnal trend appears to be the establishment of a number of start-up companies with experienced
management teams that are available as a result of industry consolidation over the past three years. This
may result in greater competition for a number of the smaller corporate and property acquisitions that
will be available.

SELECTED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL INFORMATION

The following tables shows selected ﬁnancial information related to Arapahoe for the periods
indicated. These tables should be read in conjunction with Arapahoe’s ﬁnancial statements for the
respective periods which are ﬁled on SEDAR and incorporated herein by reference.

no


The Pro Forma Fmancr' 'al Statements for Arapahoe aﬂer giving effect to the acquisition of Banks
Energy Inc. as at June 30, 2005 and the six months ended June 30, 2005 and for the year ended December
31, 2004 are contained in Appendix D of the Information Circular.
7 Six months ended June 30 Year ended December 31
2005 2004 2003 2002
Oil and gas revenue 62,428 106,368 0 0
Income 62,428 106,368 0 0
Per share — basic and 0.004 0.011 0.000 0.000
diluted
Net loss (1,040,989) (226,598) 0 0
Per share — basic and 0.070 0.024 0 0
diluted
Capital expenditures (258,527) 2,163,809 0 0
Total assets 10,648,442 2,265,945 0 0
Debt and working capital 3,799,462 (580,668) 0 0
deﬁciency
Shareholders’ equity 5,696,319 1,590,667 0
The following is selected unaudited consolidated ﬁnancial data for the last eight quarters ending
December 31, 2004, in summary form.
__—__Zi’.m+_A—_4
4 3 01 Q4 Q3 02 Q1
Oil and gas revenue 38,816 10,652 29,390 27,510 0 0 0 0
Income 38,816 10,652 29,390 27,510 0 0 0 0
— Per share basic and 0.004 0.001 0.005 0.003 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
diluted
Net earnings (loss) (118,478) (60,045) (90,923) 42,848 0 0 0 0
~ Per share basic and (0.012) (0.006) (0.013) 0.005 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
diluted
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Arapahoe does not currently have any contingent liabilities.
DIVIDEND RECORD AND POLICY
Arapahoe has not declared or paid any dividends on any shares since its incorporation, and does
not foresee the declaration or payment of any dividends on the Arapahoe Common Shares in the near
future. Any decision to pay dividends on the Arapahoe Common Shares will be made by the board of
directors on the basis of Arapahce’s earnings, ﬁnancial requirements and other conditions existing at
such future time and which the Arapahoe directou's consider appropriate in the circumstances.
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE CAPITAL 0F ARAPAHOE
Arapahoe has an authorized capital consisting of an unlimited number of Arapahoe Common
Shares, an unlimited number of non-voting shares and an unlimited number of preferred shares issuable
3-7


in series. Except for meetings at which only holders of another speciﬁed class or series of shares of
Arapahoe are entitled to vote separately as a class or series, each holder of an Arapahoe Common Share
is entitled to receive notice of, to attend and to vote at all meetings of the shareholders of Arapahoe.
Each holder of Arapahoe Common Shares is entitled to one vote for each Arapahoe Common Share held.
Subject to the rights, privileges and conditions attached to any preferred share of Arapahoe, the directors
may from time to time declare a dividend, and Arapahoe shall pay thereon out of money of Arapahoe
properly applicable to the payment of the dividend, a limited dividend payable to the holders of the
Arapahoe Common Shares or the non-voting shares to the exclusion of the holders of the remaining class
of shares, or a general dividend payable to the holders of both the Arapahoe Common Shares and the
I non-voting shares. Subject to the rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions attached to any preferred
shares of Arapahoe in the event of liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of Arapahoe or upon any
distribution of the assets of Arapahoe among its shareholders being made (other than by way of dividend
out of money properly applicable to the payment of dividends) the holders of each of the Arapahoe
Common Shares and the non-voting shares shall be entitled to share equally.
CAPITALIZATION 0F ARAPAHOE

As at the Effective Date, the number of Ampahoe Common Shares issued and outstanding is
22,820,849. This is an increase of 13,007,135 Arapahoe Common Shares from December 31, 2004. In
March 2004, Arapahoe issued 1,181,000 Arapahoe Common Shares to Quest as additional consideration
rmder the loan Agreement and provided Quest with a security interest in all of its assets, including its
interest in the Sarcee Farm-Out Lands. Arapahoe issued 11,323,225 Arapahoe Common Shares due to
the brokered private placement that occurred in April and May 2005. In August 2005, Arapahoe issued
389,910 Arapahoe Common Shares in settlement of debts outstanding at December 31, 2004. In
addition, on August 30, 2005, 113,000 Arapahoe Common Shares were issued in connection with a new
credit facility. Pursuant to the Amalgamation, Arapahoe will issue a maximum of 15,115,404 Arapahoe
Common Shares including 808,063 Arapahoe Common Shares in satisfaction of the Tenax Obligation
and will reserve a maximum of 5,401,500 Arapahoe Common Shares for issue upon exercise of Banks
Options and Banks Warrants.

Arapahoe has covenanted to Banks in the Amalgamation Agreement to use its commercially
reasonable best efforts to conduct and complete an equity ﬁnancing for proceeds of $10,000,000.
Arapahoe intends to conduct one or more private placements at such an issue price as may be permitted
by the policies of the Exchange, resulting in an increased number of Arapahoe Shares being issued and
outstanding. ,

OPTIONS TO PURCHASE ARAPAHOE COMMON SHARES AND STOCK OPTION PLAN

' A total of ten percent (10%) of the Arapahoe Common Shares outstanding from time to time are
reserved for the issuance of stock options pursuant to the stock option plan (the “Plan”) of Arapahoe
dated January 23, 2003. The Plan was most recently approved by the shareholders on June 17, 2005.
The Plan provides that options will be issued pursuant to option agreements (“Option Agreements")
which shall provide for the expiration of such options on a date not later than ﬁve (5) years after the
issuance of such option. Options issued pursuant to the Plan shall have an exercise price determined by
the directors of Arapahoe, provided that the exercise price shaﬂ not be less than the price permitted by
any stock exchange on which the Arapahoe Common Shares are then listed, or other regulatory bodies
having jurisdiction.

Subject to the particular provisions of Option Agreements, options granted under the Plan expire
at the earlier of ﬁve (5) years ﬁcm the date of grant or ninety (90) days from the date the optionee ceases
to be an ofﬁcer, director, employee or consultant of Arapahoe. In the event of death of an optionee,
options held by the estate of such optionee shall expire at the earlier of ﬁve (5) years from the date of
grant or one (1) year from the date of ceasing to be an ofﬁcer, director, employee or consultant of
Arapahoe due to death.

as


As at the Effective Date, the number of Arapahoe Common Shares issuable upon exercise of
issued and outstanding options was 1,678,181 and the number of options remaining available for future
issuance under the Plan was 603,904.

The following table sets forth options granted to directors and Executive Ofﬁcers (as deﬁned
herein) and employees and consultants of Arapahoe and which are outstanding as at the Effective Date.

Market
Value of
Number of Securities
Arapahoe Exercise Underlying
Common Price Per Arapahoe
Shares Arapahne Options at
Group (Number of Under Common Date of
Persons in Group) Option Date of Grant Expiry Date Share Grant
Executive Ofﬁcers 65,834 July 2, 2003 July 2, 2003 $0.75 $0.25“)
(includes Executive 507,347 February 6, February 6, $0.55 $0.60 ‘3’
Ofﬁcers who are also 2004‘” 2009 $043 $040
Dimmrs) (3) 450,000 May 31, 2005 May 30, 2010
Directors (excludes 100,000 February 6, February 6. $0.55 $0.60“)
directors who are 2004”) 2009 $0.43 5042
Executive Ofﬁcers) (2) 200,000 May 31, 2005 May 30, 2010
Employees and 125,000 March 4, 2004 March 4, 2009 $0.55 $0.55
COHSUIIBDIS (7) 230,000 May 31, 2005 May 30, 2010 $0.43 $0.42
Notes:
(1) Fire-Amalgamation Market Value, on a Post-Amalgamation 3-for-1 basis, price would triple.
(2) Pursuant to the Crazy Horse Amalgamation, these options were granted in exchange for
stock options that were previously granted to these individuals by Old Arapahoe aud by
Crazy Horse (the “Old Options").
(3) Trading prices as at February 24, 2004, the date on which Arapahoe Common Shares ﬁrst
traded on the TSXV after reinstatement for trading on February 6, 2004.
PRIOR SALES
The only Arapaho: Common Shares issued by Arapahoe in the 12 months prior to the Effective
’ Data are as follows:
Number of
Arapahoe
Date Securities Issue Price Reason for Issuance
April 21, 2005 1,181,000 $0.25 per Common Consideration for Loan
Common Shares Share Agreement
May 26, 2005 8,823,225 Flow- $0.45 per Flow- Working Capital
Through Through Common
Common Shares Share
May 26, 2005 2,500,000 $0.40 per Common' Working Capital
Common Shares Share
August 29, 2005 100,000 $0.40 Shares for debt
August 29, 2005 289,910 $0.30 Shares for debt
August 30, 2005 113,000 $0.44 New Credit Facility
13-9


PRICE RANGE AND TRADING VOLUMES 0F ARAPAHOE COMMON SHARES
The Arapahoe Common Shares are listed and posted for trading on the TSXV under the trading
symbol “AAO”. The following table sets forth the reported high and low sale prices (which are not
necessarily the closing prices) and the trading Volumes for the Arapahoe Common Shares for the periods
indicated as reported by~sources Arapahoe believes to be reliable. The Arapahoe Common Shares trade
in Canadian dollars.
Price Range (CDN$)
Date High Low Volume
2003
April 1 - June 30 0.28 0.12 35.525
July 1 - Sept. 30 0.36 0.15 243,668
Oct. 1. — Dec. 31 0.30 0.20 88,685
2004
Jan. 1 » Feb 5‘” No Trading No Trading No Trading
Feb 24 — Mar 31“) 0.60 0.45 _ 195,772
April 1 - June 30 0.55 0.30 94,812
July 1 - Sept. 30 0.385 0.21 139,952
Oct 1. 7 Dec. 31 0.45 0.21 488,193
2005
Jan. 1 — March 31 0.45 0.225 1,296,324
April 0.45 0.365 276,471
May 0.46 0.38 252,388 *
June 0.465 0.365 201,985
July 0.50 0.42 217,082
August 064 0.425 1,505,496
Notes:
(1) Arapahoe amalgamated effective February 6, 2004 and the shares listed prior to are for
Old Arapahoe
(2) Old Arapahoe was delisted under the trading symbol “APR” on February 24, 2004 and
the new Arapahoe resumed trading under “AAO” on February 24, 2004,
' ESCROWED SECURITIES
The number of Arapahoe Common Shares held in escrow and the percentage that number
represents of the outstanding securities of Arapahoe as at the Effective Date is as follows:
Designation of Class Nmnber oﬁmﬁw held in Percentage of Clms
Am 1 0e Common Shares 1.695.000 (2)(3) 10%(1)
Notes:
(1) As of the Effective Date, there were 22,820,849 of Arapahoe Common Shares outstanding.
(2) The escrow agent is Compuwmhme Trust Company of Canada.
(3) The escrow ageement was entered into on February 6, 2004.
3.10


February 6, 2004 Escrow Agreement

The release of 2,825,000 of Arapahoe Common Shares held in escrow (the “Escrow Shares”) is
subject to “value escrow" restrictions, as described in the policies of the TSXV, on a pro rata basis and
will occur in tranches over a three year period. Of the 3,766,667 Escrow Shares originally subject to the
Escrow Agreement, 376,667 (or 10%) of the Escrow Shares were released on February 6, 2004, the date
of issuance of the ﬁnal Exchange bulletin announcing completion of the business transactions
contemplated by the Arrangement Agreement (the “Final Exchange Bulletin”), 565,000 (or 15%) were
released on August 6, 2004, and 15% of the Escrow Shares subject to the value escrow will be released
on each of the 12, 18, 24, 30 and 36 month anniversaries of the Final Exchange Bulletin. In the event
that Arapahoe graduates from a Tier 2 issuer to a Tier 1 issuer on the TSXV, the value security release
schedule set out above will be accelerated to that of a Tier 1 value security escrow agreement (that is,
that releases will occun' over an 18 month period rather than the 36 month period set out above). Under a
Tier 1 value security release schedule, 25% of the escrowed shares are released from escrow on each of
the issuance of the Final Exchange Bulletin and each of the 6, 12 and 18 month anniversaries of the Final
Exchange Bulletin.
October 22, 1998 Escrow Agreement

In addition to the above, the additional Escrow Shares held indirectly by Jeffrey L. Standen will
remain subject to the provisions of the Arapahoe Escrow Agreement, an agreement dated October 22,
1998 among Charger Energy Inc. (Old Arapahoe as it then was), Montreal Trust Company of Canada
(Computershare as it then was) and Canaccord Capital Arapahoe ITF Jeffrey L. Standen prepared in
accordance with Form 16 of the Securities Act (Alberm). The Arapahoe Escrow Agreement was
originally executed in conjunction with Old Arapahoe’s initial public offering and the requirements (as
they then were) of the Securities Act (Alberta). Of the 722,540 01d Arapahoe shares originally subject to
the Arapahoe Escrow Agreement, a total of 108,381 Old Arapahoe shares (15%) were released on March
9, 1999 upon satisfactory completion of the distribution of common shares issued pursuant to Old
Arapahoe’s initial public offering prospectus. Sixty percent (60%) or 433,524 Old Arapahoe shares
originally escrowed under the terms of the Arapahoe Escrow Agreement (now 14,451 Arapahoe
Common Shares) were eligible for release at the end of the second, third, fourth and ﬁﬁh years from the
date of the initial public offering prospectus. Twenty-ﬁve percent (25%) or 180,635 Old Arapahoe
shares (now 6,021 Arapahoe Common Shares) are releasable, upon application to the Executive Director
of the Alberta Securities Commission, if Arapahoe satisﬁes the Executive Director that the work program
disclosed in Old Arapahoe’s initial public offering prospectus has been completed. The additional
Escrow Shares will be cancelled in the event they have not been released from escrow by October 22,
2008.

PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDERS

As at the Effective Date, and to the knowledge of the directors and ofﬁcers of Arapahoe, no
person or company beneﬁcially owns, directly or indirectly, or exercises control or direction over, more
than 10% of the issued and outstanding Arapahoe Common Shares. To the lmowledge of the directors
and ofﬁcers of Arapahoe, as of the Record Date, there are no persons, ﬁrms or corporations (other than
securities depositories) beneﬁcially owning, directly or indirectly, or exercising control or discretion over
voting securities carrying mono than 10% of the voting rights attached to any class of voting securities of
Arapahoe. As of the Record Date, the directors and ofﬁcers, as a group, beneﬁcially own, directly or
indirectly and control 1,595,417 Arapahoe Common Shares which represents approximme 7% of the
issued and outstanding Arapahoe Common Shares.

13-11


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
Name, Address, and Security Holdings
The names, municipalities of residence of the directors and ofﬁcers of Arapahoe, their positions
and offices held with Arapahoe, their principal occupations during the past ﬁve years and their
shareholdings as at the Effective Date are as follows:
Common
Shares
Beneﬁcially
Held or
Name’ Age & Current . Controlled at
Mumcfpamy Positions “Papal Quinlan“ the Effective Director Since
of Residence H e] d During Last Five Years Date 0,
Jeffrey President, President of Kinghorn Resources Ltd. a 251,505 ) February 6,
Lawrence CEO and private oil and gas consulting company (1.0%) 2004
Standen ‘2’ Director since 1977; President and Chief Executive
Calgary, AB Ofﬁcer of Extreme Energy Corporation
Arapahoe (T SXV) from September 2002 to
December 2003 and director from August
1996 to December 2003 (TSXV); Director
of Extreme Energy Arapahoe
(Amalgamated) since December 2003;
Director of Centurion Energy Internatiorml
Inc. (a public company listed on the TSE)
and its predecessor company. Canadian 7 -
Leader Energy Inc. from May 1993 to April
1999. May 1997 to May 1998; prior
thereto. President and Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer of Canadian Leader Energy Inc.
_ (TSX) from July 1993 to May 1997.
Mr. Standen is a professional Petroleum
Izndman with in excess of 22 years
experience in Western Canada and
internaticmall .
H. Barry Barrister and Solicitor since 1971; director 1,284,388 February 6,
Hemsworth ‘2’ of numerous public companies. (6%) 2004
7 West
Vancouver. BC
Ross E. Moullon Vice- Professional geologist with over 30 years of 53,524 September 20,
Calgary, AB President, oil and gas industry experience, both (0%) 2004
Exploration domestically and internationally; self
& Director employed geological consultant from May
1996 to present; senior geologist for
Phillips Petroleum Canada Ltd. from April
1984 to Ma 1996.
3—12


Common
Shares
Beneﬁcially
Held or
Name, Age 8: r» '
. . . Ourent . . Controlled at
nugﬁg Positions Dinﬁluiaisgtggz the Effective Director Since
Held 3 Date a)
Michael Director Director of business development of Quest 0 March 11, 2005
Atkinson”) Capital Corp, a publicly traded (TSX) (0%)
Vancouver, BC merchant banking organization from June
2003 to present Prior to joining Quest, Mr.
Atkinson was a Vice-President of Quest
Investment Arapahoe. Mr. Atkinson’s
experience includes over 10 years in the
ﬁnancial services sector as well as an
education in Administrative and
Commercial Studies from the University of
Western Ontario.
Brenda Stanger Chief Certiﬁed Management Accountant with 0 June 1, 2005
Calgary. AB Financial over 20 years of experience working with (0%)
Ofﬁcer companies in multiple economic sectors.
Ms. Stauger has been the President of
Wolfwind Ventures Inc. and its predecessor
company BLS Management Consultants
Ltd. from 1981 to 2005. These were private
companies offering consulting services in r
the ﬁeld of Finance, Accounting, Corporate
Governance and Corporate Structure to
L public and private companies. She has held
the position of Director, Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer, Chief Financial Ofﬁcer and Vice
President Finance in various market sectors
inboth rivate and ublie on I - nies.
Ito—tbs:
(1) The information as to shares beneﬁcially owned, not being within the knowledge of
Arapahoe, has been furnished by the respective nominees.
* (2) Denotes member or proposed member of the Audit Committee.

(3) Includes Arapahoe Common Shares held by Kinghorn Resources Ltd, a private company

connolled by Mr. Standen.

(4) Michael Atkinson is the Director of Business Development of Quest. Quest holds a total

of 1,294,000 Arapahoe Common Shares.

The audit committee of Arapahoe currently consists of Jeffrey L. Standen, H Barry Hemsworth,
and Michael Atkinson. The general function of the audit committee is to review the overall audit plan
and Arapahoe’s system of internal controls, to review the results of the external audit, and to resolve any
potential dispute with Arapahoe‘s auditors.

As at the Effective Date, the directors, ofﬁcers and insiders of Arapahoe, as a group, owned
directly or indirectly, 1,595,417 Arapahoe Common Shares, or approximately 7% of the issued and
outstanding Arapahoe Common Shares. The directors and ofﬁcers also held, in aggregate, 1,373,181
Arapahoe Options as of August 29, 2005, which, if exercised would increase the beneﬁcial ownership of

3-13


the ofﬁcers and directors as a group, to approximately 12% of Arapahoe’s outstanding Arapahoe
Common Shares.

A description of each of the members of Arapahoe‘s management team (including details with
regards to their principal occupations for the last ﬁve years) is as follows:
Jeffrey L. Standen
President, CEO and Director

Mr. Standen (age 51) is President, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and a director of Arapahoe. He is
also the President of Kinghorn Resources Ltd., a private oil and gas consulting company since 1997. Mr.
Stauden was President, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and a director of Extreme, a public oil and gas
exploration and development company listed on the TSXV, since February 1997. He has been a director
of Coyotenet Communication from September 11, 2003 until November 9, 2004. He served as a director
of Cobra Ventures Ltd. from May 24, 2004 to August 31, 2004, the President, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
and a director of Old Arapahoe (TSXV) from April 1997 until February 6, 2004, the President of
Kinghorn Petroleum Corporation (TSXV) from September 1988 to February 1993, a director of
Centurion Energy International Inc. (a public company listed on the TSE) from May 1997 to April 1997
(a director of its predecessor company, Canadian Leader Energy Inc. from May 1993 to April 1999), and
a President, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and a director of Camrex Resources Inc. (a public oil and gas
exploration company listed on the Alberta Stock Exchange) from January 1992 to May 1993. Mr.
Standen is a Petroleum Landman with in excess of 26 years oil and gas industry experience in Western
Canada and internationally. He graduated from the University of Alberta in 1976 with a Bachelor of Arts
degree majoring in Economics and Political Science. Mr. Standeu has not entered into any
conﬁdentiality or non-disclosure agreement.

H. Barry Hemsworth 7
Director

Mr. Hemsworth (age 65) has been practicing securities law in Vancouver for over 30 years and
has been a director and ofﬁcer of numerous public companies. He has been a director of Vault Minerals
Inc. (TSXV) since February 2000 and the President and director of Exchequer Resource Corp. (NEX)
since June 1991, and a director of Tiger Paciﬁc Mining Corp. (NEX) since June 2004. Mr. Hemsworth
served as a director of International Dunlop Resources Inc. (V SE) from June 1998 to October 1999 and
as a director of Mirage Resources Corp. (V SE) from June 1993 to June 1994. Mr. Hemsworth received
both his Bachelor of Commerce and his Bachelor of Laws from the University of British Columbia. Mr.
Hemsworth has not entered into any conﬁdentiality or non-disclosure agreement.

Ross E. Moulton, B.Sc., P. Geol.
’ Vice-President, Exploration and a Director ‘

Mr. Moulton (age 59) is a professional petroleum geologist with over 30 years of oil and gas
industry experience both domestically and internationally. He was formally a geological consultant on
an as—needed basis for Mart Resources Inc., Centurion Energy International Inc., Extreme, Murphy Oil
Corporation, and Devon Canada Corporation (formerly Anderson Exploration Ltd.). Dming the past 10
years, he was a geological consultant for Abacan Resources Corporation on various operations in
Nigeria. Benin, Cameroon (offshore) and Sudan, a geological consultant for Mart Resources Inc. on
acreage acquisitions in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Republic of the Congo. Cabinda-Angola
and Syria, a geological consultant for Mart Resources Inc. on the Tsuu T’ina First Nations Cretaceous
test well, a geological consultant for Centurion Energy International on its production and exploration
operations in Argentina and Colombia, and a geological consultant for Young West Oil and Gas on
Devonian and Mississippian projects on the Tsuu T’ina (Sarcee) First Nations land resulting in two wells
being drilled on the reserve. Prior to that, Ml'. Moulton spent 17 years with Phillips Petroleum Resources
Ltd., Phillips Petroleum Company, and Phillips Petroleum Company Indonesia. Mr. Moulton has not
entered into any conﬁdentiality or non-disclosure agreement.

3.14


Michael Atkinson
Director

Mr. Atkinson (age 32) is the Director of Business Development for Quest. a merchant banking
organization that focuses on providing ﬁnancial services, speciﬁcally bridge loans to small and midcap
companies in North America. Quest's primary expertise is providing asset backed commercial bridge
loans of between Cdn$500,000 and Cdn$20,000.000 to publicly listed companies, generally operating in
industries such as mining, oil and gas, real estate and manufacturing. Mr. Atkinson's experience includes
over 10 years in the financial services sector as well as an education in Administrative and Commercial
Studies from the University of Western Ontario. Mr. Atkinson has not entered into any conﬁdentiality or
non-disclosure agreement.

Brenda Stringer, C.M.A.
Chief Financial Ofﬁcer

Ms. Stanger (age 48) is a Certiﬁed Management Accountant with over 20 years of experience
working with companies in multiple economic sectors, Ms. Stanger has been the President of Wolfwind
Ventures Inc. and its predecessor company BLS Management Consultants Ltd. from 1981 to 2005.
These were private companies offering consulting services in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance, accounting. corporate
governance and corporate structure to public and private corporations. Ms. Stanger was Vice-President,
Finance for Control»F1Corp. from 2001 until 2003. She has held the position of Director, Chief
Executive Ofﬁcer, Chie' f Financial Ofﬁcer and Vice President Finance in various market sectors in both
private and public companies. Ms. Stanger has not entered into any conﬁdentiality or non-disclosure
agreement.

Corporate Cease Trade Orders or Bankruptcies

Other than as disclosed below, no director, ofﬁcer of shareholder holding a sufﬁcient number ort
securities of Arapahoe to affect materially the control of Arapahoe is, or has been within the past ten
years, a director or executive ofﬁcer of any issuer that:

a) while that person was acting in that capacity, was the subject of a cease trade or similar order, or
an order that denied the issuer access to any exemptions under Canadian securities legislation for
a period of more than 30 consecutive days; '

b) while that person was acting in that capacity, was subject to an event that resulted, after the
director or executive ofﬁcer ceased to be a director or ofﬁcer, in the issuer being the subject of a
cease trade or similar order or an order that denied the issuer access to any exemptions under
Canadian sectn'ities legislation for a period of more than 30 consecutive days;

c) while that person was acting in that capacity or within a year of ceasing to act in such capacity
became a banhupt, made a proposal under any legislation relating to banhuptcy or insolvency or
was subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or compromise with creditors or had a
receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold its assets;

or has, within the ten years before the Effective Date, became a banlo'upt, made a proposal under any
legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency or was subject to or instituted any proceedings,
arrangement or compromise with creditors or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to
hold his assets.

A cease trade order was issued by the British Columbia Superintendent of Brokers against
Jeffrey L. Standen for a period of three months from February 22, 1995 to May 24, 1995 for failure to
ﬁle insider reports in a timely manner.

5-15


Since June 1991, Mr. Hemsworth has served as President and a director of Exchequer Resource
Corp., formerly Blackline Oil (“Blackline”), a company listed on the NEX board of the Exchange. In
July 1999, BLackline entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts and Undertaking with the Executive
Director of the Alberta Securities Commission with regards to the dissemination of a magazine article by
Blackline which was deemed to be made while engaging in investor relations activities or with the
intention of effecting a' trade in a security, contrary to subsection 50(1)(h) (as it then was) of the
Securities Act (Alberta). The statement of facts indicated that Blackline had cooperated fully with staff
of the Alberta Securities Commission, had refrained from further distributing the magazine article at
issue, and had undertaken to pay the sum of $1,000 to the Alberta Securities Commission to cover the
costs of the investigation and $4,000 to the Investor Education Fund.
Personal Bankruptcies

No director, ofﬁcer or controlling shareholder of Arapahoe or a personal holding company of any
such person has, within the past ten years, become bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation
relating to bankruptcy or insolvency, or was subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or
compromise with creditors, or had a receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold such person‘s assets.
Penalties or Sanctions

No director, ofﬁcer or controlling shareholder of Arapahoe has been subject to any penalties or
sanctions imposed by a court relating to Canadian securities legislation or by a Canadian securities
regulatory authority or has entered into a settlement agreement with a Canadian securiu‘es regulatory
authority or been subject to any other penalties or sanctions imposed by a court or regulatory body that
would likely be considered important to a reasonable investor in making an investment decision.
Conﬂicts of Interest

Certain directors and ofﬁcers of Arapahoe and its subsidiary are associated with other reporting
issuers or other companies which may give rise to conﬂicts of interest. In accordance with corporate
legislation, directors who have a material interest or any person who is a party to a material contract or a
proposed material contract with Arapahoe are required. subject to certain exceptions, to disclose that
interest and generally abstain from voting on any resolution to approve the contract. In addition, the
directors are required to act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of Arapahoe.
Some of the directors of Arapahoe have either other employment or other business or time restrictions
placed on them and accordingly, these directors of Arapahoe will only be able to devote part of their time
to the affairs of Arapahoe. In particular, certain of the directors and ofﬁcers are involved in managerial
and/or director positions with other oil and gas companies whose operations may, from time to time,

7 provide ﬁnancing to, or make equity investments in, competitors of Arapahoe. Conﬂicts. if any, will be
subject to the procedures and remedies available under the ABCA. The ABCA provides that in the event
that a director has an interest in a contract or proposed contract or agreement, the director shall disclose
his interest in such contract or agreement and shall refrain from voting on any matter in respect of such
contract or agreement unless otherwise provided by the ABCA
n46


INDEBTEDNFSS OF DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
Principal Position or Subsidiary Outstanding Dun-hag Outstanding Assisted Indebtedness
~ ~ Last Completed as at the Securities
_ Financial Year (3) Effective Purchases
_ Date (S) During Last
Completed
Financial Year
Jeffrey Lawrence Terrence as lender of $6,357.00 $0.00 None N/A
Standen, a non-interest
President, CEO, bearing, unsecured
acting CFO and a loan“)
director
M1
(1) Over a period of time, Torrence loaned to Jeffrey L. Standen, the President, CEO, and a
director of Arapahoe, the amount of $6,357.00, of which all was still outstanding as at
December 31, 2004. The loan was non-interest beating, unsecured and had no speciﬁc
terms of repayment. This indebtedness was not incurred in connection with purchases of
securities of Arapahoe. On March 31, 2005, this amount was deducted from the amounts
accrued as payable to Jeffrey L. Standen. As of the Effective Date, no director or
executive ofﬁcer of Arnpahoe or any associate of such individual was indebted to
Arapahoe or its Subsidiaries.
RISK FACTORS ' e

The holding of Arapahoe Common Shares should be considered highly speculative due to the

nature of Arapahoe's business and the present stage of its development.
Exploration, Development and Production Risks

Oil and natural gas exploration involves a high degree of risk, which even a combination of
experience, knowledge and careful evaluation may not be able to overcome. There is no assurance that
expenditures made on future exploration by Arapahoe will result in new discoveries of oil or natural gas
in commercial quantities. It is difﬁcult to project the costs of implementing an exploratory drilling
program due to the inherent uncertainties of drilling in unknown formations, the costs associated with

e encountering various drilling conditions such as over pressured zones and tools lost in the hole. and
changes in drilling plans and locations as a result of prior exploratory wells or additional seismic data
and interpretations thereof.

The long-term commercial success of Arapahoe depends on its ability to ﬁnd, acquire. develop
and commercially produce oil and natural gas reserves. No assurance can be given that Arapahoe will be
able to continue to locate satisfactory properties for acquisition or participation. Moreover, if such
acquisitions or participations are identiﬁed, Arapahoe may determine that current markets, terms of
acquisition and participation or pricing conditions make such acquisitions or participations uneconomic.

Future oil and gas exploration may involve unproﬁtable efforts, not only from dry wells, but
from wells that are productive but do not produce sufﬁcient net revenues to return a proﬁt after drilling.
operating and other costs. Completion of a well does not assure a proﬁt on the investment or recovery of
drilling, completion and operating costs. In addition, drilling hazards or environmental damage could
greatly increase the cost of operations, and various ﬁeld operating conditions may adversely affect the
production from successful wellsr These conditions include delays in obtaining governmental approvals

3-17


or consents, shut»ins of connected wells resulting from extreme weather conditions, insufﬁcient storage
or transportation capacity or other geological and mechanical conditions. While diligent well supervision
and effective maintenance operations can contribute to maximizing production rates over time,
production delays and, declines from normal ﬁeld operating conditions cannot be eliminated and can be
expected to adversely affect revenue and cash ﬂow levels to varying degrees.

In addition, oil and gas operations are subject to the risks of exploration, development and
production of oil and natural gas properties, including encountering unexpected formations or pressures,
premature declines of reservoirs, blow—outs, cratering, sour gas releases, ﬁres and spills. Losses resulting
from the occurrence of any of these risks could have a materially adverse effect on future results of
operations, liquidity and ﬁnancial condition.

Prices, Markets and Marketing of Crude Oil and Natural Gas

Oil and natural gas are commodities whose prices are determined based on world demand, supply
and other factors, all of which are beyond the control of Arapahoe. World prices for oil and natural gas
have ﬂuctuated widely in recent years. Any material decline in prices could result in a reduction of net
production revenue. Certain wells or other projects may become uneconomic as a. result of a decline in
world oil prices and natural gas prices, leading to a reduction in the volume of Arapahoe’s oil and gas
reserves. Arapahoe might also elect not to produce from certain wells at lower prices. All of these
factors could result in a material decrease in Arapahoe’s future net production revenue, causing a
reduction in its oil and gas acquisition and development activities. In addition, bank borrowings
available to Arapahoe are in part determined by the borrowing base of Arapahoe. A sustained material
decline in prices from historical average prices could limit Arapahoe’s borrowing base, therefore
reducing the bank credit available to Arapahoe, and could require that a portion of any existing bank debt
of Arapahoe be repaid.

In addition to establishing markets for its oil and natural gas, Arapahoe must also successfully
market its oil and natural gas to prospective buyers. The marketability and price of oil and natural gas
which may be acquired or discovered by Arapahoe will be affected by numerous factors beyond its
control. Arapahoe will be affected by the differential between the price paid by reﬁners for light quality
oil and the grades of oil produced by Arapahoe. The ability of Arapahoe to market its natural gas may
depend upon its ability to acquire space on pipelines which deliver natural gas to commercial markets.
Arapahoe will also likely be affected by deliverability uncertainties related to the proximity of its
reserves to pipelines and processing facilities and related to operational problems with such pipelines and
facilities and extensive govemment regulation relating to price, taxes, royalties, land tenure, allowable
production, the export of oil and natural gas and many other aspects of the oil and natural gas business.
Arapahoe has limited direct experience in the marketing of oil and natural gas.

Substantial Capital Requirements; liquidity

Arapahoe anticipates that it will make substantial capital expenditures for the acquisition,
exploration, development and production of oil and natural gas reserves in the future. If Arapahoe‘s
revenues or reserves decline, Arapahoe may have limited ability to expend the capital necessary to
undertake or complete future drilling programs. There can be no assurance that debt or equity ﬁnancing,
or cash generated by operations will be available or sufﬁcient to meet these requirements or for other
corporate purposes or, if debt or equity ﬁnancing is available, that it will be on terms acceptable to
Arapahoe. Moreover, future activities may require Arapahoe to alter its capitalization signiﬁcantly. The
inability of Arapahoe to access sufﬁcient capital for its operations could have a material adverse effect
on Arapahoe’s ﬁnancial condition, results of operations or prospects.

B~18 '


Additional Funding Requirements

Arapahoe’s cash ﬂow from its reserves may not be sufﬁcient to fund its ongoing activities at all
times. From time to time, Arapahoe may require additional ﬁnancing in order to carry out its oil and gas
acquisition, exploration and development activities. Failure to obtain such financing on a timely basis
could cause Arapahoe to forfeit its interest in certain properties, miss certain acquisition opportunities
and reduce or terminate its operations. If Arapahoe’s revenues from its reserves decrease as a result of
lower oil and natural gas prices or otherwise, it will affect Arapahoe’s ability to expend the necessary
capital to replace its reserves or to maintain its production If Arapahoe‘s cash ﬂow from operations is
not sufficient to satisfy its capital expenditure requirements, there can be no assurance that additional
debt or equity ﬁnancing will be available to meet these requirements or available on terms acceptable to
Arapahoe,

Insurance

Arapahoe’s involvement in the exploration for and development of oil and gas properties may
result in Arapahoe becoming subject to liability for pollution, blow-outs, property damage, personal
injury or other hazards. Although Arapaboe has obtained insurance in accordance with industry
standards to address such risks, such insurance has limitations on liability that may not be sufficient to
cover the full extent of such liabilities. In addition, such risks may not, in all circumstances, be insurable
or, in certain circumstances, Arapahoe may elect not to obtain insurance to deal with speciﬁc risks due to
the high premiums associated with such insurance or other reasons. The payment of such uninsured
liabilities would reduce the funds available to Arapahoe. The occurrence of a signiﬁcant event that
Arapahoe is not fully insured against, or the insolvency of the insurer of such event, could have a
material adverse effect on Arapahoe’s ﬁnancial position, results of operations or prospects.

Competition .

Arapahoe actively competes for reserve acquisitions, exploration leases, licences and
concessions and skilled industry personnel with a substantial number of other oil and gas companies,
many of which have signiﬁcantly greater ﬁnancial resources than Arapahoe. Arapahoe’s competitors
include major integrated oil and natural gas companies and numerous other independent oil and natural
gas companies and individual producers and operators.

The oil and gas industry is highly competitive. Arapahoe’s competitors for the acquisition,
exploration, production and development of oil and natural gas properties, and for capital to ﬁnance such
activities, include companies that have greater ﬁnancial and personnel resources available to them than
Arapahoer

Arapahoe’s ability to successfully bid on and acquire additional property rights, to discover
reserves, to participate in drilling opportunities and to identify and enter into commercial arrangements
with customers will be dependent upon developing and maintaining close working relationships with its
futln'e industry partners and joint operators and its ability to select and evaluate suitable properties and to
consummate transactions in a highly competitive environment.

Environmental Risks

All phases of the oil and natural gas business present environmental risks and hazards and are
subject to environmental regulation pursuant to a variety of international conventions and provincial and
municipal laws and regulations. Environmental legislation provides for, among other things, restrictions
and prohibitions on spills, releases or emissions of various substances produced in association with oil
and gas operations. The legislation also requires that wells and facility sites be operated, maintained,
abandoned and reclaimed to the satisfaction of applicable regulatory authorities. Compliance with such
legislation can require signiﬁcant expenditures and a breach may result in the imposition of ﬁnes and _

3—19


penalties, sorrte of which may be material. Environmental legislation is evolving in a manner expected to
result in stricter standards and enforcement1 larger ﬁnes and liability and potentially increased capital
expenditures and operating costs. The discharge of oil, nannal gas or other pollutants into the air, soil or
, water may give rise to liabilities to foreign governments and third parties and may require Arapahoe to
incur costs to remedy such discharge. No assurance can be given that environmental laws will not result
in a curtailment of production or a material increase in the com of production, development or
exploration activities or otherwise adversely affect Arapahoe's ﬁnancial condition, results of operations
or prospects. ‘
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol could have a material adverse impact on own operations. The Kyoto Protocol
came into force on February 16, 2005. Canada ratiﬁed the Kyoto Protocol in December 2002. In 1997,
Canada committed to an emission reduction of 6% below 1990 levels during the First Commitment
period (2008 to 2012). On March 24, 2005, the Canadian government introduced to Parliament for ﬁrst
reading Bill C-43 "An Act to Implement Certain Provisions of the Budget Tabled by Parliament on
February 23, 2005" (Bill C-43), which contained certain proposals relating to the Kyoto Protocolt While
the content of Bill C-43 and whether it will eventually pass into law remains in doubt, it constitutes the
first attempt by the Canadian government to implement obligations under the Kyoto Protocol. As well, '
on April 13, 2005, Environment Canada released its Kyoto Plan, which sets out a number of initiatives.
Any required reductions in the greenhouse gases emitted from Arapahoe‘s operations could result in
increases in Arapahoe’s capital expenditures and operating expenses, which could have an adverse effect
on Arapahoe’s results of operations and ﬁnancial condition.
Reserve Replacement
Arapahoe’s future oil and natural gas reserves, production, and cash ﬂows to be derived
therefrom are highly dependent on Arapahoe successfully acquiring or discovering new reserves.
Without the continual addition of new reserves, any existing reserves Arapahoe may have at any
particular time and the production therefrom will decline over time as such existing reserves are
exploited. A future increase in Arapahoe’s reserves will depend not only on Arapahoe‘s ability to
develop any properties it may have from time to time, but also on its ability to select and acquire suitable
producing properties or prospects. There can be no assurance that Arapahoe’s future exploration and
development efforts will result in the discovery and development of additional commercial
accumulations of oil and natural gas.
Reliance on Operators and Key Employees
7 To the extent Arapahoe is not the operator of its oil and gas properties, Arapahoe will be
dependent on such operators for the tinting of activities related to such properties and will Largely be
unable to direct or control the activities of the operators. In addition, the success of Arapahoe will be
largely dependent upon the performance of its management and key employees. Arapahoe does not have
any key man insurance policies, and therefore there is a risk that the death or departure of any member of
management or any key employee could have a material adverse effect on Arapahoe.
Rights of First Refusal
The interest to be acquired by Arapahoe in certain properties and associated facilities may be
subject to a preferential right of purchase by third parties. To the extent that such preferential rights of
purchase are exercised by any third party, such exercise could have a material adverse effect on
Arapahoe.
3-7.0


Corporate Matters

To date, Arapahoe has not paid any dividends on the Arapahoe Common Shares and does not
anticipate the payment of any dividends on the Arapahoe Common Shares for the foreseeable future.
Certain of the directors 'and ofﬁcers of Arapahoe are also directors and ofﬁcers of other oil and gas
companies involved in natural resource exploration and development, and conﬂicts of interest may arise
between their duties as ofﬁcers and directors of Arapahoe and as ofﬁcers and directors of such other
companies. Such conﬂicts must be disclosed in accordance with, and are subject to such other
procedures and remedies as applicable under the ABCA.
Permits and Licenses

The operations of Arapahoe may require licenses and pemiits from various governmental
authorities. There can be no assurance that the issuer will be able to obtain all necessary licenses and
permits that may be required to carry out exploration and development at its projects.
Issuance of Debt

From time to time Arapahoe may enter into transactions to acquire assets or shares of other
corporations. These transactions may be ﬁnanced partially or wholly with debt, which may increase
Arapahoe debt: levels above industry standards. Neither Arapahoe articles not its by-laws limit the
amount of indebtedness that Arapahoe may incur. The level of Arapahoe’s indebtedness from time to
time could impair Arapahoe’s ability to obtain additional ﬁnancing in the future on a timely basis to take
advantage of business opportunities that may arise.
Dilution

Arapaho: may make future acquisitions or enter into ﬁnancing or other transactions involving the'
issuance of securities of Arapahoe which may be dilutive.
Title to Properties

Although title reviews will be done according to industry standards prior to the purchase of most
oil and natural gas producing properties or the commencement of drilling wells, such reviews do not
guarantee or certify that an unforeseen defect in the chain of title will not arise to defeat the claim of
Arapahoe which could result in a reduction of the revenue received by Arapahoe.
Aboriginal Claims

’ Aboriginal peoples have claimed aboriginal title and rights to portions of western Canada and the

Northwest Territories. Arapahoe is aware that there are such claims made in respect of certain assets
owned by Arapahoe, in particular, those assets associated with the Saroee Farm-out Lands. If other
claims arose and were successful, this could have an adverse effect on Arapahoe and its operations.
Delays in Business Operations

In addition to the usual delays in payments by purchasers of oil and natural gas to Arapahoe or to
the operators, and the delays by operators in remitting payment to Arapahoe, payments between these
parties may be delayed due to restrictions imposed by lenders, accounting delays, delays in the sale or
delivery of products, delays in the connection of wells to a gathering system, adjustment for prior
periods. or recovery by the operator of expenses incurred in the operation of the properties. Any of these
delays Could reduce the amount of cash ﬂow available for the business of Arapahoe in a given period and
expose Arapahoe to additional third party credit risks. _

3-21


Changes in Legislation

The return on an investment in securities of Arapahoe is subject to changes in Canadian federal
and provincial tax laws and government incentive programs and there can be no assurance that such laws
or programs will not he changed in a manner that adversely affects Arapahoe or the holding and
disposing of the securities of Arapahoe.
Seasonality

The level of activity in the Canadian oil and gas industry is inﬂuenced by seasonal weather
patterns. Wet weather and spring thaw may make the ground unstable. Consequently, municipalities and
provincial transportation departments enforce road bans that restrict the movement of rigs and other
heavy equipment, thereby reducing activity levels. Also, certain oil and gas producing areas are located
in areas that are inaccessible other than during the winter months because the ground surrounding the
sites in these areas consists of swampy terrain. Seasonal factors and unexpected weather patterns may
lead to declines in exploration and production activity and corresponding declines in the demand for the
goods and services of Arapahoe.
Income Taxes

Arapahoe has ﬁled or will ﬁle all required income tax returns and believes that it is in full
compliance with the provisions of the Income Tax Act (Canada) and all applicable provincial tax
legislation However, such returns are subject to reassessment by the applicable taxation authority. In
the event of a successful reassessment of Arapahoe. whether by recharacterization of exploration and
development expenditures or otherwise, such reassessment may have an impact on current and future
taxes payable.
Assessments of Value of Acquisitions

Acquisitions of oil and gas issuers and oil and gas assets are typically based on engineering and
economic assessments made by independent engineers and Arapahoe’s own assessments. These
assessments both will include a series of assumptions regarding such factors as recoverability and
marketability of oil and gas, future prices of oil and gas and operating costs, future capital expenditures
and royalties and other government levies which will be imposed over the producing life of the reserves.
Many of these factors are subject to change and are beyond Arapahoe’s control. In particular, the prices
of and markets for oil and natural gas products may change from those anticipated at the time of making
such assessment. In addition, all such assessments involve a measure of geologic and engineering
uncertainty which could result in lower production and reserves than anticipated. Initial assessments of

, acquisitions may be based on reports by a ﬁrm of independent engineers that are not the same as the ﬁrm

that Arapahoe uses for its year end reserve evaluations. Because each of these ﬁrms may have different
evaluation methods and approaches, these initial assessments may differ signiﬁcantly from the
assessments of the ﬁrm used by Arapahoe. Any such instance may offset the return on and value of the
Arapahoe Common Shares.
Borrowing

Arapahoe‘s lenders will be provided with security over substantially all of the assets of
Arapahoe. If Arapahoe becomes unable to pay its debt service charges or otherwise commits an event of
default, such as bankruptcy, these lenders may foreclose on or sell Arapahoe’s properties. The proceeds
of any such sale would be applied to satisfy amounts owed to Arapahoe’s lenders and other creditors and
only the remainder. if any, would be available to Arapaboe.

3-22


Third Party Credit Risk

Arapahoe is or may be exposed to third party credit risk through its contractual arrangements
with its current or future joint venture partners, marketers of its petroleum and natural gas production and
other parties. In the 'event such entities fail to meet their contractual obligations to Arapahoe, such
failures could have a material adverse effect on Arapahoe and its cash ﬂow from operations. .

INDUSTRY CONDITIONS

The oil and natural gas industry is subject to extensive controls and regulations imposed by
various levels of government. Outlined below are some of the more signiﬁcant aspects of the legislation,
regulations and agreements governing the oil and natural gas industry. All cm'rent legislation is a matter
of public record and Arapahoe is unable to predict what additional legislation or amendments may be
enacted.
Pricing and Marketing Oil

In Canada, producers of oil negotiate sales contracts directly with oil purchasers, with a
competitive open market setting the price of oil. The price depends in part on oil quality, prices of
competing fuels, distance to market, the value of reﬁned products and the supply/demand balance. Oil
exports may be made pursuant to export contracts with terms not exceeding one year in the case of light
crude, and not exceeding two years in the case of heavy crude, provided that an order approving any such
export has been obtained from the NEE. Any oil export to be made pursuant to a contract of longer
dm'ation requires an exporter to obtain an export license from the NEE and the issue of such a license
requires the approval of the Governor in Council.
Pricing and Marketing Natural Gas 7

In Canada. the price of natural gas sold results from transactions between buyers and sellers in an
open, transparent market environment. Natural gas exported from Canada is subject to regulation by the
NEE and the Govemment of Canada. Exporters are free to negotiate prices and other terms with
purchasers, provided that export contracts in excess of 2 years must continue to meet certain criteria
prescribed by the NEE and the Government of Canada. As is the case with oil, natural gas exports for a
term of less than two years must be made pursuant to an NEE order, or, in the case of exports for a longer
duration, pursuant to an N'EB license and Governor in Council approval.

The governments of Alberta, British Columbia and Saskatchewan also regllate the volume of
natural gas which may be removed from those provinces for consumption elsewhere based on such

, tactors as reserve availability, transportation arrangements and market considerations.

The North American Free Trade Agreement

On January 1, 1994, the North American Free Trade Ageernent (‘NAFTA”) among the
governments of Canada, the U.S. and Mexico became effective. NAFTA carries forward most of the
material energy terms contained in the Canada - U.S. Free Trade Agreement. In the context of energy
resources, Canada continues to remain free to determine whether exports to the U.S. or Mexico will be
allowed provided that the restrictions are justiﬁed under certain provisions of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade and then only if the export restrictions do not: (i) reduce the proportion of energy
resources exported relative to the total supply of the energy resource (based upon the proportion
prevailing in the most recent 36 month period); (ii) impose an export price higher than the domestic
price; and (iii) disrupt normal channels of supply. All three countries are prohibited from imposing
minimum export or import price requirements.

3—23


The NAFTA contemplates the reduction of Mexican restrictive trade practices in the energy
sector and prohibits discriminatory border restrictions and export taxes. The agreement also
contemplates clearer disciplines on regulators to ensure fair implementation of any regulatory changes
and to minimize disruption of contractual arrangements, which is important for Canadian natural gas
exports
Royalties and Incentives

In addition to federal regulation, each province has legislation and regulations that govern land
tenure, royalties, production rates, environmenml protection and other matters. The royalty regime is a
signiﬁcant factor in the proﬁtabth of oil and natural gas production. Royalties payable on production
from lands other than Crown lands are determined by negotiations between the mineral owner and the
lessee. Crown royalties are determined by governmental regulation and are generally calculated as a
percentage of the value of the gross production, and the rate of royalties payable generally depends in
part on prescribed reference prices, well productivity, geographical location, ﬁeld discovery date, method
of recovery and the type or quantity of the petroleum product produced. From time to thne the
governments of Canada, British Columbia, Alberta and Saskatchewan have established incentive
programs which have included royalty rate reductions, royalty holidays and tax credits for the purpose of
encouraging oil and natural gas exploration or enhanced recovery projects.

Oil and natural gas royalty holidays and reductions for speciﬁc wells reduce the amount of
Crown royalties paid to the provincial governments.

Environmental Regulation

The oil and natural gas industry is subject to environmental regulation pursuant to local,
provincial and federal legislation. Environmental legislation provides for restrictions and prohibitions on
releases or emissions of various substances produced in association with certain oil and natural gas
industry operations and can affect the location and operation of wells and facilities and the extent to
which exploration and development is permitted. In addition, legislation requires that well and facilities
sites be abandoned and reclaimed to the satisfaction of provincial authorities A breach of such
legislation may result in the imposition of ﬁnes or issuance of clean-up orders. Environmental legislation
in Alberta has undergone a major revision and has been consolidated into the Environmental Protection
and Enhancement Act. Under the new Act, environmental standards and compliance for releases, site
restoration and reporting are stricter and more onerous. Also, the range of enforcement actions available
and the severity of penalties have been signiﬁcantly increased. These changes will have an incremental
effect on the cost of conducting operations in Alberta. This legislation rolled the previous processes for
the review of major energy projects into a single environmental assessment process with public

' participation in the environmental and review process.
LEGAL MATI‘ERS

Certain legal matters relating to the Arapahoe Amalgamation have been or will be passed upon

by Davis & Company LLP, on behalf of Arapahoe.
PROMOTERS

H. Barry Hemsworth, the former President and a director of Crazy Horse, and Jeffrey L. Standen,
the former President, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and a director of Old Arapahoe, may be considered the
promoters of Arapahoe. For information as to the number and percentage of Arapahoe Common Shares
beneﬁcially owned, directly or indirectly, or over which control is exercised, by the promoters, or for
other information in relation to the promoters, please see “DIREcTORs AND OFFICERS".

B-ZA


No promoter of Arapahoe has received or will receive anything of value, including money,
property, contracts, options, warrants or rights of any lcind from Arapahoe in respect of acting as a
promoter for Arapahoe.

' LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

There are no outstanding legal proceedings involving Arapahoe or its assets as of the date of the
Information Circular which management of Arapahoe believes to be material In Arapahoe, nor are any
such proceedings lcnown by Arapahoe to be contemplated.

INTERESTS OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS

There are no material interests, direct or indirect, of any director or ofﬁcer of Arapahoe, or any
associates or afﬁliates of such persons, in any material transaction within the three years preceding the
Effective Date or in any proposed material transaction which has materially affected or would materially
affect Arapahoe or any of its subsidiaries other than as described below.

. 1. Jeffrey L. Standen, President, CEO, and director of Arapahoe, was the President, Chief
Executive Ofﬁcer and a director of Old Arapahoe, and was the President, Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer and a director of Extreme until December 2004. Mr. Standen currently holds 251,505
Arapahoe Common Shares. Mr. Standen purchased an aggregate of 356,671 units (each unit
consisting of one common share of Old Arapahoe and one common share purchase warrant of
Old Arapahoe) at a price of $0.15 per unit on September 17, 2003 pursuant to a private
placean Pursuant to the terms of the Crazy Horse Amalgamation, the Old Arapahoe common
shares and Old Arapahoe common share purchase warrants comprising these units were
exchanged on a 3:1 basis for Arapahoe Common Shares and for share purchase warrants of
Arapahoe, r

2. H. Barry Hemsworth, a director and former ofﬁcer of both Crazy Horse and Arapahoe, purchased
166,666 units pursuant to the same private placement as mentioned above. Pursuant to the terms
of the Crazy Horse Amalgamation, the Old Arapahoe common shares and Old Arapahoe
common share purchase warrants comprising these units were exchanged on a 3:1 basis for
Arapahoe Common Shares and for share purchase warrants of Arapahoe.

3. The Sarcee Project Lands and the Sarcee Project Farm-Out Lands are subject to Indian Oil & Gas
royalties, calculated on a basis equivalent to Alberta Crown royalties, a 3.5% GORR (the “Owl
GORR") payable to Tsuu T'ina Energy Corporation and a 3% GORR payable to Owl
Exploration Ltd. Ross Moulton, the Vice President, Exploration and a director of Arapahoe and

. a former director of Old Arapahoe, owns a 32% interest in Owl Exploration Ltd. The Owl

GORR was negotiated in September 2002 prior to Mr. Moulton’s appointment as a director of

Old Arapahoe.

4. On March 11, 2005, Arapahoe and Quest entered into the Loan Agreement. Michael Atkinson is
a director of business development of Quest Capital Corp and was appointed as a director of
Arapaho: in satisfaction of a condition of the Loan Agreement

AUDITORS, REGISTRAR AND TRANSFER AGENT

The auditors of Arapahoe are PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Chartered Accountants, 3100, 111-
5th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, TZP 5B.

The registrar and transfer agent for the Arapahoe Common Shares is Computershare Trust
Company of Canada, at its principal ofﬁces in Calgary, Alberta.

3.25


MATERIAL CONTRACTS
Except for contracts contemplated by the Information Circular and entered into in the ordinary
course of business or referred to in any of the documents incorporated by reference, the only contracts
entered into by Ampalidé in the three years immediately prior to the date hereof which can reasonably be
regarded as presently material are the following:
1) Quest Loan Agreement dated March 11, 2005, between Quest Capital Corp. and Arapahoe,
described under “General Development of the Business”;
2) Sarcee Farm-out Agreement dated March 16, 2005, between Tsnu T’ina Energy Corporation
and Ampahoe, described under “General Development of the Business”; and
3) Amalgamation Agreement dated August 9, 2005 between Banks Energy Inc. and Arapahoe.
See Appendix “A”.
3—26


APPENDIX C
INFORMATION CONCERNING BANKS ENERGY INC.

The following is intended to supplement the information under the heading "Information Concerning
Banks Energy Inc. " in the Information Circular. Unless otherwise deﬁned herein, all capitalized words
and phrases used in this'Appendix have the meaning given to such words and phrases in the Glossary to
the Information Circular. .
General
Banks was incorporated under the Canada Corporations Act by letters patent on October 22, 1953 under
the name “Macao Development Company Limited" with authorized capital consisting of 10,000,000
common shares without par value and 4,500,000 8% cumulative preferred shares with a par value of
$1.00 each. Banks was continued under the Canada Business Corporations Act on January 25, 1980, at
which time it changed its name to “International Macao Limited", consolidated authorized and issued its
common shares on a 3 old shares for 1 new share basis, and amended its authorized capital by eliminating
its preferred shares and increasing its authorized common shares to an unlimited number of common
shares without par value. Banks continued under the Company Act (British Columbia) on July 31, 1992,
at which time it changed its name to “Non-Par Developments Ltd.” and reduced its authorized share
capital to 100,000,000 common shares without par value. 011 August 11, 1992, Banks changed its name
to “Semilkameen Hydro-Power Ltd,” On July 24, 1996, the Corporation changed its name to “None
Resources Ltd.” and consolidated its authorized and issued common shares on a 2 old shares for 1 new
share basis, and thereafter increased its authorized capital to 100,000,000 common shares without par
value. On April 6, 1998 Banks continued under the Business Corporations Act (Yukon) under the name
“Banks Ventures Ltd.", consolidated its authorized and issued common shares on a 3 old shares for 1
new share basis, and amended its authorized share capital to an unlimited number of common shares
without par value. On July 26, 2004, Banks changed its name from “Banks Ventures Ltd." to “Banks,
Energy Inc."
The principal business address of Banks is 2410 - 650 West Georgia Street, Vancouver, British
Columbia, VGA 2A1. The registered and records ofﬁce of Banks is located at Suite 800 - 885 West
Georgia Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6C 3H1.
The Banks Shares are listed for trading on the TSX Venture Exchange under the trading symbol “BKL”.
Intercorporate Relationships

, Banks has one wholly-owned subsidiary, namely Trinity Ventures Ltd. (“Trinity”), a British Columbia
corporation. Trinity has no material business, assets, liabilities or operations

INFORMATION INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

Pursuant to Form 51-10735 of National Instrument 51-102 “Continuous Disclosure Obligations", which
governs the content to be included in this Information Circular, information in respect of Banks is
incorporated by reference in this Information Circular from documents ﬁled with securities commissions
or similar authorities in Canada.

Copies of the documents incorporated herein by reference may be obtained by a Banks
Shareholder on request prior to the Effective Time without charge from Banks at Suite 2410, 650 — West
Georgia Street, Vancouver, BC, V6A 2A1, telephone (604) 689-8336. In addition, the documents can be
obtained through the Internet on the Canadian System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval
(SEDAR) web site at www.sedar.com.

C-t


The following documents, ﬁled by Banks with the securities commission or similar authorities in
Canada, are speciﬁcally incorporated by reference in and form an integral part of this Information
Circular:

1. L The information under the headings "Disclosure of Reserves Data" and "Reconciliation of

Changes in Rerewes and Future Net Revenue” in Banks’ Statement of Reserves Data and Other

Oil and Gas Information effective April 30, 2005 prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and

ﬁled on SEDAR;

2. The information contained in the Report of Independent Qualiﬁed Reserves Evaluator or Auditor
effective April 30, 2005 prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and ﬁled on SEDAR;
3. The information contained in Banks’ Report of Management and Directors dated August 29,

2005 prepared in accordance with NI 51-101 and ﬁled on SEDAR;

4. The audited comparative ﬁnancial statements of Banks for its ﬁnancial years ended April 30,

2005 and 2004 ﬁled on SEDAR on August 29, 2005; and
5. The information contained in Banks’ Management’s Discussion and Analysis for the ﬁnancial I

year ended April 30, 2005 and ﬁled on SEDAR on August 29, 2005.

Any material change reports (excluding conﬁdential reports), comparative financial statements
and any documents of theptype referred to in the preceding paragraph ﬁled by Banks with the securities
commission or similar authorities in Canada after the date of this Infomiatiou Circular and prior to the
Effective Time shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference in this Information Circulars

Any statement contained herein or in a document incorporated or deemed to be,
incorporated by reference herein shall be deemed to be modiﬁed or superseded for the purposes of
this Information Circular to the extent that a statement contained herein, or in any other
subsequently filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein,
modifies or supersedes that statement. The modifying or superseding statement need not state that
it has modiﬁed or superseded a prior statement or include any other information set forth in the
document that it modiﬁes or supersedes. The making of a modifying or superseding statement shall
not be deemed an admission for any purposes that the modiﬁed or superseded statement, when
made, constituted a misrepresentation, an untrue statement or a material fact or an omission to
stating a material fact that is required to he stated or that is necessary to make a statement that is
not misleading in light at the circumstances in which it was made. Any statement so modiﬁed or

e superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modiﬁed or superseded, to constitute a part of this
Information Circular.

BUSINESS 0]“ BANKS
Banks has been actively engaged in the business of oil and gas exploration and development since April,
2002, when it acquired a 7.5% interest in a gas ﬁeld in northern California known as the East Corning
property by participating in the drilling of six wells.
Histm
In September 2002, D. Barry Lee was appointed President of Banks.
In September 2002, Banks acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of Trinity by way of a
“ﬁ'iendly” takeover bid. Trinity was a “capital pool corporation" the shares of which were listed for
0-2


trading on the TSX Venture Exchange (then known as the Canadian Venture Exchange). Trinity did not

have a business and its only material asset was cash on hand.

In late September 2002, Banks met with representatives of Tenax Energy Inc., a private oil and gas

consulting ﬁrm specializing in building relationships with aboriginal communities focused towards

creating oil and gas resource opportunities.

In October 2002, Banks signed a Business Development and Management Services Agreement with

Tenax Energy Inc. and its principals, to provide expertise to Banks in order to acquire certain oil and gas

mineral rights to speciﬁc properties held by the Poundmaker Cree Nation (the “Nation"), and Indian Oil

and Gas Canada on behalf of the Nation.

In December 2002, Tenax Energy Inc. assigned to Banks its 100% interest in a Letter Agreement, Term

Sheet - Joint Venture Operating Agreement Between Tenax and the Poundrnaker Cree Nation respecting

the Freemont Treaty Entitlement Lands property.

During the calendar years 2002 and 2003, Banks participated in the drilling of 10 successful natural gas

wells on the East Corning property in northern California, with working interests ranging from 75% to

14.25%.

In April 2003, Banks entered into a Joint Venture Farmout and Operating Agreement with the

Poundmaker Energy Corporation — a wholly owned company of the Poundmaker Cree Nation — for the

Poundmaker Homeland Reserve containing approximately 8,387 hectares of prospective Mannville

formation gas and all rights.

In April 2003, Banks and the Poundmaker Cree Nation and its energy company, Poundmaker Energy,

Corporation, added approximately 3,681 hectares of additional prospective Manville formation gas and

oil rights to the Joint Venture Farmout and Operating Agreement.

On April 1, 2003 and September 15, 2003, Indian Oil and Gas Canada (the federal regulatory authority

on aboriginal lands) issued federal Oil and Gas Permits to Banks with respect to its Joint Venture

Farmout and Operating Agreement, effectively providing its consent to the activities contemplated by the

Joint Venture Farmout and Operating Agreement.

In July 2003, Banks shot 124 kilometers of 2D seismic data on the Freemont property and an 11

hlometer 2D seismic program on the Poundmaker Homeland Reserve in order to identify drilling targets.
. During the calendar year 2003, Banks drilled and completed four heavy oil wells at Freemont and one

natural gas well on the Poundmaker Homeland Reserve.

In November 2003, Banks completed a private placement of 5,422,500 ﬂow through Common Shares and

2,711,250 share purchase warrants for gross proceeds of $2,169,000.

In December 2003, Banks sold its interest in the East Coming property in California for US$255,000.

During spring breakup in 2004, Banks shot a 6.8 square kilometer 3D seismic program on the Freemont

property in order to select new drilling locations targeting the Waseca and Sparky formations.

In June 2004, and the following months, Banks purchased the Senlac land holdings at Saskatchewan

provincial land sales. Banks drilled, completed and tested two natural gas wells on the Senlac property in

late 2004.

0-3


In June 2004, Banks completed a private placement of 8,035,000 ﬂow through Common Shares and

warrants for gross proceeds of $3,214,000.

In August 2004, Banks purchased the Sidney Lake property.

During the calendar year 2004 Banks drilled and completed an additional 5 oil wells on the Freemont

property and 2 additional natural gas wells on the Poundmaker Homeland reserve.

In December 2004, Banks arranged credit facilities with National Bank of Canada Energy Group of

Calgary in the aggregate amount of $1,250,000.

Recent Developments

In January 2005, Banks completed a private placement of 1,708,000 flow through Common Shares for

gross proceeds of $768,600.

In August 2005, Banks entered into the Amalgamation Agreement with Ampahoe and Subco.

DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS AND OPERATIONS

Exploration and Development Strategy

Banks’ business plan is to create sustainable and proﬁtable growth by aggessively pursuing aboriginal

and non-aboriginal land bases, oil and gas drilling, and production opportunities in the western Canadian

sedimentary basin, particularly in western Saskatchewan.

Principal Properties A

The following is a description of Banks’ principal oil and natural gas properties. The term “net” when

used to describe Banks’ share of production, means the total of Banks’ working interest share before
I deducting royalties owned by others. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, gross and net acres and well count

information are as at April 30, 2005. Reserve amounts are as at April 30, 2005 based on an independent

evaluation of oil and gas reserves by Gilbert Laustsen Jung Ltd. (“GLJ”).

Freeman!

The Freemont property consists of an Indian Oil and Gas Canada Pemiit covering 259 hectares - 640

7 acres, or one section of land in Township 44, Range 21, west of the Third Meridian in the Province of

Saskatchewan, approximately 80 km south southeast of the City of Lloydminster, adjacent to a paved

highway in an established heavy oil/ shallow gas producing region of the province. The property consists

of 9 wells, 8 of which are producing 12-14% API gravity oil from predominately the Waseca and to a

small degree the Sparky zone in the Mannville formation at depths of approximately 740 meters or less.

Banks holds a 100% working interest in the wells. Established total proved plus probable reserves for the

property as of April 30, 2005 were 527 Mhbl oil and 34 MMcf gas. GLJ reports that the average

production from the property effective April 30, 2005 was approximately 329 barrels of heavy oil per

day. Subsequent to the April 2005 period forward, given the nature of heavy oil wells, in particular the

initial sand production and well servicing wm'k required. together with the extremely wet spring and

record rainfalls in the sunnner months, the property has experienced production cycles and the Company

has not yet been able to fully optimize production from the new wells. Additionally, one of the ﬁve

recent wells is presently not economic and has been suspended due to high water cuts, and will likely be

convened to a disposal well. As fall approaches and the rains diminish the Company expects optimized

ﬁeld production to be in the order of 325 to 365 bbl per day range.

ca


Paundmaker Homeland Reserve
The Poundmaker Homeland Reserve property consists of an Indian Oil and Gas Canada Permit covering
the entire homeland  totaling 8370 hectares of land in Townships 44 and 45. Range 24, West of
the Third Meridian in the Province of Saskatchewan. approximawa 120 km southeast of the City of
Lloydminster next to an established heavy oil / shallow gas producing region of the province. The land is
prospective for Mannville formation heavy oil and gas as well as shallower gas zones. The property
encompasses 3 drilled and cased Colony gas wells in which Banks holds a 100% working interest before
payout and 50% after payout and a 50 % interest in an additional two earned contiguous sections. Payout
is at Poundmaker Energy Corporation‘s election and is based on a cumulative production volume of 0.75
billion cubic feet of gas sales. Testing at each of the wells has indicated commercial quantiﬁes of Colony
zone gas. The Company anticipates drilling a fourth and possibly a ﬁfth well at the southernmost portion
of the property in order to reach a critical gas reserve recovery base, before proceeding with equipping
and building a 10.2 km gas gathering pipeline, compressor and sales line to existing transportation
facilities. The Company is also in the process of acquiring two suspended well bores previously drilled in
1995 by another operator, in order to test other possible prospective shallower gas zones. Established
proved plus probable reserves for the property as of April 30, 2005 were 525 Mmcf gas and 87 MBOE
oil equivalents. There has been no production from this property to Banks as of April 30, 2005.
Senlac
Senlac is a Saskatchewan provincial crown land lease and license - gas and heavy oil prospect property
consisting of 3366 hectares of rights, approximately 85 km south southeast of the city of Lloydminster
near the Town of Senlac in Saskatchewan. The property consists of two drilled and cased nonproducing
gas wells in which Banks holds a 100% working interest. Banks has conducted extensive testing on the
two gas wells and has several prospective Mannville gas and shallower gas targets on its Senlac propertyr
Banks plans to drill two additional locations and shoot additional 2D seismic data, conditional upon
available ﬁnancing. The Senlac property is within a very active industry exploration area, and Banks will
continue to build its land base containing medium risk exploration targets at upcoming provincial land
sales. Established proved plus probable reserves for the property as of April 30, 2005 were 93 Mmcf gas
and 16 MBOE oil equivalents.
Minor Properties
Sidney [111w
Sidney Lake is a Saskatchewan provincial crown land Mannville gas prospect property located 55 km
7 northeast of the city of Lloydminster. This property consists of 1 section of land in which Banks holds a
100% working interest and has planned a 2D seismic program and‘Mannville formation gas well test.
There is no production and there are no established reserves attributed to Banks for this property.
Poundmaker Treaty Land Entitlement Lands
The Poundmaker Treaty Land Entitlement Lands, located in Saskatchewan, were originally acquired by
Banks at a 100% working interest in the form of an Indian Oil and Gas Permit along with the Freemont
Area Property. Certain of these properties are contiguous with the Poundrnaker homeland reserve and
others are single section or partial sections scattered throughout the heavy oil / shallow gas producing
region approximately 80 km south east of the city of Lloydminster. Bank’s exploration land base consists
of approximately 4000 hectares. Banks continues to evaluate the oil and gas prospects and may shoot or
acquire additional seismic data and/or acquire land in the process of advancing these prospects. There is
no production and there are no established reserves attributed to Banks for this property.
CA5


Land Holdings -

The following table sets out Banks’ land holdings as at April 30, 2005.

m_ Develoed Hectares ‘” Undeveln 1 ed (Hectares ‘1’
__

Poundmaler Homeland

Poundmalm TLE __

Sidne Lake __

_

Notes:

(1) Developed Lands refers to lands that contain a well drilled by Banks or on its behalf

(2) Undeveloped Lands refers to lands that have not been drilled by Banks or on its behalf

The following table sets out Banks’ undeveloped Land holdings (Gross and Net) to which no proved

reserves are attributed as at April 30, 2005.

Undevela | ed Lands Gross (HectaresW’ Net (Hectares) ‘

__

Poundmaker Homeland

Poundmaker TLE 3681

Sidne Lake __

[_

Notes:

(1) Gross refers to total hectares in which Banks has an interest.

(2) Net refers to the total hectares in which Banks has an interest, multiplied by the percentage
working interest therein owned by Banks.

Wells

The following table sets forth the number and status of wells in which at April 30, 2005, Banks had an

interest1 which are producing or which Banks considers to be capable of production.

7 - Hea Oil Wells Natural Gas Wells V
-
-
--_nn-_nn-
-—-—-——_—
mun-.“m-nn

Notes:

(1) Non-producing heavy oil well means a well which is no longer capable of producing heavy oil,
but which will likely be converted to a disposal well.

(2) Non-producing natural gas wells means a natural gas well(s) which has encountered and are
capable of producing natural gas, but which are not producing due to available transportation
facilities and / or other reasons.

(3) Gross refers to total hectares in which Banks has an interest.

06


(4) Net refers to the total hectares in which Banks has an interest, multiplied by the percentage
working interest therein owned by Banks.

Drilling History V 77

The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the number and status of gross and net

exploratory and development wells in which Banks has participated in drilling:

Ari130 2003 Aril30 2004 Aril30 2005
—
nun-“n.-
Natnral Gas “nu-
mum-“nun
"nun".-
Notes:

(1) Gross refers to total hectares in which Banks has an interest.
(2) Net refers to the total hectares in which Banks has an interest, multiplied by the percentage
working interest therein owned by Banks.
(3) Dry refers to a well which is not productive. This nonoproductive heavy oil well will likely be
converted to a disposal well.
Production History, Prices Received and Capital Expenditures
The following table sets forth certain information respecting production, product prices received and,
expenditures made by Banks for each quarter in the most recently completed ﬁnancial year of Banks.
Three Three Three Three
months months months months
Ended Ended Ended Ended
Apr 30, January 31, October 31, July 31,
2005 2005 2004 2004
Average Daily Production
Oil & NGLs (bbls/day) 326 269 184 185
Average Prices Received
7 Oil & NGLs ($lbb1) 29.02 24.23 35.85 34.37
Royalties ($lbbl) 8.03 7.13 10.73 9.64
Production Expenses ($lbbl) 10.09 17.11 8.47 8.42
Field Netback Received ($Ibbl) 10.91 (0.02) 16.66 1 16.32
Dollar Amounts Expended (3)
Land and undeveloped lease rentals 267,681 596,465 (158,984) 52,896
Geological and geophysical 117,200 166,176 105,294 32,829
Drilling and completion 141,737 2,209,369 717,296 445,345
Well equipment and pipeline 1,763 285,945 714,308 177,967
c-7


Marketing of Production and Future Commitments
The Company’s heavy oil production is sold 011 the spot market. Banks continues to pursue optimal
markets for its heavy. oil production. Our oil marketer‘s performance, including trucking costs and
pricing are monitored on a monthly basis. Banks does not hedge or forward sell any of its production and
has no futln'e commitments to buy, sell, exchange or transport petroleum or natural gas
SELECTED FINANCIAL AND OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
The following table sets forth certain selected annual ﬁnancial and operational information of Banks for
the periods indicated:
(In 3 excet share amounts
_ mm Year enemas
1600392 492,499
Cash Flow from Operations (55,465) (551,926) (198,535)
$ Per Share -Basic (0.00) (0.04) (0.03)
(0.00) (0104) (0.03)
1226.135 950.642 668,680
Net Loss Per Share (basic and fully diluted) (0.05) (0.07) (0.11)
8.232.433 3.723555 1298.969
Total Long-term Debt 1,544,859 397,046 _
Ca - ital Ex enditures, Net 5,690,274 2,901,485 370,969
Oment Worldn Ca l ital Deﬁcit 2,183,327 561,039 1,058,538 7
Common Shares outstandin at Year End ——_
28.614.682 17,587,932 6,760,315
39,417.688 26,656,392 9,895,315
The following sets out selwted ﬁnancial information of the Company for the quarterly peﬁods indicated:
Apr” Ian31 061.31 Jul31 Apr30 JanSl 01131 Jul31
2005 2005 2004 2004 2004 2004 2003 2003
ﬁnancial Data 5 S 5 $ $ $ $ 3
011 and gas 51155 850.699 585.708 593.113 571,372 423,960 61,539 r r
, Royalty expenes 235,300 172.330 177.526 160,199 147.446 3.922 - -
Production costs 295,682 413,707 140,076 139,399 195,455 93,079 - -
Nu operating income 319,717 (379) 275.511 271.274 81.059 (33.462) — -
Depletion 550.214 260.461 232,902 156,423 510.616 42.488 - -
lumme (loss) befme
discontinued operation: l25.436 (879,296) (264,147) (249,674) 44,430 (372.760) (“1.599) (159,137)
Loss per share before
msemnnnm opennem
-basic and diluted 0.00 (0.03) (0.01) (0.01) 0.00 (om) (0.01) (0.02)
Net income (loss) 166,982 (879.296) (264.147) (249,674) 57,106 (372,760) (127,899) (507,139)
Net income (km) 121
shire - hair: 8: diluled 0.01 (0103) (0.01) (0.01) 0.00 (0.01) (0.01) (0.05)
Sales Volumes
011 (Mal/day) 325 259 184 135 66 51 - »
GE


DESCRIPTION OF SHARE CAPITAL

The authorized share capital of Banks consists of 100,000,000 common shares. As at the date hereof,

Banks had a total of 28,614,682 Banks Shares issued and outstanding. All of the issued Banks Shares are

fully paid and not subject to any future call or assessment

All of the Banks Shares rank equally as to voting rights, with one vote per share. The Banks Shares do

not have cumulative voting rights. Holders of Banks Shares are entitled to receive dividends, when and if

declared by the board of directors, out of funds of Banks legally available thereforer Holders of Banks

Shares do not have any preemptive rights or other rights to subscribe for additional shares, or any

conversion rights. Upon a liquidation, dissolution, or winding up of the affairs of Banks, holders of

Banks Shares will be entitled to share rateably in the assets available for distribution to such stockholders

after the payment of all liabilities and after the liquidation preference of any preferred stock outstanding

at such time. There are no sinking fund provisions applicable to the Banks Shares.
CAPITALIZATION
Outstanding as at
Share Capital Authorized April 30, 2005 and as at
September 1, 2005
Common Shares “’ 100,000,000 $7,509,995
(28,614,682 common shares) _
Long term debt (2) - -

Notes:

(1) As at the date hereof, Banks has outstanding (i) 158,000 share purchase warrants, each entitling,
the holder to acquire one additional Banks Share at the price of $0.45 if exercised on or before
December 31, 2005; (ii) 8,035,000 share purchase warrants, each entitling the holder to acquire
one additional Banks Share at the price of $0.75 ifexercised on or before June 9, 2006; and (iii)
an aggregate of 2,610,000 Banks Shares reserved for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding
stock options at an average price of $0.31 per Banks Share.

t2) Banks has no long—term debt. As of its ﬁnancial year ended April 30, 2005 Banks had
outstanding loans totaling $1,440,000. The following material changes have taken place with
respect to Banks’ loan structure between April 30, 2005 and the date of this Information
Circular:

(:1) Banks‘ revolving credit facility agreement with National Bank of Canada was converted into
a reducing demand credit facility in June of 2005, as a result of which Banks is obligated to
reduce the amount owing thereunder by $100,000 per month. The indebtedness thereunder of
$1,000,000 as of April 30, 2005 has been reduced to $800,000 as of the date of this
Information Circular. See “Material Contracts";

(b) Banks was indebted to Tenax on April 30, 2005 in the amount of $100,000 on account of a
loan. The outstanding balance owing on that loan as of the date hereof is approximately
$120,000;

(c) Banks was indebted to Mr. Chris Wright on April 30, 2005 in the amount of $330,000 on
account of a loan The outstanding balance owing on that loan as of the date hereof is
approximawa $350,000;

c-9


(d) Banks entered into a loan agreement dated July 15, 2005 with 632959 Alberta Ltd, as lender
(the “632959 Loan Agreement”). wherein 632959 loaned to Banks the sum of $150,000.
The loan is due and payable on July 15, 2006, and bears bonus interest at the rate of 10%
from Julyrlﬁ, 2005 until October 15, 2005 and at the rate of 20% from October 16, 2005
until paid in full. Interest is repayable concurrently with principal.
PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDERS
As at the date of this Information Circular, to the best of the knowledge of the directors and ofﬁcers of
Banks, no person or company beneﬁcially owns, directly or indirectly, or exercises control or direction
over, voting securities carrying more than 10% of the voting rights attached to any class of voting
securities of Banks.
As of the date hereof, the directors and ofﬁcers of Banks, as a group, and associates beneﬁcially own,
directly or indirectly, or exercise direction or control over, 2,937,611 Banks Shares, representing 10.25%
of the issued and outstanding Banks Shares In addition, those persons hold options to acquire a total of
1,995,000 Banks Shares which, if exercised, would result in them collectively controlling 16% of the
issued and outstanding Banks Shares.
PRIOR SALES
The following table sets forth a summary of all Common Shares issued by Banks in the 12 months
immediately preceding the date hereof:
Number of Issue Price Aggregate Reason for
Issued by way Effective Dates Common per Issue Price Issuance
of Shares Issued Securit
—_———_
Private December 16, 2004 1,000,000 $0.45 $450,000
Placement caital
Private January 11, 2005 708,000 $0.45 $318,600 working
Placement ca - ital
ESCROWED SECURITIES
r The number of Common Shares of Banks held in escrow pursuant to an escrow agreement dated
November 5, 2002, and the percentage which that number represents of the outstanding Common Shares
as of the date hereof is as follows:
Designation of Class Number of Securities held in Percentage of Class
Escrow
Banks Common Shares 83.601 0.29% ”
Notes:
(1) As of the date hereof, there are 28,614,682 Common Shares issued and outstanding.
(2) The escrow agent is Computershare Trust Company of Canada. A total of 75,000 Common Shares are
eligible for release from escrow every six months. The next escrow release date is November 5. 2005.
(2-10


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
The following table sets out certain information respecting Banks’ directors and ofﬁcers:
7 K V _ No. 01 Shares
Name, Municipality of . Beneﬁcially
Residence and L Owned,
Present Position Principal Occupation Director Controlled
in the Company for the Past Five Years Since or Directed m
D. BARRY LEE 0’ President ofthe Company, Sep 2002 - Mar. 10, 2000 2,139,389
Varwouver. B.C. present, President & CEO. of P.I.L.
President, CEO & DiIeCtol' Productions Ltd, Jan 1985 - present
LESTER STACH President, Tenax Energy Inc., 2000 - Jun. 18, 2003 150,000
Calgary, Alberta present Consultant, Stach & Associates
Vice—President, Business Ino. 1993 - present
Development & Director
CHRISTOPHER President & CEO, Northern Sun Mar. 10, 2000 80,472
COOPER Exploration Company Inc., 2002 »
Vancouver, BC“) present, President, Styles Management
Director Inc., 1995 - resent 7
STEVEN BRUK President, Watch Resources Ltd. 2004- Nov. 11, 2002 1 11,500
West Vancouver, B.C. ‘" 2005, President, Choice Resources Corp.
Director 2001-2003

Notes:

(1) Member of the Audit Committee and Reserves Committee. Banks’ board of directors has no other
committees.

(2) Shares beneﬁcially owned, directly or indirectly, or over which control or direction is exercised, as at
September 1, 2005, based upon information furnished to the Company by individual directors.
Unless otherwise indicated, such shares are held directly.

. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Except as set forth below, there are no material conﬂicts of interest between Banks or Trinity and the

directors or ofﬁcers of Banks or Trinity.

Lester Stach is a shareholder, director and President of Tenax, which is party to a Loan Agreement with

Banks dated April 8, 2005 under which Tenax loaned to Banks the sum of $100,000 (the “Tenax Loan

Ageement”). The loan is due and payable on April 8, 2006, and hears bonus interest at the rate of 10%

per annum from April 8, 2005 until July 9, 2005 and at the rate of 20% per annum from July 10, 2005

until paid in full. Interest is Iepayable concurrently with principal. The loan is unsecured. Mr. Stach has

a potential conﬂict of interest with Banks if Banks defaults in payment of the loan.

Mr. Stnch also has a conﬂict of interest with Banks under the Tenax Business Development Agreement

and the Tenax Supplemental Agreement. See “Interest of Certain Persons or Companies in Matters to Be

Acted Upon."

on


A potential conﬂict of interest existed for D. Barry Lee under the Lee Management Agreement in that the
Amalgamation triggers a right of termination at his election which would in turn entitle him to a
severance payment ofr$45,000, however, Mr. Lee has waived his right to terminate and to receive that
payment. See “Executive Compensation - Termination of Employment, Changes in Responsibility and
Employment Contracts"?
MANAGEMlmT
D. Barry Lee and Lester Stach are considered to be members of Banks’ management team whose
expertise is critical to Banks. The following is a summary of their background, experience and
responsibilities:
D. Barry Lee - President, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer & Director
Barry Lee has been involved in the senior management and corporate ﬁnance of numerous domestic and
international oil and gas projects. He is the co-founder and a former director and COO of Choice
Resources Corp, producing natural gas in Alberta, co—founder, director and former President of Watch
Resources Ltd., with oil and gas production in Alberta, and a co—founder of Northern Sun Exploration
Company Inc., exploring for and producing oil and natural gas in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and the
NorthWest Territories. As President and CEO of Banks, Mr. Lee is responsible for overseeing all aspects
of the day-to-day management of the Company. He provides his services to Banks as an independent
contractor, and not as an employee, under the Lee Management Agreement. Mr. Lee currently devotes
approximately 80% of his working time and attention in providing his services to Banks. Prior to
becoming President of Banks in September of 2002, Mr. Lee's full time occupation was as President of
P.I.L. Productions Ltd, his personal investment and holding company, a. position which he continues to,
hold. He is party to a conﬁdentiality agreement with Banks (contained in the Lee Management
Agreement) but is not subject to a non-competition agreement. He is 48 years of age.
Les G. Stat-h, P. lami— Vice-President, Business Development & Director
Les Stach is a professional landman with twenty»two years of negotiating and management experience
with various sized oil and gas producers in Western Canada. He has extensive experience in managing
issues. project coordination and in creating and managing aboriginal relationships with a broad business
perspective. He has held the position of Vice-President Business Development of Banks since October 7,
2004. Mr. Stach provides his services to Banks as an independent contractor through Tenax Energy Inc.,
an independent consulting services ﬁrm of which he is President and one of four shareholders. Mr. Stach
r devotes approximately 60% of his working time and attention to the provision of services to Banks.
Since 1999, he has been involved with various companies developing oil and gas on aboriginal
community lands. Among such companies is Navigo Energy Inc., to whom Mr. Stach provided his
services and developed innovative strategies to facilitate substantial production growth for that company
on Indian and Métis land bases. These projects included creating educational and business development
programs aimed at involving individuals within these communities in the exploration and development
activities for corporations with whom the native communities entered into business arrangements.
From 1996 to 1999, Mr. Stach was with Amber Energy Inc., identifying, building and acquiring
prospective land bases on aboriginal communities. Prior to Amber’s sale to Encarta. (formerly ABC), he
managed eight different aboriginal exploration opportunities across Alberta and in the northern United
States, with such aboriginal land bases producing in excess of 7500 BOE per day. Amber’s competitive
advantage with the First Nation and Métis people was based on his strategy of involving the communities
in the development of their resources based on agreements which included education, training.
environmental responsibility, and business development components.
or:


From 1980 to 1996, Mr. Stach worked for both Texaco Canada and Imperial Oil in various capacities as a
Landman. Aboriginal Affairs Adviser, Employment Equity Advisor, and Hobbema 7 Four Nations
Liaison. During this tenure he developed corporate Aboriginal policies, renegotiated royalty rates,
managed signiﬁcant First Nation relationships, and provided direction to the Board of Directors for each
corporation. ’
He has been a member of and has represented the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers at the
Royal Conunission on Aboriginal Peoples National Round Table on Economic Development and
Resources, has provided evidence before the Federal Standing Committee on Energy respecting Indian
Oil and Gas Regulations, and served as Chairman of the Native Affairs Committee. He is 50 years of age.
The following is a summary of the background and experience of Chris Cooper and Steven Bruk.
directors of Banks:
Chris R. Cooper, Director
Chris Cooper is the co—founder and current President and director of Northern Sun Exploration Company
Inc. and is the former CFO and treasurer of Velvet Exploration Ltd., where he was instrumental in its
early stage ﬁnancing and development. He is a former member of the board of directors of Pan-Global
Energy, a public oil and gas producer in a joint venture partnership with the Onion Lake First Nation of
Saskatchewan, and a member of the board of directors of Watch Resources Ltd, producing gas in
Alberta.
Steven J. Bruk, Director
Steven Bruk is most recently the former President and CEO of Watch Resources Ltd., a public oil and?
gas producer in a joint venture with the Fishing Lake Métis Settlement in Alberta, near Lloydnrinster. He
is the co—founder and former President of Choice Resources Corp, where he built natural gas production
to 1600 BOEPD through a series of acquisitions and development drilling. He also sits on the Board of
Directors of a number of public and private resource companies.
HUMAN RESOURCES
Banks currently has 2 full time consultants, 8 part-time consultants and no employees.
PRICE RANGE AND TRADING VOLUME
Banks Shares are listed and posted for trading on the Exchange under the trading symbol “BKL”. The
7 following table sets forth the high and low trading prices and the volume of Banks Shares traded as
reported on the Exchange for the periods indicated:
Dail Av .17 Volume
m- 104,773
Iuws 23.705
W 25.181
15.600
29.209
39,227
Febos 69,985
Nov 04— Janos 234.259
Au 0+ Oct-o4 -M_ 107.748
013


.m-
.3-
m
INDEBTEDNESS OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
There is no indebtedness of any director, executive ofﬁcer, senior ofﬁcer, proposed nominee for election
as a director or associate of them, to or guaranteed or supported by the Company or any of its subsidiaries
either pursuant to an employee stock purchase program of the Company or otherwise, during the most
recently completed financial year.
STOCK OPTION PLAN
The Banks directors adopted the Stock Option Plan in 2003 pursuant to which options to acquire Banks
Shares may be granted to directors, ofﬁcers, employees and consultants of Banks. The Stock Option Plan
was amended in 2004 to provide that the maximum number of Banks Shares which may be reserved for
issuance pursuant to the grant of options thereunder shall not exceed 10% of the number of issued and
outstanding Banks Shares from time to time. The Stock Option Plan, as amended, was approved by the
Banks Shareholders by way of disinterested vote. Banks is seeking re-approval of the Stock Option Plan
by the Shareholders at the Meeting. The Stock Option Plan is fully described in the information circular
respecting the Meeting to which this Appendix G attached. See “Special Business to be Conducted At the
Meeting — Re—Approval of Stock Option Plan".
As of the date hereof options entitling the directors, ofﬁcers, employees and consultants of Banks to
acquire an aggregate of 2,610,000 Banks Shares are outstanding as follows:
Number of Common Exercise Price per
Person Shares under Option Common Share Date of Grant E_xpiry Date
75,000 $0.20 Aug 26/02 Aug 26/07
Executive Ofﬁcers 150,000 $0.21 Sept. 20/02 Sept. 20/07
(3 persons) 130,000 $0.20 Feb. 18/03 Feb. 18/08
100,000 $0.37 June 18/03 June 18/08
100,000 $0.38 Aug. 29/03 Aug. 29/08
300,000 $0.34 July 5/04 July 5/09
100,000 $0.36 Oct. 6/04 Oct. 6/09
100,000 $0.20 Aug 26/02 Aug 26/07
. Directors 30,000 $0.20 Feb. 13/03 Feb. 18/08
(1 person) 100,000 $0.38 Aug. 29/03 Aug. 29/08
100,000 $0.34 July 5/04 July 5/09
Employees (none) N/A N/A N/A N/A
30,000 $0.20 Feb. 18/03 Feb. 18/08
Consultants 100,000 $0.37 Jlme 18/03 June 18/08
(18 persons) 225,000 $0.38 Aug. 29/03 Aug. 29/08
75,000 $0.47 Nov. 24/03 Nov. 24/08
100,000 $0.30 June 21/04 June 21/09
425,000 $0.34 July 5/04 July 5/09
370,000 $0.36 Oct. 6/04 Oct. 6/09
Total 2,610,000
014


DIVIDEND AND RECORD POLICY
Banks has neither declared nor paid dividends on any of its outstanding common shares, and does not
intend to in the foreseeable future. Banks intends to retain any futln'e earnings to ﬁnance the expansion
of its business. Any future determination to pay dividends will be at the discretion of the board of
directors of Banks and'will be dependent upon Banks’ earnings, capital requirements and financial
position, as well as any other factors deemed relevant by the board of directors.
LEGAL PROCEEDH‘IGS
Management of Banks is not aware of any existing or contemplated legal proceedings material to Banks.
to which Banks is a party or to which any of its properties is subject
MATERIAL CONTRACTS OF BANKS
Other than contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business, the only material contracts entered
into by Banks during the past two year period prior to the date hereof which can reasonably be regarded
as presently material to Banks are as follows:

(a) the Amalgamation Agreement, as amended, by the Amalgamation Amending Agreement,
and by the second Amalgamation Amending Agreement;

(b) the Tenax Supplemental Agreement;

(c) the Tenax Loan Agreement;

((1) the Lee Management Agreement; 7

(e) Credit Facilities Agreement dated November 30, 2004 between Banks and National Bank
of Canada, as amended by a further agreement dated June 21, 2005. Pursuant to such
agreement, National Bank is providing to Banks a revolving reducing demand loan in the
maximum amount of $1,000,000 with a sublimit of $250,000 for letters of credit and
letters of guarantee The loan facility is reducing by the sum of $100,000 per month
commencing July 31, 2005. Banks currently owes $800,000 under the loan facility. The
loan is secured by charges and security interests in and to all of Banks‘ assets;

(f) Financial Advisory Services Agreement dated June 29, 2004 between Banks and

e Woodstone, pursuant to which Banks engaged Woodstone to assist it in pursuing a
strategic merger. “friendly” take-over bid, reverse take-over or other business
combination. The agreement provided for payment of a success fee of 1.5% of the
transaction value of any such transaction. Woodstone introduced Banks to Arapahue:
however, Banks has not paid Woodstone any fees thereunder. and that agreement was
terminated by mutual agreement concurrently with the entering into of the Letter of
Engagement described below;

(g) Letter of Engagement dated July 11, 2005 between Banks and Woodstone Capital Inc.
respecting the provision of the fairness opinion described in the Information Circular to
which this is appended. Banks has agreed to pay to Woodstone a fee of $100,000 for the
fairness opinion, plus reimburse Woodstone for its reasonable out of pocket costs, which
are estimated to be nominal;

(h) Loan Agreement dated April 8, 2005 between Banks as borrower and Chris D. Wright as
lender wherein the lender loaned to Banks the sum of $300000. The loan is due and

015


payable on April 8, 2006, and bears bonus interest at the rate of 10% from April 8, 2005
until July 9, 2005 and at the rate of 20% from July 10, 2005 until paid in fulL Interest is
repayable concurrently with principal. The loan is unsecured; and
(i) The 632559 Loan Agreement described under the heading “Capitalization?
Copies of these agreements will be available for inspection at the ofﬁce of Banks, 2410 - 650 West
Georgia Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, during ordinary business hours
AUDITOR, REGISTRAR AND TRANSFER AGENT OF BANKS
The auditor of Banks is BDO Dunwoody LLP, Calgary, Alberta.
The registrar and transfer agent of Banks is Computershal'e Trust Company of Canada, 4‘h Floor, 510
Burrard Street. Vancouver, British Columbia, V6C 3B9.
c-is


APPENDIX D
v PRO-FORMA FH‘IANCIAL STATEMENTS
m


WCEVWERHOUsECdJPERs

V x Priman—houuCoumeLr

Charmed Accountants
v in st Avenue sw, sue 3100

cum, Aim
Cuudn TIP SL3
Telephone +1 (403) 509 7500
Facsimile +1 (406) 731 1325

Compilation report

To the Directors cfArapahoe Energy Corporation

We have read the accompanying unaudited pro forma. consolidated balance sheet of Aaraphoe

Energy Corporation (the “Company”) as at June 30, 2005 and unaudited pro forma

consolidated statement of operations for the six months then ended and for the year ended

December 31, 2004, and have performed the following procedures.

1. Compared the ﬁgures in the columns captioned "Arapahoe Energy Corp." to the unaudited
ﬁnancial statements of the Company as at June 30, 2005 and for the six months then
ended, and the audited ﬁnancial statements of the Company for the year ended December
31, 2004, and found them to be in agreement.

2. The columns captioned "Banks Energy Inc." contained the balance sheet of Banks Energy ,
Inc. as at April 30, 2005 and its results of operations for the six months th ended and the
twelve months ended January 31, 2005 that have been calculated from the audited
ﬁnancial statements for the years ended April 30, 2004 and 2005, the unaudited ﬁnancial
statements for the six months ended October 31, 2004 and the unaudited ﬁnancial
statements for the nine months ended January 31, 2004 and 20051 We have re-performed
the calculation of the columns containing the ﬁnancial position as at April 30, 2005, the
result of operations for the six months ended April 30, 2005 and the twelve months ended
January 31, 2005 and found the columns to be arithmetically correct

3. Made enquiries of certain ofﬁcials of the Company who have responsibility for financial
and accotnIting matters about:

(a) the basis for determination of the pro forma adjustments; and
(b) whether the pro forma ﬁnancial statements comply as to form in all material respects
with Canadian generally accepted accounting principles.
The ofﬁcials: '
(a) described to us the basis for determination of the pro forms adjustments; and
(b) stated that the pro forma statements comply as to form in all material respects with
Canadian generally accepted accounting principles.

Priccwllcﬂiwibcoweu ﬁfe! in the MI" ﬁnnofhioewnmthlseCoopzi-s LLP uni the other numb: “Hm ummmm [memuional

momma ammo. seam: mu indepﬁﬂlwt leg-l unity.


WCEVWERHOUSEGDPERS

4. Read the notes to the pro fonna statements, and found them to be consistent with the basis
described for determination of the pro forma adjustments.

5. Recalculated the application of the pro forma adjustments to the aggregate of the amormts
in the columns captioned "Arapahoe Energy Corp."," Banks Energy Inc," and
“Adjustments” as at June 30, 2005 and for the six months then ended and for the year
ended December 31, 2004, and found the amounts in the column captioned "Pro forma
Arapahoe Energy Corp." to be arithmetically correct.

A pro forma ﬁnancial statement is based on manageut assumptions and adjustments which

are inherently subjective. The foregoing procedures are substantially less than either an audit

or a review, the objective of which is the expression of assurance with respect to
management's assumptions, the pro forma adjustments, and the application of the adjustments
to the historical ﬁnancial information. Accordingly, we express no such assurance. The
foregoing procedures would not necessarily reveal matters of signiﬁcance to the pro forma
ﬁnancial statements, and we therefore make no representation about the sufﬁciency of the
procedures for the purposes of a reader of such statements.

Chartered Accountants

Calgary, Alberta
September 7, 2005
(2)


ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION
Proforma Consolidated Balance Sheet
As at June 30, 2005
(Unaudited)
' " Pro Forma
' Ampahoe Banks Ailiustments Arapahoe
Energy Corp. Energy Inc. (note 2) Energy Corp.
ASSETS
Current assets
, Casll 4,347,978 23,932 - 4,371,910
Accounts receivable & prepaids 4,271,739 573,231 - 4,849,970
Deferred ﬁnancing charges 117,644 . . 117,644
8,737,361 602,163 - 9,339.524
Goodwill 1,506,695 1,506,695
Property, plant and eqm'pment 1,911,081 7,630,270 4,45 8,076 13,999,427
Total 10,648,442 8,232,433 5,964,771 24,845,646
_—__—_———ﬂ—___
LIABILITIES 0
Current liahilities a
11
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 3,772,982 1,247,600 270,000 5,290,582
Operating loan 1,073,969 1,440,000 - 2,513,969
Due to lelated panics 90,948 97,890 7 188,838,
4,937,899 2,785,490 270,000 7,993,389
Future income taxes 1,280,000 1,434,537 2,7 14,537
Asset retirement obligation 14,224 264,859 - 279,083
Total 4,952,173 4,330349 1,704,537 10,987,009
I
SHAREHOLDERS” EQUITY , |
I
Share capital 6,315,144 7,509,995 (7,509,995)
8,162,318 14,477,462
Contributed surplus 662,944 980,006 (980,006) 662,944
r Deﬁcit (1,281,769) (4,587,917) 4,587,917 (1,281,769)
——_—m
Total 10,643,442 8,232,433 5,964,771 24,845,646
n41


A Manor; g
, hmgv 8:39 Sf;an g
‘7 Mm V, — H‘Hm’ I. m
03: ﬁaaqngn m5” gags
3mm, ~m-mog g N; "1 #:‘r
. .v," o Vac—1 "1 SW m v
a E ogm lag q” ‘f V
E36 $32” .7 ~_.
0 m\_/v—1
£2.» .—« a, 66
62? A A
a<l§  3,53% 8
69 II—1 l‘ ﬁlm o
..,1\ h a” *V; V
m‘ll a 00‘ a 1“
a? a H S
w _ V
a m
:A
$3 69 Ge
3% A
5 “AN? .\
Q “A5? vgtm Q
Hummg-S SSE Rio-M’s e
NAS {38:33.1 3, (ﬁx-I” $223
38» ..mmo N NH “1V ’
.. .61» ~33pr q 99 N S
3“ E2§ a" w m V
F .
:1”?3 40.. ‘9 m
Ewigs ” é
asaa I A m g 7
N ‘9 II "N1 “3% d
A" $8 ﬁnﬁq h N
333 ﬁg 2.0;”; 3 we
I A "1"” In an v
E's: 8&3 H5 m
8“: #3
EU: 3 59
aﬂe'ga ‘9
Eggs"
‘1: w
ra’n 69
5?
§
5
E
E ‘5
2 EU
V 0
a a
D n a
 'o a g g a
, Eﬁv g 8 g 5 g
o
325% a  g ﬁg g
a ..
u. 0 :5” a
oH a
EEM E  gag E 3“.-
o3; o E 203%}: E 
o w 0
WE E 1i§n§ “g 3&a& g
UI§8 0” Eu Sc ﬁg 32.55 a“
Man 2 “33055 0‘ is k m
:2 I: Sav§x gE eogg 8
EEE 3 Emésg’ui SE §§z2 g.
msﬁ M zéi“'§j§ ﬁg Mag 2
QUE? an; gaggigs g5 SE“
5% a “a; “(335” H
0: =° m5“ H
gig CM
0
£533


77-h: o m~ 61—4 we Azzp n
We 3.5%. aiaséiw 233%. 3%.: §
Eon 'ﬁdﬂ ﬁQﬁQSﬁﬁ 3;: #916 V
sf.” 13°. I~°°~~°ova~1 :-:«g
kg? _V_ m s» 3»
She"
Edi;
93 G ea
In"... .v-lvnq ... AmA A
:9 2. "—1 Eﬁﬁ 8
g 8 3 dam" 8
5, a a
a-
F?
iv
69
99
HI‘ 0 'WOWH'ODN ADO“ A
dEg §§s 2§ 8:233 x:% 52% S.
 '~ '4'“ J“  o
.553 £>£ 83 ﬁcx‘ﬂg v: =35 V
.52 a» tgq I~<r hot—1 3mg
=§§M ﬂy... N _; v
éggi V
a a.
6‘ 69 a, W
c:th hvgln—‘oxo Iv 3'5: [3
ﬁg #3”? EKQSH‘SQ a a Q «s
85:3 $453 angsnsa o’ e‘ 8 a
ﬁlled. 3 whim mq g 3 7
nEEM -‘ 4 ._7
20:.» v V
<=§§ 99
He" 99 a;
Q A
m '0
5r '3’
2'5“) 5
' 3% E
:53 5
03
cu. = as
an: .2
«a: g E m 1%
egg 8 8 1% 52 3
Va" is “g E as I
a“? c... 3 55 o “a §
“2g o '= '5 E .5
nu _, a: t:“ a§
E32,. u a 82 E a
31-5-5 E 'a .20 - '5" °
[:25 a i30§3 = :53 E
o8EA a vgmn‘o 08 £5 a
x-g n. ﬁgigu 5.2 E n. :2
=N-EH 5 a ‘50 § at 2‘5- 5
Egg? EH: g¥2§553 SE «.‘Ebﬁ E:
é‘Ehg an?“ mag" ’ﬁg ‘31 B§§ .5
09 E a: as .= :‘79 -
‘19-“ §=o no._~uE ~R 30 o
On: OUmEDm £0 ﬁzz z


ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION
Notes to Pro-Forrna Consolidated Financial Statements
As at June 30, 2005, for the year ended December 31, 2004 and the six months ended June 30, 2005.
1. Basis “presentation?
The pro—forma consolidamd ﬁnancial statemenm of Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Arapahoe" or the "Company")
as at June 30, 2005, for the period then ended and for the year ended December 31, 2004. have been prepared for
inclusion in the Information Circular dated September 7, 2005 relating to the proposed amalgamation of Banks
Energy Inc. (“Banks”). Pursuant to the amalgamation, Banks shareholders will receive 050 of an Arapahoe
common share for each Banks share held. Banks and its subsidiary are engaged in the exploratim development and
production of oil and natural gas in Saskatchewan
The pro—forma consolidated ﬁnancial statements have been prepared from the following sources of information and
the assumptions set out in notes 2. 3 and 4 below.
1. The information used to form the Balance Sheet as at June 30, 2005 was compiled by using the
following information:
a. June 30, 2005 unaudited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of the Company.
b. April 30, 2005 audited consolidawd ﬁnancial statements of Banks.
2. The information used to form the Statement of Earning (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2004
was compiled by using the following information:
a. 12 months data from the December 31. 2004 audited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of the
Company.
h. 3 months data extracted from the April 30. 2005 audited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of
Banks.
0. 9 months data from the January 31, 2005 unaudited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of Banks. 7
3. The information used to form the Statement of Earning (loss) for the six months aided June 30. 2005
was compiled by using the following infon-natiorn
a. 6 months data from the June 30, 2005 unaudited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of the Company.
b. 3 months data extracted from the April 30, 2005 audited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of
Banks.
0. 3 months data extracted from the January 31, 2005 unaudited consolidated ﬁnancial statements of
Banks.
The pro—forma consolidated statement ofEanu'ng (loss) gives effect to the amalgamation as if it occurred January 1,
, 2004. The pro—forma consolidated balance sheet gives effect to the amalgamation at I une 30, 2005.
The pro—format consolidated ﬁnancial statements do not give effect to any transaction mat does not meet the
signiﬁcant teat rules as deﬁned by various securities regulators.
The pro-forms consolidated ﬁnancial statements may not be indicative of the ﬁnancial position or the results of
operations of Arapahoe which will be obtained upon completion of the acquisition of Banks (the "Acquisition"). In
preparing the pro-forrna consolidated ﬁnancial statements, no adjusnnents have been made to reﬂect any operating
or administrative cost savings that may result from the opaations of the consolidated assets,
Accounting policies used in the preparation of the pro—fonna ﬁnancial statements are in accordance with those
disclosed in the Company’s audited consolidated ﬁnancial statements as at and for the year ended December 31,
2004, In the opinion of management, the pro—furma ﬁnancial statements include all adjustments necessary for fair
presentation In the opinion of management, the pro fonna ﬁnancial statements include all necessary adjustments for
a fair presentation of the ongoing entity.
V D-7


The pro—forma statements should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated ﬁnancial statements as at
and for the year ended December 31. 2004 and the audited consolidated financial Statements of Banks as at and for
the year ended April 30, 2005‘
2. Pro-forms consolidatéd balance sheets as at June 30, 2005 adjustments and assumptions:
The prorforma consolidated balance sheet of the Company as at June 30, 2005 has been prepared as if the following
transactions had been completed as of the balance sheet date:
(a) Corporate Acquisition
in $ (000‘s) except per share amounts
June 3|), 2005
Net assets acquired at: assigned values:
Working capital deﬁciency (2.183)
Oil &Gastperties 7,110
Undeveloped Lands 4.973
Goodwill 1507
Asset retirement obligation (265)
Future tax liability (2,715)
Net assets acquired 8,432
Financed by:
Shares issued (15,115,404 common shares) 8,162
Acquisition costs 270 ,
Purchase price 8,432
(b) The book value of Bank’s assets and liabilities are adjusted to reﬂect their fair value and the related
deﬁcit, contributed surplus and cumulative exchange adjustment were eliminated,
(c) Acquisition costs include the following items:
Amounts payable to advisors in connection with share issuance 100
Fees payable for accounting, tax and legal advice 170
V Total Acquisition Costs 3 270
(d) Banks has a contractual obligation to pay to Tenax Energy Inc. an amount equal to 5% of the enterprise
value immediately upon the occurrence of a Change of Control. Upon closing, at Arapahoe‘s
discretion, the Tenax obligation will be paid through the issue of 808.063 common shares of Arapahoe.
These shares have been included in the “Shares issued” referred to in note 2(a).
3. Pro-forms consolidated statement of operations for year ended December 31, 2004 adjustments and
assumptions:
The pro-forma consolidated statement of operations of the Company for the year ended December 31, 2004 has been
prepared as if the following proposed transactions took place on January 1, 2004:
13-8


(a) The purchase price allocated to the Banks Energy Inc. capital assets is amortized on a unit of
production basis.
(b) Future income mes are recorded at the applicable corporate rate of 39.12%.
4. Pro—forms consolidated statement of operations for six month period ended June 30, 2005 adjustments
and assumptions:
The proforma consolidaned statement of operations of the Company for the six month period ending June 30, 2005
has been prepared as if the following proposed transactions took place on January 1, 2004:
(a) The purchase price allocated to the Banks Energy Inc. capital assets is amortized on a unit of
production basis.
(b) Future income taxes are recorded at the applicable corporate rate of 39.12%.
5. Per share mun-ls:
Holders of Banks Energy common shares will receive 0.50 shares of Arapahoe for each Banks share held Holders
of Banks warrants and options will be entitled to purchase 050 shares of Arapahoe for each Banks warrant and
option held.
Pro—forum net income per share at December 31. 2004 has been calculated using the weighted average numbu of
Arapahoe shares. including Arapahoe shares issued to acquire Banks Energy Inc.
Pro-forms net income per share at June 30, 2005 has been calculated using the weighted average number of
Arapahoe shares, including Arapahoe shares issued In acquire Banks Energy Inc. 7
ARAPAHOE ENERGY CORPORATION
Basic & diluted shares outstanding
June 30, 2005 Demmher 31, 2004
Weighted Average Shares outstanding 14,713,591 9.334.490
Shares issued to Banks shareholders 15,115.404 15,115,404
Weighted Average Bade Shares OutstandLng' 29,828g95 24,449é94
Anﬁ-Dilntive Options 8: Warrants
. Arapahoe Options outstanding 1.678.181 872,348
Options issued to Banks option holders 1,317,500 1,317,500
Arapahoe Wannnts outstanding 1,132,322 3.196.531
Warrants issued to Banks warrant holders 4,096,500 4,096,500
Total 38,053,498 33£322773
D—9


APPENDIX E
SECTION 193 OF THE BUSINESS CORPORATIONS ACT (YUKON)
~ Yukon Business Corporations Act
Section 193: shareholder’s right to dissent
(1) Subject to sections 194 and 243, a holder of shares of any class of a corporation may dissent if
the corporation resolves to
(a) amend its articles under section 175 or 176 to add, change or remove any provisions
restricting or constraining the issue or transfer of shares of that class;

(b) amend its articles under section 175 to add, change or remove any restrictions on the
business or businesses that the corporation may carry on;

(c) amalgamate with another corporation, otherwise than under section 186 or 189;

(d) be continued under the laws of another jurisdiction under section 191; or

(e) sell, lease or exchange all or substantially all its property under section 192.

(2) A holder of shares of any class or series of shares entitled to vote under section 178 may dissent
ifthe corporation resolves to amend its articles in a manner described in that section.

(3) In addition to any other right, but subject to subsection (20), a shareholder entitled to dissent
under this section and who complies with this section is entitled to be paid by the corporation the
fair value of the shares in respect of which the shareholder dissents, determined as of the close of
business on the last ‘mrsiness day before the day on which the resolution from which the
shareholder dissents was adopted.

(4) A dissenting shareholder may only claim under this section with respect to all the shares of a
class held by the dissenting shareholder or on behalf of any one beneﬁcial owner and registered
in the name of the dissenting shareholder.

(5) A dissenting shareholder shall send to the corporation a written objection to a resolution referred
to in subsection (1) or (2)

r (a) at or before any meeting of shareholders at which the resolution is to be voted on; or
(b) if the corporation did not send notice to the shareholder of the purpose of the meeting or
of the shareholder’s right to dissent, within a reasonable time after learning that the
resolution was adopted and of the right to dissent.

(6) An application may be made to the Supreme Court after the adoption of a resolution referred to

in subsection (1) or (2),
(a) by the corporation; or
(b) by a shareholder if an objection to the corporation under subsection (5) has been sent by
the shareholder, to set the fair value in accordance with subsection (3) of the shares of a
shareholder who dissents under this section
at


(7) If an application is made under subsection (6), the corporation shall, unless the Supreme Court
otherwise orders, send to each dissenting shareholder a written offer to pay an amount considered
by the directors to be the fair value of the shares to that shareholder.

(8) Unless the Supreme Court otherwise orders, an offer referred to in subsection (7) shall be sent to
each dissenting shareholder '

(a) at least 10 days before the date on which the application is returnable, if the corporation
is the applicant; or

(b) within 10 days after the corporation is served with a copy of the originating notice, if a
shareholder is the applicant.

(9) Every offer made under subsection (7) shall
(a) be made on the same terms; and
(b) contain or be accompanied by a statement showing how the fair value was determined

(10) A dissenting shareholder may make an agreement with the corporation for the purchase of that
shareholder’s shares by the corporation, in the amount of the corporation’s offer under
subsection (7) or otherwise, at any time before the Supreme Court pronounces an order setting
the fair value of the shares.

(11) A dissenting shareholder
(a) is not required to give security for costs in respect of an application under subsection (6);

and o
(b) except in special circumstances shall not be required to pay the costs of the application
or appraisal.
(12) In connection with an application under subsection (6), the Supreme Court may give directions
for
(a) joining as parties all dissenting shareholders whose shares have not been purchased by
the corporation and for the representation of dissenting shareholders who, in the opinion
of the Supreme Court, are in need of representation;
, (b) the trial of issues and interlocutory matters, including pleadings and examinations for

discovery;

(c) the payment to the shareholder of all or part of the sum offered by the corporation for the
shares; . 1

(d) the deposit of the share certiﬁcates with the Supreme Court or with the corporation or its
transfer agent;

' (e) the appointment and payment of independent appraisers, and the procedures to be

followed by them;
(f) the service of documents; and i
(g) the burden of proof on the parties.
E~2


(13) On an application under subsection (6), the Supreme Court shall make an order
(a) setting the fair value of the shares in accordance with subsection (3) of all dissenting

shareholders who are parties to the application;

(b) giving judgment in that amount against the corporation and in favour of each of those
dissenting shareholders; and

(c) setting the time within which the corporation must pay that amount to a shareholder.

(14) On
(a) the action approved by the resolution from which the shareholder dissents becoming

effective;

(b) the making of an agreement under subsection (10) between the corporation and the
dissenting shareholder as to the payment to be made by the corporation for that
shareholder’s shares. whether by the acceptance of the corporation’s offer under
subsection (7) or otherwise; or

(c) the pronouncement of an order under subsection (13),

whichever ﬁrst occurs, the shareholder ceases to have any rights as a shareholder other than the

right to be paid the fair value of the shares in the amount agreed to between the corporation and

the shareholder or in the amount of the judgment, as the case may be.

(15) Paragraph (I4)(a) does not apply to a shareholder referred to in paragraph (5)(b).

(16) Until one of the events mentioned in subsection (14) occurs,

(a) the shareholder may withdraw the dissent: or

(b) the corporation may rescind the resolution, and in either event proceedings under this
section shall be discontinued.

(17) The Supreme Court may in its discretion allow a reasonable rate of interest on the amount
payable to each dissenting shareholder. from the date on which the shareholder ceases to have
any rights as a shareholder because of subsection (14) until the date of payment.

7 (18) If subsection (20) applies, the corporation shall, Within 10 days after

(a) the pronouncement of an order under subsection (13); or

(b) the making of an agreement between the shareholder and the corporation as to the
payment to be made for the shares,

notify each dissenting shareholder that it is unable lawfully to pay dissenting shareholders for

their shares.

(19) Even though a. judgment has been given in favour of a dissenting shareholder under paragraph
(13)(b), if subsection (20) applies, the dissenting shareholder, by written notice delivered to the
corporation within 30 days after receiving the notice under subsection (18), may withdraw the
notice of objection, in which case the corporation is deemed to consent to the withdrawal and the
shareholder is reinstated to having full rights as a shareholder, failing which the shareholder

ea


retains a status as a claimant against the corporation. to be paid as soon as the corporation is
law-fully able to do so or, in a liquidation. to be ranked subordinate to the rights of creditors of
the corporation but in priority to its shareholders.
(20) A corporation shall not make a payment to a dissenting shareholder under this section if there are
reasonable grounds for believing that
(a) the corporation is or would after the payment be unable to pay its liabilities as they
become due; or
(b) the realizable value of the corporation’s asses would thereby be less than the aggregate
of its liabilities. R.S., c.15, 5.195.
Citation: Business Corporations Act. R.SiY. 2002, c. 20
Version available as of 2004—11-24 (Last npdam on CanLII: 2004—11-24)
URL: http://www.can1ii.01g/yk/laws/sta/2D/20041124/whole.html
Enabled Regulations: 3 Regulations
54


APPENDIX F
~ WOODSTON'E CAPITAL INC.
FAIRNESS OPINION
F—l


,7 %E;TCAPIIAL ruc.‘ 7
August 10, 2005 V r
The Board of Directors ' I
of Banks Energy Inc. ~ ;
Dear Sirs and Mesdamesf
RE: Fairness Opinion by Woodstone Capital Inc.
‘ Proposed Share Exchange Ratio respecting Amalgamau‘on of Banks Energy ‘
Inc. with a subsidiary of Arapahoe Energy Corporation resulting in
exchange of Banks Shares for Arapahoe Shares
‘ Woodstone Capital Inc. (‘Woodstone' Capital”, “we”, “us”, “our”) understands that
Banks Emgy Inc. (“Banks” or the “Corporation”) has altered into an amalgamation
agreement dated August 9, 2005 (the “Agreement’ﬁ with Arapahoe Energy Corporation
C‘Arapahoe”) and 38659 Yukon Inc. (“Subco”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Arapahoe
which was organized solely for the purpose of the amalgamation. Pursuant to the ,
' Agreenx, Banks will amalgamate with Subeo, with all of the issued and outstanding
common shares of Banks (the “Banks Shares”) being exchanged for common shares
without par value in the capital stock of Arapahoe (the “Arapahoe Shares") on the basis
of0.5 ofone Arapahoe Share for every 1.0 Banks Share ~
> WennderslandﬂratﬁnalaeeeptnneeoftheAgreememis suhjeettoannmberofterms
and conditions which must either be satisﬁed or waived including, among other things, at
least 66 2/3 %(two-thirds) ofthe votes castatameetinginperson orhyproxyofBanks
' Shareholders We further understand that certain Shareholders, including the
management and directors of Banks, have entered into locked-up agreements (the “Lock-
Up Agreemmts”) with Ampahoe with respect to an aggregate of approximately 13% of
r the Shares (on a hilly-diluted basis). -
- - To assist the board of directors of Banks (the “Board’j in considering the terms of the
Offer, Banks has requested Woodstone Capital prepare an, opinion as to the fairness, from
a ﬁnancial point of view (the “Fairness Opinion"), of the consideration to he paid, which -'
isashareexchangeratioas oontainedinﬂieAgleement.
ENGAGEMENT ‘ ' _ r
Woodst Capital was engaged by Banks no provide :1 Fairness Opinion to the Board. ’
with respect to the Agreement. A formal engagement ayeement (the “Engagement
Agreement”) dated July 11, 2005, was entered into between Banks and Woodstone
Suite 3X0 -11he Smum‘ - 601 West Gordon Street Vanmuver, British Columbia V63 161
Phone (604) 605-8300 ‘ Fax (604) 605-8310 ' ll)an 1-888-383-3885


 regarding the preparation and delivery of the Fnimess Opinion. Banks has agreed
' -» to‘ compensate Woodstone Capital for its services in comwction with the Fairness
' Opinion, to reimburse it for its reasonable out-of-pocket expenses. including the fees of 1
its legal counsel, andto indemnifin in certain circumstances.
Pmsuant to the terms ofthe Engagement Agreement, Woodstone Capital has notbeeu
engaged to prepare a formal valuation of any assets m shares of Banks or Arapahoe, or to
‘ express an opinion with respect to the _fonn of the Agreement itself, and this Fairness
Opinion should not be construed as such. However, Woodstone Capital has performed
such investigations and ﬁnancial analyses that it considered to be relevant and -
' ' appropriate in the circumstances to support the wnelusions reached in this Painless
. ' Opinion. ' ’
Woodstone Capital consents to the inclusion of the Fairness Opinion in the lnibrmation
CirclllsrtobemailedtotheBanksShaIeholdexsinconnectinnwiththeAgreementandto ..
the ﬁling thereof with the securities commission or similar regulatory authority of each of
r the provinces of Canada and other jurisdictions, if required. .
RELATIONSHIP WITH INTERESTED PARTIES ‘
Woodstane Capital is not an insider, associate or aﬁiliate of Banks or Arapahoe.
Woodstone Capital is not acting as an adviser to Banks or Arnpahoe in connection with »
any matter. Arapahoe and Woodstone Capital have entered into a shares for debt ,
amgement under which Arapaho: will issue 100,000 shares to Woodstone, in
satisfaction of fees for ﬁnancial advisory services performed in 2004. ‘
Theeornpensation for Woodstonelmderdie Letter ofEngaganent orthedebtforshares '
V ' a'nnngementdoesnmdependinwholeorinpartontheeonclusionsreachedinthe
Fairness Opinion or the successful outcome of the Agreement. I
Woodstone Capital acts asatraderanddealer,bothaspﬁncipal amiss agent. inalluwjor
Canadianﬁnaneisl markets andas such has had, orniayhave,positions inthe securities
ofBanksand/orArapahoeﬁomﬁmetoﬁmeandmayhaveexecutedormayexecme, . v
mansactions in those securities and may, in the ordinary course of its business, be
, expected to provide research reports or conduct fuhne business dealings with Banks
and/or Arapahoe. Woodsmne Capital has previously and may, in the ﬁxture, in the
‘ ordinary course of its husinas, perfonn ﬁnandal advisory or investment banking services . ‘
for Banks and/or Ampahoe. .
QUALIFICATIONS 0F WOODSTONE CAPITAL INC. '
Woodstone Capital is an independent, full service investment dealer with corporate ‘
ﬁnancemwshnemresmhmdmmﬂbmkmgeopmﬁonslocmdinﬂbermand ‘
British Columbia. Its corporate ﬁnance division services the needs of emerg‘ng resource
companiesheadquameredinWestemCunada. Woodsman: Capitalanditsprineipalshave
- _ extensive experience in the securities industry and have participated in n_ signiﬁcsm ‘


%Emnber of macﬁons involving private and publicly traded oil and .gas companies. _ '
' Woodstone Capital is a participating organization of the Toronto Stock EXChange/(I'SX
Group), the Monti-eel Stock Exchange, the Investment Dealers Association of Canada and
- the Canadian Investor Protection Fund. ‘
The opinions expressed herein are the opinions of Woodstone Capital as a ﬁrm. The
form and content of the Fairness Opinion have been approved for release by senior
professionals of Woodstone Capioal. The principal individuals responsible for the
preparaﬁon of this Fairness Opinion were Mr. All limes, CA, MBA, Vice—President _
Corporate Finance, and Mr: Bob Chenery P.Eng, MBA, consultant to Woodstone Capital,
who combined have in excess of sixty (60) years experience in the evaluation and sale of ‘ '
:assetsintheCanadianoilam‘lgasindusu'y. ' . ‘ -
SCOPE OF REVIEW CONDUCTED BY WOODSTONE CAPITAL ‘
' Woodstone Capital is preparing this’Fairness Opinion at the request of Board of Directors
‘ofBanks in respect ofthe Agrement. In preparing this Fairness Opinion, Woodstone
Capital has recently analyzed publier available and conﬁdential ﬁnancial. operational
and other information relan'ng to Banks, including information derived from discussions
with the Board of Directors and management of Banks. .Exoept as expressly desn-ibed .
‘ herein, Woodstone Capital has not conducted any independent investigations to verify the
’ accuracy and completeness of suchinfomiatiorr _
In carrying out this engagement and arriving at am- Fairness Opinion, we have reviewed _
and relied upon, among other things: '
i. FinalcopyoftheAmalgamaﬁonAgreemembetweenAmpahoeandBanksdated , '
V August 9, 2005; ' p
.  The form ofLock-Up Agreement in respect of the Agreement; -
iii. Public information relating to the business, operations, ﬁnancial perfonnanoe and -
stock trading history of Banks;
- iv. Certain non-public infomation regarding Banks, is business and projects;
' vs Discussions with senior management of Banks with respect to, among other
, things, the past and futu're operations ofBanks, Bank’s eompeﬁtive position
in the market, and other issues ded relevant;
vi. fl‘he audited ﬁnancial statements ofBanks ﬁx the years ended April 30, 2003 and .
April30,2004andﬂieunauditedﬁnandalstatementsfortheyearendedApnl30, p
2005; ' '
vii. The unaudited ﬁnancial statement ofBanks for the ninemonth period ended
_ Jauumy31,20043ndlanuary31,2005; ‘
 Copies of press releases 2004 and 2005 to'dale; '
ix. A surmnary of the balances of various categories of tax pools of Banks as at
April 30, 2004; _ V
x. Astmmaryvaluaﬁonoftheoﬂmdgasresez'vesandtﬁepresemworﬂiofﬁmne '


 net cashrﬂows of Banks’ properties prepared by Gilbert Lausrsen Jung -
'4‘ ’ Associates Ltd. prepared on June 6, 2005 and effective April 30, 2005 in i
accordance with standards contained inN'l 51-101;
- xi A schedule of land acreage preparedby Banks as at June 14, 2005;
xii. A schedule of issued and outstanding shares, options and warrants of Banks as .
at June 30, 2005: ' r '
 ‘ Employee contracts & commitments. ..
' i. Final copy of the Amalgamation Agreement between Arapahoe and Banks dated
August 9, 2005; ‘ ‘
 Public infonnaﬁnn relating to the business, operations, ﬁnancial performance and
tie/ding history of Arapahoe;
 Cerlain non-public information regarding Ampahce, its business and projects;
1 iv. Discussions with senior management of_ Arapahoe with respect to, among other
things, the past and future opezaiions of Arapahoe, Arapahoe’s competitive
position in the market, and other issues deemed relevant;
v. The Annual Report of Arapahoe for the year ended December 31, 2004;
‘ vi. 'I'heaudited ﬁnancial statements ofArapahoe fortheyears endedDecernber31,
2003' and December 31, 2004;
- .  The unaudited ﬁnancial statemmls qumpahoe for the three month period ended .
lVlarch31,2005andthesixmonthpeziodmdedJune 30,2005; 7 '
- ‘  Copies of press releases dining 2004 and 2005 to date;
ix. A schedule of theches of various cmgories cftax pools cfArapahoe as at
December 31, 2004; l
x. Asmmnaryvaluaﬁoncftheoilandgasreservesandﬂieprmentworthofﬁmre
‘ net cash ﬂows of Ampahoe as prepared by Chapman Petrolwm Engineering Ltd, ' .
prepared on April 27, 2005 and ‘eﬁ'ective December 31, 2004 in accordance with
standardscontainedinNISl-ml; '
xi. Acmemsdieduleofissuedandoutstandingshareaopﬁonsandwartanmof
Ampahoeas at June 30, 2005; - '
xii. A schedule of employees, salaries, and beneﬁts.
ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS .

, Woodstone Capital has assumed and relied upon, but has not independently veriﬁed, the
accuracy, completeness and fair representaiion of all ﬁnancial and other information, materials,
representations, reports data, advice, opinions and discussions referred to above including all
information obtained by it from public sources and th'm Fairness Opinion is conditional upon
suchaccuraeyandcompleteness. Bankshesrepresentedtcusinacertiﬁcatedatedtoday'sdate
that, among oﬂmr things, there are no face not speciﬁcally disclosed which could reasonably be -
expectean matuiallyaﬁieeube scope afreviewmdenalrmhyns inrespeetofmzr engagement
which inel‘udes'preparing this Fairness Opinion and that the information, data, advice, opinions
andrepresentanlonsprovidedm usaten'ue.completeandcorredinallmaterialrespectsanddn


%ngtmnminany Imlrue material fact oromitto state anymamial faetandthat since the date the
- relevant inform'ationwas providedtherehns been no material change in Banks anan material
, change has oecm-red in the information or any part therefore that would reasonably be expected
to have an effect on the Fairness Opinion Our assumptions, the procedures we adopted and the
conclusions and opinions reached by us are dependent, in part, upon the accuracy, completeness v
v andfaimessofallsuchfactsandinformaﬁon. Bankshasrepresectedtnusthsttheinformation
proyidedby oronbehalfofBanksisttueandcorreotinallmateﬁalrespectsandconminsno
untrue statememofamaterialﬂtetanddoes notomitto statesmaterialfactthatisrequiredto he
stated or that is necessary to make a smement not misleading in light of the circumstances in
which it was made. Subject to the exercise of professional judgment and except as expreﬁly
described herein, Woodstone Capiml hasnot attempted to verify independently the accuracy or
, completeness of any such infcnnaﬁon, data, advice, opinions, representations, forecasts and '
projections. ,
Woodstone Capital believes that oin- analysis must be consida'ed as a whole and that selecting
portions of our analysis and of the {scum considered, without considering all ﬁscmrs and
. analysis in connection with the preparation of the Fairness Opinion, could create a misleading
view of the process underlying the Fairness Opinion. The preparation ofthe Fairness Opinion is
a complex process and is not necessarily suscqotible to partial analysis or summary description.
Any attempt to do so could lead to undue emphasis on any particular factor or analysis. '
In our analyses and in connection with the preparation of this Fairness Opinion, Woodstone
Capital has made xunnerous assumptions with respect to injury performance; general business
and economic conditions and other matters, many of which are beyond the control of Banks:
While in the opinion of Woodsmne Capital, the assumptions used in preparing this Fairness
_ Opinion are appropriate in the chcmstanoes, some or all of these assumptions may prove to be
incorrect
The Fairness Opinion is given as of the date of hereof and Woodstone Capital disclaims any
, undertaking or obligation to advise any person of any change in any fact or matter affecting the
Fairness Opinion which may some or be brought to Woodstone Capital‘s attention alter the date
_ hereof. Withoutlimitingthcforegoing,intheeventthattheteismymatenialchangeinanyfaot
or matter affecting the Fa'nness Opinion slid the date hereoﬁ Woodstone reserves the right to
change, modify or withdraw the Fairness Opinion '
' FAIRNESS CONSIDERATIONS '
In assessing the fairness from a ﬁnancial point of View of the consideration oﬁ‘ered unda the -
Amalgamation Agreement between Ampahoe Etergy Corporation and Banks Energy Inc,
Woodstone reviewed and considered a number of quantitative and qualitative factors, including
the ﬁcllowing’: _ r .
l. a comparison of the consideraﬁon to be'reoeived per the Agreement to the recent stock
market trading prices ofthe Banks Shares and the Ampahoe shares;


2. mﬁummshmwusmdﬂmdirecmsandoﬁmomehhnldinzm
aggegntcinexcessofl3%ofiheoumdinzsmu,havamedhnolmk-up
Wm; ,

3. ImpuisonofthcwnsidnﬁonmbenceivedpatheAyemmﬂnnngeofvalucs
ﬁatme Shares bused onvu-icms maﬁadologies invokingne! manila;

CONCLUSION AND FAIRNESS OPINION
Bueduponousnﬂyﬁhmdstbjeamaﬂofmmwemofmwhﬂmthmun
AugleZmiAhemidmdmoﬁmmﬂwAmalmnﬁmAmmishmﬁqnl
ﬁnanciﬂpoimofﬁewmshqehom
mFmoFiﬁmmbemHuwnbythﬁdDmmdmgemomeh
forthcpmposeofmnsiduhgﬁmAgmunnﬂmﬂmaﬁngtmommmﬁonwﬂanks
ShuthddmwiﬁmpeﬂhhAWbﬂmynmbemedunﬁdupmbymyoﬂm
pamwixhnmouraqxesspiorwrinumnm Wemlymmmmdupﬁcaﬁonmd
inclusion ofﬂzisfaimss Opinimindwlnfonmﬁqgﬁzcular. -

V Ymnsva'ytmly,
WOODSTONE CAPITAL INC.
AlEmes,C.A,% MahmodAhamed,CA
Viwrmidumcorpomeﬁnmce maiden:


APPENDIX G
’ ' BANKS ENERGY WC.
NOTICE OF éHANGE OF AUDITOR AND RELATED CORRESPONDENCE
. G-l


Tony M. Ricci Inc.
CharteredAccaumani Suite 1304
925 West Georgia Street
' 7 Vancouver, BC. V6C 3L2
. Tel: (604) 669-3013
Fax: (504) 669-3015
July 8, 2005
Banks Energy lnc. ‘
Suite 2410, PO. Box 11524
650 West Georgia Street
Vancouver, BC VSB 4N7
Dear Sirs:
I hereby submit my resignation as auditor of Banks Energy Inc. effective today. No reportable
event, as defined in National lnslmment No. 51-102 of the Continuous Disclosure Obligations,
has arisen from my engagement as auditor of the Company.
Yours truly, '
Tony M. Ricci Inc.
‘Tony M. Ricci”
Tony M. Ricci, CA.


n. 45.-
; E E N E R G Y I N C .
V ,7 Suke2410.F.OrBoX11524
650 West George Street
e Vancouver. BC VBB 4N7
T: 604.689.3336 F: 604.682.5564
Tony M. Rioct' Incl
Chartered Accountants
Suite [304, 93 West Georgia Street
Vancouver, BC V6C 3L2
and
BBQ Dunwoody LLP
Chartered Accountants
1900 801— 6 Avenue SW.
Calgary, AB T2P3W2
Dear Sirs:
Re: Notice of Change ofAuditor
The Directors of Bank Energy Inc. (the ‘Ccmpany") do not propose to reappoint Tony MV Ricci Inc” Chartered
Aooountants. at its next annual general meeting of shareholders and have requested the resignation of Tony M. Ricci Inc. as
auditors for the Company effective July 8, 2005.
The Directors of the Company Mose to appoint BDO Dunwoody LLP, Chartered Accountant, 35 auditor for the
Company to ﬁll the vacancy created by Tony Mr Ricci [1th effective July 8. 2005 and to appoint BDO Dunwoody LLP, 357
the Company’s auditors at its next annual general meeting of shareholders.
We conﬁrm that there have been no reportable evean as deﬁned in NI 51-102 with Tony M. chci Inc. and there have been
no adverse, qualiﬁed or denied audit opinions contained in the auditors‘ reports on the Company's annual ﬁnancial
statements for the preceding two ﬁscal yws, and there are no similar reservations contained in any auditors' report or
comments on interim ﬁnancial statements for any subsequent period preceding the date of this notice.
The proposal to change the Company's auditor has been comidered and appmved by the Audit Committee and the Board of
Directors of the Company, and is further subject to the approval of the shareholders of the Company, which will be sought
at the Company‘s next annual general meeting.
DATED at Vancouver. British Columbia this 8“ day of July, 2005.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
BAN GY INC.
per
[01'


Tony M. Ricci Inc.
Charla'MAmunmnt Suite 1304
925 West Georgia Street
’ ' Vancouver, BC. V6C 3L2
- Tel: (604) 669-3013
Fax: (604) 669-3015
July 8, 2005
British Columbia Securities Commission
701 West Georgia Street, 9'“ Floor
Vancouver, BC V7Y 1L2
Attention: Comglianoe Branch Cag‘rtal Markets Regulation Division
Alberta Securities Commission
4th ﬂoor — 300 — 5th Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2P 304
Attention: Exewtive Director
Dear Sirs:
Re: Change of Auditor of Banks Energy Inc. ,
I acknowledge receipt of a Notice of Change of Auditor (the "Notice') dated July 8, 2005 given
by the Company to myself and BBQ Dunwoody LLP.
Based upon my information as of this date, I agree with the statements set out in the Notice.
Yours truly,
Tony M. Ricci lnc.
“Tony M. Riccf’
' Tony M. Ricci, C.A.


VIA SEDAR July 10, 2005

British Columbia Securities Commission

5th Floor, 701 West Georgia Street

Vancouver, British Columbia V7Y 1L2

Alberta Securities Commission

4th Floor, 300-5th Ave SW

Calgary, Alberta "[2? 3C4

Dear Sirs:
re: Bank Energy Inc. (the ‘Company”)

Resignation and Appointment of Auditor - Casual Vacancy
The Company received the resignation of its auditor. Tony M. Ricci , Inc,l Chartered Accountants.

(the “Fomier Auditor”), effective as of July 8Y 2005. The directors have appointed BDO Dunwoody LLP,

Chartered Accountants, (the “Successor Auditor") as the Company’s auditor in the place and stead of Tony M.

Ricci, lnc., Charmed Accountants
On behalf of the Company we enclose the following:

1. Copy of the Notice of Resignation and Appoinmient of Auditor (the “Notice”);

2. Originally executed counterpart of a letter, dated July 8, 21305, ﬁ'om the Former Auditor addressed to
the British Columbia Securities Commission and the Alberta Securities Commission (collectively the
“Commissions") approving the information contained in the Notice;

3. Originally executed counterpart of a letter, dated July 8, 2005, from the Successor Auditor addressed '
to the Commissions approving the information contained in the Notice; and

4. Written confirmation that the Notice and the letters referred to in png'nphs 2 and 3 have been
reviewed by the audit committee or the Board of Directors of the Company.

collectiver the (“Reporting Package”).

The Reporting Package will be included in the Information Circular for the ﬁrst meeting of
shareholders held subsequent to the change of audit/Dr.

Yours truly,

7 BANKS ENERGY INC.

Per: “D, Barry Lee”

D. Barry Lee, President and Chief Executive Officer
cc: Tony Mr Ricci, Inc. (VI/ends.)
BDO meuody LLP (w/encls.)


HM) [Dam 1900. 301 r 6 A S.W.
I F  WW; Calyly,All:n1amC:md&12P3W2
~— and Cunsultantx W [N 2665608
DIWhIg gram N [mlﬂiww
Alberta Securities Commission
4'" Floor, 300 — 5'h Avenue SW
Calgary, AB T2P 3C4
British Columbia Securities Commission
PO Box 10142, Paciﬁc Centre
701 West Georgia Street
Vancouver. BC V7Y 1l2
Yukon Registrar of Securltles
3" Floor, 2130 Second Avenue
Whitehorse, YT Y1A 5H6
and-
Banks Energy Inc.
Suite 2410 P.O. Box 11524 ‘
650 West Georgia Street
Vancouver, BC VGB 4N7
Dear Sire/Madame:
Re: Banks Enemy Inc. [the "Comoratlon"!
We have read the Corporation's Notice of Change of Auditors dated July 8, 2005 (the 'Notioe'), a
copy of which is attached hereto. Based on our knowledge at the date hereuf, we conﬁrm that we
are in agreement with the statements contained in the Notice as they relate to us.
Yours truly,
BDO Dunwoody LLF ‘
Signed ‘BDO Dunwoody LLP"
Chartered Accountants
Calgary, Alberta
July 11, 2005
EDD Dunwoodg IJJ' is a Limited Liability Partnership regisi‘nzd in Ontario


APPENDIX H
FORM OF BANKS RESOLUTION APPROVING AMALGAMATION

BE IT RESOLVED AS_A SPECIAL RESOLUTION THAT:

1. The amalgamation of 38659 Yukon Inc. (“Newco”) and Banks Energy Inc. (“Banks”) (the
“Amalgam-nation") as provided for in and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the
amalgamation agreement (the “Amalgamation Agreement") dated as of August 9, 2005 among
Arapahoe Energy Corporation (“Arapahoe”), Neweo and Banks, as amended, is hereby
approved and authorized with such restrictions or conditions as may be required by the TSX
Venture Exchange (the “Exchange”). subject to the approval of the Exchange, all as more
particularly described in the management proxy and information circular of Banks dated
September 7, 2005 (the “Circular").

2. The Amalgamation Ageement, substantially in the form attached to the Circular as Appendix A,
be and is hereby approved and authorized.

3. Notwithstanding that this resolution has been passed (and the Amalgamation Agreement and the
Amalgamation adopted) by the registered holders of Common Shares in the capital of Banks
(“Banks Shareholders”), the Board of Directors of Banks is hereby authorized and empowered
without further notice to or approval of the Banks Shareholders (i) to amend the Amalgamation
Agreement to the extent permitted by the Amalgamation Agreement, and (ii) subject to the terms
and conditions of the Amalganmion Agreement. not to proceed with the Amalgamation.

4. Any director or ofﬁcer of Banks be and is hereby authorized, instructed and empowered, acting ’
for. in the name of and on behalf of Banks, to do or to cause to be done all such other acts and
things that in the opinion of such director or ofﬁcer of Banks may be necessary or desirable in
order to fulﬁll the intent of this resolution and the matters authorized hereby.

H-l

