
424B5 1 d239683d424b5.htm 424B5 424B5
Table of Contents
Filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5)
Registration No. 333-204766
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Proposed
Amount
Maximum
Title of Each Class of
to be
Offering Price
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Amount of
Registered
Securities to be Registered  
Class A common stock, par
value $0.01 per share
 
 
(1) Includes 1,087,500 shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the
$279,723,125
8,337,500(1)
Per Share
Offering Price
Registration Fee(2)
$33.55
$28,168.12
underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of Class A common stock.
(2) Calculated and paid in accordance with Rule 457(r) under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, and relates to the Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-204766) filed
by the registrant with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 5, 2015.
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
(To Prospectus dated June 5, 2015)
7,250,000 Shares
Parsley Energy, Inc.
Class A Common Stock
We are offering 7,250,000 shares of our Class A common stock.
Our Class A common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the
symbol “PE”. On August 12, 2016, the last sale price of our Class A common stock as reported on
the NYSE was $33.85 per share.
Investing in our Class A common stock involves risks. See “Risk Factors” beginning on
page S-5 of this prospectus supplement.
Per Share
Total
Price to Public    
33.5500     $
   $
   $ 243,237,500     $
Underwriting
Discounts and
Commissions(1)     Proceeds to Us 
32.5435  
235,940,375
1.0065     $
7,297,125     $
(1) We have also agreed to reimburse the underwriters for certain of their expenses in
connection with this offering. See “Underwriting.”
We have granted the underwriters an option to purchase up to an additional 1,087,500 shares of
Class A common stock from us at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and
commissions, within 30 days of the date of the underwriting agreement.
The shares are expected to be ready for delivery on or about August 19, 2016.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission
has approved or disapproved of the shares or determined if this prospectus is truthful or
complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
J.P. Morgan
Scotia Howard Weil
BMO Capital Markets
Wells Fargo Securities
UBS Investment Bank
Barclays
Capital One Securities
Johnson, Rice & Company L.L.C.   Northland Capital Markets   Seaport Global Securities
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co.
Stephens Inc.
RBC Capital Markets
SunTrust Robinson Humphrey
Canaccord Genuity
Prospectus Supplement dated August 15, 2016
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Supplement
Prospectus
About This Prospectus Summary
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Summary
Risk Factors
Use of Proceeds
Capitalization
Dividend Policy
Market Price of our Class A Common Stock
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations for Non-U.S. Holders
Underwriting
Legal Matters
Experts
Where You Can Find Additional Information
Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference
 
About This Prospectus
About Parsley Energy, Inc.
Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference
Available Information
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Risk Factors
Use of Proceeds
Ratios of Earnings to Fixed Charges
Description of Debt Securities
Description of Capital Stock
Description of Depositary Shares
Description of Warrants
Selling Stockholders
Legal Matters
Experts
Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Statements
Index to Financial Statements
S-i
Page  
  S-ii  
  S-iii  
  S-1  
  S-5  
  S-10  
  S-11  
  S-13  
  S-14  
  S-15  
  S-19  
  S-24  
  S-24  
  S-24  
  S-25  
Page  
1  
 
1  
 
 
2  
3  
 
4  
 
 
6  
7  
 
8  
 
9  
 
 
11  
16  
 
17  
 
 
18  
19  
 
 
19  
 
19  
  F-1
Table of Contents
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This document is in two parts. The first part is this prospectus supplement, which describes the
specific terms of this offering. The second part, the accompanying prospectus, gives more
general information, some of which may not apply to this offering. Generally, when we refer to the
prospectus, we are referring to this prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus
combined. You should read the entire prospectus supplement, as well as the accompanying
prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference that are described under “Incorporation
of Certain Documents by Reference” in this prospectus supplement. To the extent that any
statement we make in this prospectus supplement is inconsistent with statements made in the
accompanying prospectus or any documents incorporated by reference herein, you should rely
on the information contained in this prospectus supplement, which will be deemed to modify or
supersede those made in the accompanying prospectus or documents incorporated by reference
herein or therein.
You should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus or to the information to which
we have referred you. Neither we nor the underwriters have authorized anyone to provide
you with information different from that contained in this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying prospectus. We take no responsibility for, and can provide no assurance
as to the reliability of, any other information that others may give you. We and the
underwriters are offering to sell shares of our Class A common stock and seeking offers
to buy shares of our Class A common stock only in jurisdictions where such offers and
sales are permitted. You should not assume that the information contained in this
prospectus supplement is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of
this prospectus supplement, or that the information in the accompanying prospectus or
contained in any document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other
than the date of such prospectus or document incorporated by reference, regardless of
the time of delivery of this prospectus supplement or any sale of a security. Our business,
financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since that
date.
This prospectus contains forward-looking statements that are subject to a number of risks and
uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control. See “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary
Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Table of Contents
S-ii
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus supplement, the accompanying prospectus and the documents incorporated by
reference herein and therein contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of
Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). These forward-looking
statements include statements, projections and estimates concerning our operations,
performance, business strategy, oil and natural gas reserves, drilling program, capital
expenditures, liquidity and capital resources, the timing and success of specific projects,
outcomes and effects of litigation, claims and disputes and derivative activities. Forward-looking
statements are generally accompanied by words such as “estimate,” “project,” “predict,” “believe,”
“expect,” “anticipate,” “potential,” “could,” “may,” “foresee,” “plan,” “goal” or other words that
convey the uncertainty of future events or outcomes. Forward-looking statements are not
guarantees of performance. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current
expectations and assumptions about future events. These statements are based on certain
assumptions and analyses made by us in light of currently available information, our experience
and our perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments as
well as other factors we believe are appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may
differ materially from those implied or expressed by the forward-looking statements. These
forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this prospectus supplement, or if earlier,
as of the date they were made. We disclaim any obligation to update or revise these statements
unless required by law, and we caution you not to rely on them unduly. While our management
considers these expectations and assumptions to be reasonable, they are inherently subject to
significant business, economic, competitive, regulatory and other risks, contingencies and
uncertainties relating to, among other matters, the risks discussed under the headings “Risk
Factors” in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K, any subsequently filed Quarterly
Reports on Form 10-Q and any subsequently filed Current Reports on Form 8-K, all of which are
incorporated by reference in this prospectus, and the risk factors included in this prospectus and
in any documents incorporated by reference herein.
Forward-looking statements may include statements about our:
•
business strategy;
•
reserves;
•
exploration and development drilling prospects, inventories, projects and programs;
•
ability to replace the reserves we produce through drilling and property acquisitions;
•
financial strategy, liquidity and capital required for our development program;
•
realized oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids (“NGLs”) prices;
•
timing and amount of future production of oil, natural gas and NGLs;
•
hedging strategy and results;
•
future drilling plans;
•
competition and government regulations;
•
ability to obtain permits and governmental approvals;
•
pending legal or environmental matters;
•
marketing of oil, natural gas and NGLs;
•
leasehold or business acquisitions;
•
costs of developing our properties;
•
general economic conditions;
S-iii
Table of Contents
•
credit markets;
•
uncertainty regarding our future operating results; and
•
plans, objectives, expectations and intentions contained in this prospectus that are not
historical.
We caution you that these forward-looking statements are subject to all of the risks and
uncertainties, most of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control,
incident to the exploration for and development, production, gathering and sale of oil, natural gas
and NGLs. These risks include, but are not limited to, commodity price volatility, inflation, lack of
availability of drilling and production equipment and services, environmental risks, drilling and
other operating risks, regulatory changes, the uncertainty inherent in estimating reserves and in
projecting future rates of production, cash flow and access to capital, the timing of development
expenditures, and the other risks described under “Risk Factors” herein and in our most recent
Annual Report on Form 10-K, any subsequently filed Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and any
subsequently filed Current Reports on Form 8-K, all of which are incorporated by reference
herein.
Additionally, we caution you that reserve engineering is a process of estimating underground
accumulations of oil, natural gas and NGLs that cannot be measured in an exact way. The
accuracy of any reserve estimate depends on the quality of available data, the interpretation of
such data and price and cost assumptions made by reserve engineers. In addition, the results of
drilling, testing and production activities may justify revisions of estimates that were made
previously. If significant, such revisions would change the schedule of any further production and
development drilling. Accordingly, reserve estimates may differ significantly from the quantities of
oil, natural gas and NGLs that are ultimately recovered.
Should one or more of the risks or uncertainties described in this prospectus occur, or should
underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results and plans could differ materially from
those expressed in any forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements, expressed or implied, included in this prospectus are expressly
qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. This cautionary statement should also be
considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we
or persons acting on our behalf may issue.
Except as otherwise required by applicable law, we disclaim any duty to update any forward-
looking statements, all of which are expressly qualified by the statements in this section, to reflect
events or circumstances after the date of this prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
S-iv
SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in, or incorporated by reference into,
this prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus. It does not contain all of the
information that may be important to you. Before deciding whether to invest in our Class A
common stock, for a more complete understanding of our business and this offering, you should
read carefully this entire prospectus supplement, the accompanying prospectus, the information
incorporated by reference herein and therein, and any other documents to which we refer. You
should pay special attention to the “Risk Factors” sections of this prospectus supplement, the
accompanying prospectus, our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015 (the “Form 10-K”), and our subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current
Reports on Form 8-K to determine whether an investment in our Class A common stock is
appropriate for you. As used in this prospectus supplement, references to the “Company,”
“Parsley,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Parsley Energy, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries
unless we state otherwise or the context otherwise requires. Unless we indicate otherwise, the
information presented in this prospectus supplement assumes no exercise of the underwriters’
option to purchase additional shares.
Overview
We are an independent oil and natural gas company focused on the acquisition and
development of unconventional oil and natural gas reserves in the Permian Basin. The Permian
Basin is located in West Texas and Southeastern New Mexico and is comprised of three primary
sub-areas: the Midland Basin, the Central Basin Platform and the Delaware Basin. These areas
are characterized by high oil and liquids-rich natural gas content, multiple vertical and horizontal
target horizons, extensive production histories, long-lived reserves and historically high drilling
success rates. Our properties are located in the Midland and Delaware Basins and our activities
have historically been focused on the vertical development of the Spraberry, Wolfberry and
Wolftoka Trends of the Midland Basin. Our vertical wells in the Permian Basin are drilled into
stacked pay zones that include the Spraberry, Wolfcamp, Upper Pennsylvanian (Cline), Strawn,
Atoka and Mississippian formations. We now focus predominantly on horizontal development
drilling and expect to target various stacked pay intervals in the Spraberry, Wolfcamp, Upper
Pennsylvanian (Cline) and Atoka shales. For additional information about our company, please
read the documents listed under “Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference.”
Recent Acquisitions
Recent Developments
On August 15, 2016, we entered into a purchase and sale agreement (the “Purchase
Agreement”) with an undisclosed third party (the “Seller”). The Purchase Agreement provides for
the sale and transfer by the Seller of its interests in 11,672 gross (9,140 net) acres located in
Glasscock County, Texas, as well as associated mineral and overriding royalty interests (the
“Acquisition”), for an aggregate purchase price of $400.0 million in cash (subject to customary
purchase price adjustments). The properties to be acquired have an estimated current net
production of approximately 270 Boe/d from 67 gross (60 net) vertical producing wells.
The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, covenants and
indemnification provisions and has an effective date of September 1, 2016. We and the Seller
expect to close the Acquisition on or before October 4, 2016, subject to the satisfaction of
customary closing conditions. This offering is not conditioned on the consummation of the
Acquisition.
We intend to fund the aggregate purchase price for the Acquisition with the net proceeds of this
offering and the Concurrent Notes Offering (as defined below). Please read “Use of Proceeds.”
S-1
Table of Contents
Glasscock County Operational Update
Our first producing horizontal well on the Glasscock County acreage acquired in May 2016 has
shown encouraging results to date. The Dwight Gooden 6-7-01AH, located approximately 2.5
miles west of the acreage to be acquired in the Acquisition and completed in the Wolfcamp A
interval with a 5,890’ stimulated lateral, registered a peak 30-day initial production rate of 1,161
Boe/d or 197 Boe/d per thousand stimulated feet.
Concurrent Notes Offering
Concurrently with this offering of our Class A common stock, Parsley Energy, LLC and Parsley
Finance Corp., our consolidated subsidiaries, priced an offering to qualified institutional buyers
and non-U.S. persons outside of the U.S., which was exempt from registration under the
Securities Act, of $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.250% senior notes due 2024
(the “New 2024 Notes”) (the “Concurrent Notes Offering”). The New 2024 Notes were offered as
additional notes under an indenture pursuant to which Parsley Energy, LLC and Parsley Finance
Corp. issued, on May 27, 2016, $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.250% senior
notes due 2024 (the “Initial 2024 Notes” and, together with the New 2024 Notes, the “2024
Notes”). The New 2024 Notes will have identical terms, other than the issue date, as the Initial
2024 Notes, and the New 2024 Notes and the Initial 2024 Notes will be treated as a single class
of securities under the indenture.
We estimate that we will receive net proceeds from the Concurrent Notes Offering of
approximately $199.8 million, which we intend to use to partially fund the Acquisition as
discussed in “Use of Proceeds.” We will not guarantee the New 2024 Notes or be subject to the
terms of the indenture governing the New 2024 Notes. We cannot assure you that the Concurrent
Notes Offering will be completed or, if completed, on what terms it will be completed. We expect
to consummate the Concurrent Notes Offering at or near the time we consummate this offering;
however, this offering is not conditioned on the consummation of the Concurrent Notes Offering,
and the Concurrent Notes Offering is not conditioned on the consummation of this offering.
Ongoing Acquisition and Investment Activities
We regularly engage in discussions with potential sellers regarding acquisition opportunities.
Such acquisition efforts may involve our participation in auction processes, as well as situations
in which we believe we are the only buyer or one of a very limited number of potential buyers in
negotiations with the potential seller. These acquisition efforts can involve assets that, if
acquired, would have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. We
finance acquisitions with a combination of funds from equity and debt offerings, bank borrowings
and cash generated from operations.
We typically do not announce a transaction until after we have executed a definitive agreement.
In certain cases, in order to protect our business interests or for other reasons, we may defer
public announcement of a transaction until closing or a later date. Past experience has
demonstrated that discussions and negotiations regarding a potential transaction can advance or
terminate in a short period of time. Moreover, the closing of any transaction for which we have
entered into a definitive agreement may be subject to customary and other closing conditions,
which may not ultimately be satisfied or waived. Accordingly, we can give no assurance that our
current or future acquisition or investment efforts will be successful.
Table of Contents
S-2
Company Information
We are a Delaware corporation. Our principal executive offices are located at 303 Colorado
Street, Suite 3000, Austin, Texas 78701 and our telephone number at that address is (737) 704-
2300. Our website address is www.parsleyenergy.com. Our periodic reports and other
information filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) are
available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after those
reports and other information are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. Except for
information specifically incorporated by reference into this prospectus supplement that may be
accessed from our website, the information on, or otherwise accessible through, our website or
any other website does not constitute a part of this prospectus supplement.
The following diagram indicates our simplified ownership structure immediately following this
offering (assuming that the option to purchase additional shares is not exercised):
S-3
Table of Contents
Issuer
THE OFFERING
Parsley Energy, Inc.
Shares of Class A common stock
offered by us
7,250,000 shares (8,337,500 shares if the option to
purchase additional shares is exercised in full).
Option to purchase additional
shares
We have granted the underwriters an option to purchase up
to an additional 1,087,500 shares of Class A common stock
within 30 days of the date of the underwriting agreement.
Shares of Class A common stock to
be outstanding immediately after this
offering
Use of proceeds
178,513,403 shares (179,600,903 shares if the option to
purchase additional shares is exercised in full). The
foregoing number of shares of our Class A common stock is
based on 171,263,403 shares outstanding as of August 12,
2016. Unless we indicate otherwise or the context otherwise
requires, all of the information in this prospectus supplement
(i) assumes no exercise of the option to purchase additional
shares and (ii) includes 618,467 shares of restricted stock
outstanding and unvested under the Parsley Energy, Inc.
2014 Long Term Incentive Plan.
We estimate that, after deducting underwriting discounts
and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable
by us, we will receive approximately $235.7 million of net
proceeds from this offering, or $271.1 million if the option to
purchase additional shares is exercised in full. We
anticipate that we will contribute all of the net proceeds from
this offering to Parsley Energy, LLC (“Parsley LLC”) in
exchange for a number of units in Parsley LLC (“PE Units”)
equal to the number of shares of our Class A common stock
issued by us in this offering. We intend to use the net
proceeds from this offering, along with the net proceeds of
the Concurrent Notes Offering, to fund the aggregate
purchase price for the Acquisition, and the remaining net
proceeds will be used to fund a portion of our capital
program and for general corporate purposes, including
potential future acquisitions. This offering is not conditioned
on the consummation of the Acquisition or the Concurrent
Notes Offering. Please read “Use of Proceeds.”
Risk factors
Investing in our Class A common stock involves risks.
Before deciding to invest in our Class A common stock, you
should carefully read and consider the information set forth
in the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding
Forward-Looking Statements” sections of this prospectus
supplement, the “Risk Factors” sections of our Form 10-K
and our subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and
Current Reports on Form 8-K and all other information set
forth in, or incorporated by reference into, this prospectus
supplement.
Listing and trading symbol
PE.
Table of Contents
S-4
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our Class A common stock involves risks. Before deciding whether to purchase
shares of our Class A common stock, you should carefully consider the risks and uncertainties
described below as well as those described under “Risk Factors” in our Form 10-K and in our
subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, together with all
of the other information included in, or incorporated by reference into, this prospectus
supplement. See “Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference.” If any of these risks
actually occur, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and
adversely affected and we may not be able to achieve our goals, the value of our securities could
decline and you could lose some or all of your investment. Additional risks not presently known
to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also impair our business operations.
We are a holding company. Our sole material asset is our equity interest in Parsley LLC
and we are accordingly dependent upon distributions from Parsley LLC to pay taxes,
make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and cover our corporate and other
overhead expenses.
We are a holding company and have no material assets other than our equity interest in Parsley
LLC. We have no independent means of generating revenue. To the extent Parsley LLC has
available cash, we intend to cause Parsley LLC to make distributions to its unitholders, including
us, in an amount sufficient to cover all applicable taxes at assumed tax rates and payments under
the tax receivable agreement (the “Tax Receivable Agreement”) we have entered into with
Parsley LLC and each holder of PE Units (a “PE Unit Holder”), and to reimburse us for our
corporate and other overhead expenses. We are limited, however, in our ability to cause Parsley
LLC and its subsidiaries to make these and other distributions to us due to the restrictions under
our revolving credit facility and the indentures governing our 7.500% senior notes due 2022 (the
“2022 Notes” and, together with the 2024 Notes, the “Notes”) and the 2024 Notes. To the extent
that we need funds and Parsley LLC or its subsidiaries are restricted from making such
distributions under applicable law or regulation or under the terms of their financing
arrangements, or are otherwise unable to provide such funds, it could materially adversely affect
our liquidity and financial condition.
The price of our Class A common stock in this offering may not be indicative of the market
price of our Class A common stock after this offering and may fluctuate significantly.
The market price of our Class A common stock could vary significantly as a result of a number of
factors, some of which are beyond our control. In the event of a drop in the market price of our
Class A common stock, you could lose a substantial part or all of your investment in our Class A
common stock. The price of our Class A common stock in this offering will be negotiated between
us and the underwriters and may not be indicative of the market price of our Class A common
stock after this offering. Consequently, you may not be able to sell shares of our Class A common
stock at prices equal to or greater than the price paid by you in this offering.
The following factors, among others, could affect our stock price:
•
our operating and financial performance;
•
the number of identified drilling locations and our reserves estimates;
•
•
quarterly variations in the rate of growth of our financial indicators, such as net income per
share, net income and revenues, capital expenditures, production, and unit costs;
the public reaction to our press releases, our other public announcements and our filings
with the SEC;
•
strategic actions by our competitors;
•
changes in revenue or earnings estimates, or changes in recommendations or withdrawal
of research coverage, by equity research analysts;
S-5
Table of Contents
•
speculation in the press or investment community;
•
the failure of research analysts to cover our Class A common stock;
•
sales of our Class A common stock by us or other stockholders, or the perception that
such sales may occur;
•
changes in accounting principles, policies, guidance, interpretations or standards;
•
additions or departures of key management personnel;
•
actions by our stockholders;
•
general market conditions, including fluctuations in commodity prices;
•
•
domestic and international economic, legal and regulatory factors unrelated to our
performance; and
the realization of any risks described in this “Risk Factors” section or in the “Risk Factors”
section in our Form 10-K or subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q or Current
Reports on Form 8-K.
The stock markets in general have experienced extreme volatility that has often been unrelated
to the operating performance of particular companies. These broad market fluctuations may
adversely affect the trading price of our Class A common stock. During the 52-week period
immediately preceding the date of this prospectus supplement, the price of our Class A common
stock as reported on the NYSE ranged from a high of $34.08 to a low of $13.29 per share.
Securities class action litigation has often been instituted against companies following periods of
volatility in the overall market and in the market price of a company’s securities. Such litigation, if
instituted against us, could result in very substantial costs, divert our management’s attention and
resources and harm our business, operating results and financial condition.
We may not consummate the Acquisition or the Concurrent Notes Offering, and this
offering is not conditioned on the consummation of the Acquisition or the Concurrent
Notes Offering.
We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering, along with the net proceeds from the
Concurrent Notes Offering, to fund the aggregate purchase price for the Acquisition, as described
under “Summary—Recent Developments.” However, we may not consummate the Acquisition,
which is subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions. There can be no assurance
that such conditions will be satisfied or that the Acquisition will be consummated. Further, we
may not consummate the Concurrent Notes Offering, which is subject to market conditions and
other factors.
This offering is not conditioned on the consummation of the Acquisition nor the Concurrent Notes
Offering. Therefore, upon the closing of this offering, you will become a holder of our Class A
common stock regardless of whether either the Acquisition or the Concurrent Notes Offering are
consummated, delayed or terminated. If the Acquisition or the Concurrent Notes Offering are
delayed or terminated, the price of our Class A common stock may decline to the extent that the
current market price of our Class A common stock reflects a market assumption that the
Acquisition and the Concurrent Notes Offering will be consummated on the terms described
herein.
If the Acquisition is not consummated, our management will have broad discretion in the
application of the net proceeds of this offering and could apply the proceeds in ways that you or
other stockholders may not approve. In addition, if the Concurrent Notes Offering is not
consummated, our management will have broad discretion in the source of funds for the
Acquisition, and could draw upon such other sources of funds in ways that you or other
stockholders may not approve. In either event, the market price of our Class A common stock
could be adversely affected.
Table of Contents
S-6
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and our amended and restated
bylaws, as well as Delaware law, contain provisions that could discourage acquisition bids
or merger proposals, which may adversely affect the market price of our Class A common
stock.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation authorizes our board of directors to issue
preferred stock without stockholder approval. If our board of directors elects to issue preferred
stock, it could be more difficult for a third party to acquire us. In addition, some provisions of our
amended and restated certificate of incorporation and our amended and restated bylaws could
make it more difficult for a third party to acquire control of us, even if the change of control would
be beneficial to our stockholders, including:
•
limitations on the removal of directors;
•
limitations on the ability of our stockholders to call special meetings;
•
•
•
establishing advance notice provisions for stockholder proposals and nominations for
elections to the board of directors to be acted upon at meetings of stockholders;
providing that the board of directors is expressly authorized to adopt, or to alter or repeal
our bylaws; and
establishing advance notice and certain information requirements for nominations for
election to our board of directors or for proposing matters that can be acted upon by
stockholders at stockholder meetings.
In addition, certain change of control events have the effect of accelerating the payment due
under our Tax Receivable Agreement, which could be substantial and accordingly serve as a
disincentive to a potential acquirer of our company. Please see “—In certain cases, payments
under the Tax Receivable Agreement may be accelerated and/or significantly exceed the actual
benefits, if any, we realize in respect of the tax attributes subject to the Tax Receivable
Agreement.”
We do not intend to pay dividends on our Class A common stock, and our revolving credit
facility and the indentures governing our Notes place certain restrictions on our ability to
do so. Consequently, your only opportunity to achieve a return on your investment is if
the price of our Class A common stock appreciates.
We do not plan to declare dividends on shares of our Class A common stock in the foreseeable
future. Additionally, our revolving credit facility and the indentures governing our Notes place
certain restrictions on our ability to pay cash dividends. Consequently, your only opportunity to
achieve a return on your investment in us will be if you sell your Class A common stock at a price
greater than you paid for it. There is no guarantee that the price of our Class A common stock that
will prevail in the market will ever exceed the price that you pay for our Class A common stock in
this offering.
Future sales of our Class A common stock in the public market, or the perception that
such sales may occur, could reduce our stock price, and any additional capital raised by
us through the sale of equity or convertible securities may dilute your ownership in us.
We may sell additional shares of Class A common stock or securities convertible into shares of
our Class A common stock in subsequent offerings. We cannot predict the size of future
issuances of our Class A common stock or securities convertible into Class A common stock or
the effect, if any, that future issuances and sales of shares of our Class A common stock will have
on the market price of our Class A common stock. Sales of substantial amounts of our Class A
common stock (including shares issued in connection with an acquisition), or the perception that
such sales could occur, may adversely affect prevailing market prices of our Class A common
stock.
On May 27, 2014, we filed a registration statement with the SEC on Form S-8 providing for the
registration of 12,727,273 shares of our Class A common stock issued or reserved for issuance
under our equity incentive
Table of Contents
S-7
plan. Subject to the satisfaction of vesting conditions, the expiration or waiver of lock-up
agreements and the requirements of Rule 144 under the Securities Act, shares registered under
the registration statement on Form S-8 will be available for resale immediately in the public
market without restriction.
On March 11, 2015, we filed a registration statement with the SEC on Form S-1 providing for the
registration of 14,885,797 shares of our Class A common stock in connection with a private
placement of such Class A common stock at a price of $15.50 per share to selected institutional
investors.
On June 5, 2015, we filed an automatically effective registration statement with the SEC on Form
S-3 providing for the continued registration of such shares of our Class A common stock, which
are available for resale immediately in the public market without restriction, as well as the
registration of additional shares of our Class A common stock and certain other of our securities.
We are required to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for certain tax
benefits we may claim, and the amounts of such payments could be significant.
The PE Unit Holders generally have the right to exchange (the “Exchange Right”) their PE Units
(and a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock), for shares of our Class A
common stock at an exchange ratio of one share of Class A common stock for each PE Unit (and
a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock) exchanged (subject to conversion
rate adjustments for stock splits, stock dividends and reclassifications), or cash at our or Parsley
LLC’s, as applicable, election (the “Cash Option”).
We have entered into a Tax Receivable Agreement with Parsley LLC and the PE Unit Holders
and certain other holders of equity interests in us (each such person, a “TRA Holder”). This
agreement generally provides for the payment by us to a TRA Holder of 85% of the net cash
savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state or local income tax that we actually realize (or are deemed to
realize in certain circumstances) in periods after our initial public offering (“IPO”) as a result of
(i) any tax basis increases resulting from the contribution in connection with our IPO by such TRA
Holder of all or a portion of its PE Units to us in exchange for shares of Class A common stock,
(ii) the tax basis increases resulting from the exchange by such TRA Holder of PE Units for
shares of Class A common stock pursuant to the Exchange Right (or resulting from an exchange
of PE Units for cash pursuant to the Cash Option) and (iii) imputed interest deemed to be paid by
us as a result of, and additional tax basis arising from, any payments we make under the Tax
Receivable Agreement. In addition, payments we make under the Tax Receivable Agreement
will be increased by any interest accrued from the due date (without extensions) of the
corresponding tax return.
For purposes of the Tax Receivable Agreement, cash savings in tax generally are calculated by
comparing our actual tax liability to the amount we would have been required to pay had we not
been able to utilize any of the tax benefits subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement. The term of
the Tax Receivable Agreement commenced upon the completion of our IPO and will continue
until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired, unless we exercise our right to terminate
the Tax Receivable Agreement by making the termination payment specified in the agreement.
The actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the
Tax Receivable Agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of
the exchanges of PE Units, the price of Class A common stock at the time of each exchange, the
extent to which such exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of the taxable income we
generate in the future and the tax rate then applicable, and the portion of our payments under the
Tax Receivable Agreement constituting imputed interest or depletable, depreciable or
amortizable basis. We expect that the payments that we will be required to make under the Tax
Receivable Agreement could be substantial.
The payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement are not conditioned upon a holder of rights
under the Tax Receivable Agreement having a continued ownership interest in us. See
“Transactions with Related
Table of Contents
S-8
Persons—Tax Receivable Agreement” in our Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A for
our 2016 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which is incorporated herein by reference.
In certain cases, payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement may be accelerated
and/or significantly exceed the actual benefits, if any, we realize in respect of the tax
attributes subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement.
If we elect to terminate the Tax Receivable Agreement early or it is terminated early due to
certain mergers or other changes of control we would be required to make an immediate payment
equal to the present value of the anticipated future tax benefits subject to the Tax Receivable
Agreement, which calculation of anticipated future tax benefits will be based upon certain
assumptions and deemed events set forth in the Tax Receivable Agreement, including the
assumption that we have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize such benefits and that any PE
Units that the PE Unit Holders or their permitted transferees own on the termination date are
deemed to be exchanged on the termination date. Any early termination payment may be made
significantly in advance of the actual realization, if any, of such future benefits.
In these situations, our obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement could have a
substantial negative impact on our liquidity and could have the effect of delaying, deferring or
preventing certain mergers, asset sales, other forms of business combinations or other changes
of control due to the additional transaction cost a potential acquirer may attribute to satisfying
such obligations.
Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement will be based on the tax reporting positions that
we will determine. The holders of rights under the Tax Receivable Agreement will not reimburse
us for any payments previously made under the Tax Receivable Agreement if such basis
increases or other benefits are subsequently disallowed, except that excess payments made to
any such holder will be netted against payments otherwise to be made, if any, to such holder
after our determination of such excess. As a result, in such circumstances, we could make
payments that are greater than our actual cash tax savings, if any, and may not be able to recoup
those payments, which could adversely affect our liquidity.
Table of Contents
S-9
USE OF PROCEEDS
We estimate that, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering
expenses payable by us, we will receive approximately $235.7 million of net proceeds from this
offering, or $271.1 million if the option to purchase additional shares is exercised in full. We
anticipate that we will contribute all of the net proceeds from this offering to Parsley LLC in
exchange for a number of PE Units equal to the number of shares of our Class A common stock
issued by us in this offering. We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering, along with the
net proceeds of the Concurrent Notes Offering, to fund the aggregate purchase price for the
Acquisition, and the remaining net proceeds will be used to fund a portion of our capital program
and for general corporate purposes, including potential future acquisitions. This offering is not
conditioned on the consummation of the Acquisition or the Concurrent Notes Offering.
Table of Contents
S-10
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our cash and cash equivalents and capitalization as of June 30,
2016:
•
on an actual basis;
•
as adjusted to give effect to this offering (assuming no exercise of the option to purchase
additional shares) and the Concurrent Notes Offering as if they had occurred on June 30,
2016.
Cash and cash equivalents(1)
Long-term debt:
Revolving credit facility(2)
2022 Notes(3)
2024 Notes(4)
Other debt
Total indebtedness
(in thousands)
As Adjusted 
 
876,534
Actual
$ 441,024    $
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
   
   $ 752,221    $
—     
  550,000   
  200,000   
   
   
2,221
—    
550,000  
400,000  
 
2,221  
 
952,221
—
—     
 
1,665
Stockholders’ equity:
Preferred stock, $0.01 par value, 50,000,000 shares authorized,
none issued and outstanding, actual and as adjusted
Common stock:
Class A common stock(5)(6)
Class B common stock, $0.01 par value, 125,000,000 shares
authorized, 32,145,296 issued and outstanding, actual and as
321  
  
adjusted(6)
2,087,593  
  
Additional paid-in capital
(29,804) 
  
Accumulated deficit
(290) 
Treasury stock, at cost, 124,158 shares, actual and as adjusted   
  
 
   $1,823,867    $ 2,059,558  
  
 
   $2,576,088    $ 3,011,779
321   
  1,851,975   
 
(29,804)  
(290)
Total stockholders’ equity
Total capitalization
1,738
(1) On July 14, 2016, we paid $252.1 million of cash as partial consideration for the acquisition
of mineral rights under 29,813 gross (29,813 net) acres, surface rights on 23,769 gross
(23,769 net) of these acres and estimated net production of approximately 280 Boe/d at the
time of the purchase and sale agreement from wells producing on these acres in Pecos and
Reeves Counties, Texas. As of August 12, 2016, we had approximately $185.5 million in
cash and cash equivalents.
(2) As of June 30, 2016, the borrowing base on our revolving credit facility was $525.0 million,
with a commitment level of $525.0 million. There were no borrowings outstanding related to
the revolving credit facility and $0.3 million in letters of credit outstanding as of June 30,
2016, resulting in availability of $524.7 million. As of August 12, 2016, we had no borrowings
outstanding and $0.3 million of letters of credit outstanding, resulting in availability of $524.7
million under our revolving credit facility. We expect that our borrowing base will be reduced
to $475.0 million as a result of the Concurrent Notes Offering, pursuant to the terms of our
revolving credit facility.
(3) Reflected at principal amount and excludes issue premium of $6.0 million on $150 million of
our 2022 Notes issued on April 17, 2014, which will be amortized over the life of the 2022
Notes.
(4) Reflected at principal amount and excludes issuance costs of $4.6 million on the Initial 2024
Notes issued on May 27, 2016, which will be amortized over the life of the Initial 2024 Notes.
Assumes the New 2024 Notes offered in the Concurrent Notes Offering are issued at par.
See “Summary—Recent Developments—Concurrent Notes Offering.”
(5) Class A common stock, $0.01 par value, 600,000,000 shares authorized, 167,215,201 issued
and 167,091,043 outstanding, actual; 600,000,000 shares authorized, 174,465,201 issued
and 174,341,043 outstanding, as adjusted.
Table of Contents
S-11
(6) Since June 30, 2016, certain PE Unit Holders exercised their Exchange Right and elected to
exchange an aggregate of 4.1 million PE Units (and a corresponding number of shares of
Class B common stock) for an aggregate of 4.1 million shares of Class A common stock. We
exercised our call right under Parsley LLC’s limited liability company agreement and elected
to issue Class A common stock to each of the exchanging PE Unit Holders in satisfaction of
our election notices. As of August 12, 2016, there were 171,263,403 shares of Class A
common stock and 28,008,573 shares of Class B common stock outstanding.
Table of Contents
S-12
DIVIDEND POLICY
We have never declared or paid any dividends to holders of our Class A common stock, and do
not anticipate declaring or paying any dividends to holders of our Class A common stock in the
foreseeable future. We currently intend to retain future earnings, if any, for the development and
growth of our business. Our future dividend policy is within the discretion of our board of directors
and will depend upon then existing conditions, including our results of operations, financial
condition, capital requirements, investment opportunities, statutory restrictions on our ability to
pay dividends and other factors that our board of directors may deem relevant. In addition, our
revolving credit facility and the indentures governing our Notes place restrictions on our ability to
pay cash dividends.
S-13
Table of Contents
MARKET PRICE OF OUR CLASS A COMMON STOCK
Our Class A common stock began trading on the NYSE under the symbol “PE” on May 23, 2014.
Prior to that, there was no public market for our Class A common stock. The table below sets
forth, for the periods indicated, the high and low sales prices per share of our common stock
since May 23, 2014.
2014
Second Quarter(1)
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
2015
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
2016
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter (through August 12, 2016)
High     
  
$25.70    
$24.23    
$21.85    
  
$18.34    
$19.02    
$17.75    
$20.33    
  
$23.00    
$28.01    
$34.08
Low
$21.19  
$19.29  
$11.11
$13.38  
$15.52  
$13.29  
$14.60
$14.51  
$21.23  
$26.40
(1) For the period from May 23, 2014 through June 30, 2014.
On August 12, 2016, the closing price of our Class A common stock on the NYSE was $33.85
per share. As of August 12, 2016, we had approximately 35 holders of record of our Class A
common stock. This number excludes owners for whom Class A common stock may be held in
“street” name.
Table of Contents
S-14
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS FOR NON-U.S. HOLDERS
The following is a summary of the material U.S. federal income tax considerations related to the
purchase, ownership and disposition of our Class A common stock by a non-U.S. holder (as
defined below) that holds our Class A common stock as a “capital asset” (generally property held
for investment). This summary is based on the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended (the “Code”), U.S. Treasury regulations, administrative rulings and judicial
decisions, all as in effect on the date hereof, and all of which are subject to change, possibly with
retroactive effect. We have not sought any ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) with
respect to the statements made and the conclusions reached in the following summary, and there
can be no assurance that the IRS or a court will agree with such statements and conclusions.
This summary does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be relevant
to non-U.S. holders in light of their personal circumstances. In addition, this summary does not
address the Medicare tax on certain investment income, U.S. federal gift or estate tax laws, any
state, local or non-U.S. tax laws or any tax treaties. This summary also does not address tax
considerations applicable to investors that may be subject to special treatment under the U.S.
federal income tax laws, such as (without limitation):
•
banks, insurance companies or other financial institutions;
•
tax-exempt or governmental organizations;
•
qualified foreign pension funds;
•
dealers in securities or foreign currencies;
•
traders in securities that use the mark-to-market method of accounting for U.S. federal
income tax purposes;
•
persons subject to the alternative minimum tax;
•
•
•
partnerships or other pass-through entities for U.S. federal income tax purposes or
holders of interests therein;
persons deemed to sell our Class A common stock under the constructive sale provisions
of the Code;
persons that acquired our Class A common stock through the exercise of employee stock
options or otherwise as compensation or through a tax-qualified retirement plan;
•
certain former citizens or long-term residents of the United States;
•
real estate investment trusts or regulated investment companies; and
•
persons that hold our Class A common stock as part of a straddle, appreciated financial
position, synthetic security, hedge, conversion transaction or other integrated investment
or risk reduction transaction.
PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS ARE ENCOURAGED TO CONSULT THEIR TAX ADVISORS
WITH RESPECT TO THE APPLICATION OF THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX LAWS TO
THEIR PARTICULAR SITUATION, AS WELL AS ANY TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE
PURCHASE, OWNERSHIP AND DISPOSITION OF OUR CLASS A COMMON STOCK
ARISING UNDER THE U.S. FEDERAL GIFT OR ESTATE TAX LAWS OR UNDER THE
LAWS OF ANY STATE, LOCAL, NON-U.S. OR OTHER TAXING JURISDICTION OR UNDER
ANY APPLICABLE INCOME TAX TREATY.
Non-U.S. Holder Defined
For purposes of this discussion, a “non-U.S. holder” is a beneficial owner of our Class A common
stock that is not for U.S. federal income tax purposes a partnership or any of the following:
•
an individual who is a citizen or resident of the United States;
S-15
Table of Contents
•
•
•
a corporation (or other entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax
purposes) created or organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state
thereof or the District of Columbia;
an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of its
source; or
a trust (i) the administration of which is subject to the primary supervision of a U.S. court
and which has one or more United States persons who have the authority to control all
substantial decisions of the trust or (ii) which has made a valid election under applicable
U.S. Treasury regulations to be treated as a United States person.
If a partnership (including an entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal
income tax purposes) holds our Class A common stock, the tax treatment of a partner in the
partnership generally will depend upon the status of the partner, upon the activities of the
partnership and upon certain determinations made at the partner level. Accordingly, we urge
partners in partnerships (including entities or arrangements treated as partnerships for U.S.
federal income tax purposes) considering the purchase of our Class A common stock to consult
their tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal income tax considerations of the purchase,
ownership and disposition of our Class A common stock by such partnership.
Distributions
As described in the section entitled “Dividend Policy,” we do not currently make, and do not plan
to make for the foreseeable future, any distributions on our Class A common stock. However, if
we do make distributions of cash or other property on our Class A common stock, those
distributions will constitute dividends for U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent paid from
our current or accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax
principles. To the extent those distributions exceed our current and accumulated earnings and
profits, the distributions will be treated as a non-taxable return of capital to the extent of the non-
U.S. holder’s tax basis in our Class A common stock and thereafter as capital gain from the sale
or exchange of such Class A common stock. See “—Gain on Disposition of Class A Common
Stock.” Subject to the withholding requirements under FATCA (as defined below) and with
respect to effectively connected dividends, each of which is discussed below, any distribution
made to a non-U.S. holder on our Class A common stock generally will be subject to U.S.
withholding tax at a rate of 30% of the gross amount of the distribution unless an applicable
income tax treaty provides for a lower rate. To receive the benefit of a reduced treaty rate, a non-
U.S. holder must provide the applicable withholding agent with an IRS Form W-8BEN or IRS
Form W-8BEN-E (or other applicable or successor form) certifying qualification for the reduced
rate.
Dividends paid to a non-U.S. holder that are effectively connected with a trade or business
conducted by the non-U.S. holder in the United States (and, if required by an applicable income
tax treaty, are treated as attributable to a permanent establishment maintained by the non-U.S.
holder in the United States) generally will be taxed on a net income basis at the rates and in the
manner generally applicable to United States persons (as defined under the Code). Such
effectively connected dividends will not be subject to U.S. withholding tax if the non-U.S. holder
satisfies certain certification requirements by providing the applicable withholding agent a
properly executed IRS Form W-8ECI certifying eligibility for exemption. If the non-U.S. holder is a
non-U.S. corporation, it may also be subject to a branch profits tax (at a 30% rate or such lower
rate as specified by an applicable income tax treaty) on its effectively connected earnings and
profits (as adjusted for certain items), which will include effectively connected dividends.
Gain on Disposition of Class A Common Stock
Subject to the discussion below under “—Additional Withholding Requirements under FATCA,” a
non-U.S. holder generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on any gain realized
upon the sale or other disposition of our Class A common stock unless:
•
the non-U.S. holder is an individual who is present in the United States for a period or
periods aggregating 183 days or more during the calendar year in which the sale or
disposition occurs and certain other conditions are met;
S-16
Table of Contents
•
•
the gain is effectively connected with a trade or business conducted by the non-U.S.
holder in the United States (and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, is
attributable to a permanent establishment maintained by the non-U.S. holder in the
United States); or
our Class A common stock constitutes a United States real property interest by reason of
our status as a United States real property holding corporation (“USRPHC”) for U.S.
federal income tax purposes.
A non-U.S. holder described in the first bullet point above will be subject to U.S. federal income
tax at a rate of 30% (or such lower rate as specified by an applicable income tax treaty) on the
amount of such gain, which generally may be offset by U.S. source capital losses.
A non-U.S. holder whose gain is described in the second bullet point above or, subject to the
exceptions described in the next paragraph, the third bullet point above, generally will be taxed
on a net income basis at the rates and in the manner generally applicable to United States
persons (as defined under the Code) unless an applicable income tax treaty provides otherwise.
If the non-U.S. holder is a corporation, it may also be subject to a branch profits tax (at a 30% rate
or such lower rate as specified by an applicable income tax treaty) on its effectively connected
earnings and profits (as adjusted for certain items) which will include such gain.
Generally, a corporation is a USRPHC if the fair market value of its United States real property
interests equals or exceeds 50% of the sum of the fair market value of its worldwide real property
interests and its other assets used or held for use in a trade or business. We believe that we
currently are, and expect to remain for the foreseeable future, a USRPHC for U.S. federal income
tax purposes. However, as long as our Class A common stock continues to be regularly traded
on an established securities market, only a non-U.S. holder that actually or constructively owns
or owned at any time during the shorter of the five-year period ending on the date of the
disposition or the non-U.S. holder’s holding period for the Class A common stock, more than 5%
of our Class A common stock will be taxable on gain realized on the disposition of our Class A
common stock as a result of our status as a USRPHC. If our Class A common stock were not
considered to be regularly traded on an established securities market during the calendar year in
which the relevant disposition by a non-U.S. holder occurs, such holder (regardless of the
percentage of Class A common stock owned) would be subject to U.S. federal income tax on a
taxable disposition of our Class A common stock (as described in the preceding paragraph), and
a 15% withholding tax would apply to the gross proceeds from such disposition.
Non-U.S. holders should consult their tax advisors with respect to the application of the foregoing
rules to their ownership and disposition of our Class A common stock.
Backup Withholding and Information Reporting
Any dividends paid to a non-U.S. holder must be reported annually to the IRS and to the non-
U.S. holder. Copies of these information returns may be made available to the tax authorities in
the country in which the non-U.S. holder resides or is established. Payments of dividends to a
non-U.S. holder generally will not be subject to backup withholding if the non-U.S. holder
establishes an exemption by properly certifying its non-U.S. status on an IRS Form W-8BEN, IRS
Form W-8BEN-E or other appropriate version of IRS Form W-8.
Payments of the proceeds from a sale or other disposition by a non-U.S. holder of our Class A
common stock effected by or through a U.S. office of a broker generally will be subject to
information reporting and backup withholding (at the applicable rate) unless the non-U.S. holder
establishes an exemption by properly certifying its non-U.S. status on an IRS Form W-8BEN, IRS
Form W-8BEN-E or other appropriate version of IRS Form W-8 and certain other conditions are
met. Information reporting and backup withholding generally will not apply to any payment of the
proceeds from a sale or other disposition of our Class A common stock effected outside the
United States by a non-U.S. office of a broker. However, unless such broker has documentary
evidence in its records that the holder is not a United States person and certain other conditions
are met, or the non-U.S. holder otherwise establishes an exemption, information reporting will
apply to a payment of the
Table of Contents
S-17
proceeds of the disposition of our Class A common stock effected outside the United States by
such a broker if it has certain relationships within the United States.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Rather, the U.S. income tax liability (if any) of
persons subject to backup withholding will be reduced by the amount of tax withheld. If backup
withholding results in an overpayment of taxes, a refund may be obtained, provided that the
required information is timely furnished to the IRS.
Additional Withholding Requirements under FATCA
Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, and the Treasury regulations and administrative
guidance issued thereunder (“FATCA”), impose a 30% withholding tax on any dividends paid on
our Class A common stock and on the gross proceeds from a disposition of our Class A common
stock (if such disposition occurs after December 31, 2018), in each case if paid to a “foreign
financial institution” or a “non-financial foreign entity” (each as defined in the Code) (including, in
some cases, when such foreign financial institution or non-financial foreign entity is acting as an
intermediary), unless: (i) in the case of a foreign financial institution, such institution enters into an
agreement with the U.S. government to withhold on certain payments, and to collect and provide
to the U.S. tax authorities substantial information regarding U.S. account holders of such
institution (which includes certain equity and debt holders of such institution, as well as certain
account holders that are non-U.S. entities with U.S. owners); (ii) in the case of a non-financial
foreign entity, such entity certifies that it does not have any “substantial United States owners” (as
defined in the Code) or provides the applicable withholding agent with a certification identifying
the direct and indirect substantial United States owners of the entity (in either case, generally on
an IRS Form W-8BEN-E); or (iii) the foreign financial institution or non-financial foreign entity
otherwise qualifies for an exemption from these rules and provides appropriate documentation
(such as an IRS Form W-8BEN-E). Foreign financial institutions located in jurisdictions that have
an intergovernmental agreement with the United States governing these rules may be subject to
different rules. Under certain circumstances, a holder might be eligible for refunds or credits of
such taxes.
INVESTORS CONSIDERING THE PURCHASE OF OUR CLASS A COMMON STOCK ARE
URGED TO CONSULT THEIR OWN TAX ADVISORS REGARDING THE APPLICATION OF
THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX LAWS TO THEIR PARTICULAR SITUATIONS AND THE
APPLICABILITY AND EFFECT OF U.S. FEDERAL GIFT OR ESTATE TAX LAWS AND ANY
STATE, LOCAL OR NON-U.S. TAX LAWS AND TAX TREATIES.
Table of Contents
S-18
UNDERWRITING
Under the terms and subject to the conditions contained in an underwriting agreement between
us and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, as representative of the underwriters, the underwriters have
agreed to purchase, at the public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions
set forth on the cover page of this prospectus supplement, the shares of Class A common stock
set forth below.
Underwriter
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
BMO Capital Markets Corp.
RBC Capital Markets, LLC
Scotia Capital (USA) Inc.
UBS Securities LLC
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC
Barclays Capital Inc.
Canaccord Genuity Inc.
Capital One Securities, Inc.
Johnson Rice & Company L.L.C.
Northland Capital Markets
Seaport Global Securities LLC
Stephens Inc.
SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc.
Number of
Shares  
  3,407,500  
  507,500  
  507,500  
  507,500  
  507,500  
  507,500  
  145,000  
  145,000  
  145,000  
  145,000  
  145,000  
  145,000  
  145,000
SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc.
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc.
Total
145,000  
  145,000  
  
 
  7,250,000
The underwriting agreement provides that the underwriters are severally, and not jointly,
obligated to purchase all the shares of Class A common stock in this offering if any are
purchased, other than those shares covered by the option to purchase additional shares. We
have granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days from the date of the underwriting
agreement, to purchase up to 1,087,500 additional shares of Class A common stock at the public
offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions.
The underwriters propose to offer the shares of Class A common stock initially at the public
offering price on the cover page of this prospectus less a selling concession of $0.6039 per
share. After the initial offering of the shares of Class A common stock, the underwriters may
change the public offering price and concession and discount to broker/dealers. The offering of
the shares by the underwriters is subject to receipt and acceptance and subject to the
underwriters’ right to reject any order in whole or in part. The underwriters may offer and sell the
shares through their affiliates.
We have agreed to indemnify the underwriters against liabilities under the Securities Act, or
contribute to payments that the underwriters may be required to make in that respect. The
underwriters have informed us that they do not expect sales to accounts over which they have
discretionary authority to exceed 5% of the shares of Class A common stock being offered.
The following table summarizes the discounts and commissions that we will pay.
Discounts and commissions
to be paid by us
Per Share
Without Option     With Option
Total
$ 1.0065     $
7,297,125     $ 8,391,694
We estimate our out-of-pocket expenses for this offering will be approximately $220,000. We
have also agreed to reimburse the underwriters for certain of their expenses up to $30,000 as set
forth in the underwriting agreement.
Table of Contents
S-19
Lock-Up Agreements
In connection with this offering, we agreed that, for a period of 30 days from the date of the
underwriting agreement, subject to certain exceptions described below, we will not, directly or
indirectly: (i) offer, sell, issue, contract to sell, pledge or otherwise dispose of, share of Class A
common stock or any securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for Class A
common stock (“Lock-Up Securities”) (other than the shares offered hereby and shares issued
pursuant to employee benefit plans, qualified stock option plans or other employee
compensation plans existing on the date of the underwriting agreement (each, an “Employee
Plan”), (ii) offer, sell, issue, contract to sell, contract to purchase or grant any option, right or
warrant to purchase Lock-Up Securities (other than the grant of options pursuant to an Employee
Plan), (iii) enter into any swap, hedge or any other agreement that transfers, in whole or in part,
the economic consequences of ownership of Lock-Up Securities, (iv) establish or increase a put
equivalent position or liquidate or decrease a call equivalent position in Lock-Up Securities
within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act or (v) file with the SEC a registration
statement under the Securities Act relating to Lock-Up Securities, or publicly disclose the
intention to take any such action, without the prior written consent of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC,
except for (x) issuances of Lock-Up Securities pursuant to the conversion or exchange of
convertible or exchangeable securities or the exercise of warrants or options that are outstanding
on or prior to the date of the underwriting agreement, (y) the filing of a registration statement on
Form S-8 relating to, and the issuance and sale of Lock-Up Securities pursuant to, the terms of
an Employee Plan and (z) issuances of Lock-Up Securities issued as consideration for the
acquisition of equity interests or assets of any person, or the acquiring by us by any other manner
of any business, properties, assets, or persons, in one transaction or a series of related
transactions or the filing of a registration statement related to such Lock-Up Securities; provided
that (1) no more than an aggregate of 10% of the number of shares of our capital stock
outstanding as of the closing date of this offering are issued as consideration in connection with
all such acquisitions and (2) prior to the issuance of such shares of our capital stock each
recipient of such shares agrees in writing to be subject to the “lock-up” described herein for the
remaining term of the 30-day lock-up period. The 30-day period will commence on the date of the
underwriting agreement and continue for 30 days or until such earlier date as J.P. Morgan
Securities LLC may consent to in writing.
In addition, each of our officers and directors has agreed in connection with this offering that they
will not offer, sell, contract to sell, pledge or otherwise dispose of, directly or indirectly, any shares
of our Class A common stock or securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for
any shares of our Class A common stock, enter into a transaction that would have the same
effect, or enter into any swap, hedge or other arrangement that transfers, in whole or in part, any
of the economic consequences of ownership of our Class A common stock, whether any of these
transactions are to be settled by delivery of our Class A common stock or other securities, in cash
or otherwise, or publicly disclose the intention to make any offer, sale, pledge or disposition, or to
enter into any transaction, swap, hedge or other arrangement, without, in each case, the prior
written consent of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, for a period of 30 days after the date of the
underwriting agreement, except that such officers or directors may exchange any units in Parsley
Energy, LLC and a corresponding number of our shares of Class B common stock for Class A
common stock in accordance with the terms of the First Amended and Restated Limited Liability
Company Agreement of Parsley Energy, LLC.
These lock-up restrictions are subject to certain specific exceptions, including any transactions
relating to shares of our Class A common stock acquired in the open market after the closing of
this offering, the exercise or vesting of outstanding options and other equity-based awards
granted pursuant to certain equity incentive and other plans, and the withholding of shares of our
Class A common stock for the payment of taxes due upon such exercise or vesting, entry into
new trading plans in compliance with Rule 10b5-1 of the Exchange Act and sales pursuant to
Rule 10b5-1 trading plans in effect on the date of the underwriting agreement. The lock-up
restrictions will also permit transfers of Class A common stock as a bona fide gift or by will or
intestate succession and transfers to such person’s immediate family or to a trust or to an entity
controlled by such holder, provided that the recipient of such shares agrees to be bound by the
same restrictions on sales.
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, in its sole discretion, may release the Class A common stock and
other securities subject to the lock-up agreements described above in whole or in part at any
time. When determining
Table of Contents
S-20
whether or not to release the Class A common stock and other securities from lock-up
agreements, J.P. Morgan Securities LLC will consider, among other factors, the holder’s reasons
for requesting the release and the number of shares of Class A common stock or other securities
for which the release is being requested.
Other Relationships
The underwriters and their respective affiliates are full service financial institutions engaged in
various activities, which may include securities trading, commercial and investment banking,
financial advisory, investment management, investment research, principal investment hedging,
financing and brokerage activities.
The underwriters and their respective affiliates have from time to time performed, and may in the
future perform, various financial advisory, commercial banking and investment banking services
for us and for our affiliates in the ordinary course of business for which they have received and
would receive customary compensation.
In the ordinary course of their various business activities, the underwriters and their respective
affiliates may make or hold a broad array of investments and actively trade debt and equity
securities (or related derivative securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans) for
their own account and for the accounts of their customers, and such investments and securities
activities may involve our securities and/or instruments. The underwriters and their respective
affiliates may also make investment recommendations and/or publish or express independent
research views in respect of such securities or instruments and may at any time hold, or
recommend to clients that they acquire, long and/or short positions in such securities and
instruments.
Stabilization, Short Positions and Penalty Bids
The underwriter may engage in stabilizing transactions, short sales and purchases to cover
positions created by short sales and penalty bids or purchases for the purpose of pegging, fixing
or maintaining the price of our common stock, in accordance with Regulation M under the
Exchange Act as described below.
•
•
•
•
Stabilizing transactions permit bids to purchase the underlying security so long as the
stabilizing bids do not exceed a specified maximum.
A short position involves a sale by the underwriter of shares in excess of the number of
shares the underwriter is obligated to purchase in this offering, which creates the
syndicate short position. This short position may be either a covered short position or a
naked short position. In a covered short position, the number of shares involved in the
sales made by the underwriter in excess of the number of shares it is obligated to
purchase is not greater than the number of shares that it may purchase by exercising its
option to purchase additional shares. The underwriter may also sell shares in excess of
the option, creating a naked short position. The underwriter must close out any short
position by purchasing shares in the open market. A naked short position is more likely to
be created if the underwriter is concerned that there could be downward pressure on the
price of the shares in the open market after pricing that could adversely affect investors
who purchase in this offering.
Syndicate covering transactions involve purchases of the common stock in the open
market after the distribution has been completed in order to cover syndicate short
positions.
Penalty bids permit the underwriter to reclaim a selling concession from a syndicate
member when the common stock originally sold by the syndicate member is purchased in
a stabilizing or syndicate covering transaction to cover syndicate short positions.
These stabilizing transactions, syndicate covering transactions and penalty bids may have the
effect of raising or maintaining the market price of our common stock or preventing or retarding a
decline in the market price of the common stock. As a result, the price of our common stock may
be higher than the price that might otherwise exist in the open market. These transactions may be
effected on the NYSE or otherwise and, if commenced, may be discontinued at any time.
Table of Contents
S-21
Neither we nor the underwriters make any representation or prediction as to the direction or
magnitude of any effect that the transactions described above may have on the price of our
Class A common stock. In addition, neither we nor the underwriters make any representation that
the underwriters will engage in these stabilizing transactions or that any transaction, once
commenced, will not be discontinued without notice.
Electronic Prospectus
A prospectus in electronic format may be made available on the web sites maintained by the
underwriters, or selling group members, if any, participating in this offering and the underwriters
participating in this offering may distribute prospectuses electronically. The underwriters may
agree to allocate a number of shares to selling group members for sale to their online brokerage
account holders. Internet distributions will be allocated by the underwriters and selling group
members that will make internet distributions on the same basis as other allocations.
Canada
Selling Restrictions
The shares may be sold only to purchasers purchasing, or deemed to be purchasing, as principal
that are accredited investors, as defined in National Instrument 45-106 Prospectus Exemptions or
subsection 73.3(1) of the Securities Act (Ontario), and are permitted clients, as defined in
National Instrument 31-103 Registration Requirements, Exemptions and Ongoing Registrant
Obligations. Any resale of the shares must be made in accordance with an exemption from, or in
a transaction not subject to, the prospectus requirements of applicable securities laws.
Securities legislation in certain provinces or territories of Canada may provide a purchaser with
remedies for rescission or damages if this prospectus (including any amendment thereto)
contains a misrepresentation, provided that the remedies for rescission or damages are
exercised by the purchaser within the time limit prescribed by the securities legislation of the
purchaser’s province or territory. The purchaser should refer to any applicable provisions of the
securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory for particulars of these rights or
consult with a legal advisor.
Pursuant to section 3A.3 of National Instrument 33-105 Underwriting Conflicts (NI 33-105), the
underwriter is not required to comply with the disclosure requirements of NI 33-105 regarding
underwriter conflicts of interest in connection with this offering.
European Economic Area
In relation to each member state of the European Economic Area which has implemented the
Prospectus Directive (each such state being referred to herein as a “Relevant Member State”),
each underwriter has represented and agreed that with effect from and including the date on
which the Prospectus Directive is implemented in that Relevant Member State (each such date
being referred to herein as a “Relevant Implementation Date”) it has not made and will not make
an offer of shares to the public in that Relevant Member State prior to the publication of a
prospectus in relation to the shares which has been approved by the competent authority in that
Relevant Member State or, where appropriate, approved in another Relevant Member State and
notified to the competent authority in that Relevant Member State, all in accordance with the
Prospectus Directive, except that it may, with effect from and including the Relevant
Implementation Date, make an offer of shares to the public in that Relevant Member State at any
time:
(a) to legal entities which are authorized or regulated to operate in the financial markets or, if
not so authorized or regulated, whose corporate purpose is solely to invest in securities;
(b) to any legal entity which has two or more of (1) an average of at least 250 employees
during the last financial year; (2) a total balance sheet of more than €43,000,000 and
(3) an annual net turnover of more than €50,000,000, as shown in its last annual or
consolidated accounts;
S-22
Table of Contents
(c) to fewer than 100 natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the
Prospectus Directive) subject to obtaining the prior consent of the representative for any
such offer; or
(d) in any other circumstances which do not require the publication by the company of a
prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer of shares to the public” in relation to
any shares in any Relevant Member State means the communication in any form and by any
means of sufficient information on the terms of the offer and the shares to be offered so as to
enable an investor to decide to purchase or subscribe the shares, as the same may be varied in
that Relevant Member State by any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in that
Relevant Member State and the expression Prospectus Directive means Directive 2003/71/EC
and includes any relevant implementing measure in each Relevant Member State.
United Kingdom
Each underwriter has represented and agreed that (a) it has only communicated or caused to be
communicated and will only communicate or cause to be communicated an invitation or
inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning of Section 21 of the Financial
Services and Markets Act 2000 (the “FSMA”)) received by it in connection with the issue or sale
of the shares in circumstances in which Section 21(1) of the FSMA does not apply to us; and (b) it
has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to anything
done by it in relation to the shares in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.
Table of Contents
S-23
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the shares of our Class A common stock being offered by this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying prospectus will be passed upon for us by Vinson & Elkins
L.L.P., Houston, Texas. Certain legal matters will be passed upon for the underwriters by
Latham & Watkins LLP, Houston, Texas.
EXPERTS
The consolidated and combined financial statements of Parsley Energy, Inc. and subsidiaries as
of December 31, 2015 and 2014, and for each of the years in the three-year period ended
December 31, 2015, and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, have been incorporated by reference herein in
reliance upon the report of KPMG LLP, independent registered public accounting firm,
incorporated by reference herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and
accounting.
The information incorporated by reference in this prospectus regarding estimated quantities of
proved reserves, the future net revenues from those reserves and their present value as of
December 31, 2015, is based on the proved reserves report prepared by Netherland, Sewell &
Associates, Inc., our independent petroleum engineers. These estimates are incorporated by
reference in this prospectus in reliance upon the authority of such firm as an expert in these
matters.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly, current and other reports and other information with the SEC. You may
read and copy any materials we file with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F
Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C., 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for
further information on the operation of the Public Reference Room. Our SEC filings are also
available to the public from commercial document retrieval services and through the SEC’s
website at http://www.sec.gov.
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE under the symbol “PE.” Our reports and other
information filed with the SEC can also be inspected at the offices of the NYSE, at 20 Broad
Street, New York, New York 10005.
We also make available free of charge on our Internet website at www.parsleyenergy.com all of
the documents that we file with the SEC as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file those documents with the SEC. Information contained on our website is not
incorporated by reference into this prospectus supplement, and you should not consider
information contained on our website as part of this prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
S-24
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” information we have filed with the SEC. This
means that we can disclose important information to you without actually including the specific
information in this prospectus supplement by referring you to other documents filed separately
with the SEC.
The information incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus supplement.
Information that we later provide to the SEC, and which is deemed to be “filed” with the SEC, will
automatically update information previously filed with the SEC, and may replace information in
this prospectus supplement and information previously filed with the SEC.
We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and any future filings we make with the
SEC under Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act (other than, in each case,
information furnished rather than filed), after the date of this prospectus supplement and before
the filing of a post-effective amendment to the registration statement of which this prospectus
supplement is a part that indicates that all securities offered hereunder have been sold or that
deregisters all securities then remaining unsold:
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015;
•
•
•
•
our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2016, and
June 30, 2016;
our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on January 5, 2016, March 23, 2016, April 4,
2016, April 6, 2016, May 23, 2016, May 27, 2016, June 3, 2016, August 12, 2016, and
August 15, 2016;
the information specifically incorporated by reference into the Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the year ended December 31, 2015, from our Definitive Proxy Statement on
Schedule 14A filed on April 22, 2016; and
the description of our Class A common stock contained in our Form 8-A filed on May 20,
2014, including any amendment to that form that we may file in the future for the purpose
of updating the description of our Class A common stock.
These reports contain important information about us, our financial condition and our results of
operations.
You may request a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus, including
the exhibits thereto, at no cost, by writing or telephoning us at the following address or telephone
number:
Parsley Energy, Inc.
303 Colorado Street, Suite 3000
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS
Austin, Texas 78701
Phone: (737) 704-2300
S-25
Parsley Energy, Inc.
Debt Securities
Guarantees of Debt Securities
Class A Common Stock
Preferred Stock
Depositary Shares
Warrants
From time to time we may offer and sell the following securities:
•
Debt securities, which may be senior or subordinated, and which may be guaranteed by
certain of our subsidiaries, including Parsley Energy, LLC, Parsley Energy, L.P., Parsley
Energy Management, LLC, Parsley Energy Operations, LLC, Parsley Energy Aviation,
LLC and Parsley Finance Corp.;
•
Shares of Class A common stock;
•
Shares of preferred stock;
•
Depositary shares; and
•
Warrants.
We may offer and sell these securities from time to time in amounts, at prices and on terms to be
determined by market conditions and other factors at the time of our offerings. We may offer and
sell these securities through agents, through underwriters or dealers or directly to one or more
purchasers, including existing stockholders. This prospectus provides you with a general
description of these securities and the general manner in which we will offer the securities. Each
time securities are offered, we will provide a prospectus supplement that will contain specific
information about the terms of that offering. The prospectus supplement may also add, update or
change information contained in this prospectus.
Our Class A common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “PE.”
Our principal executive offices are located at 303 Colorado Street, Suite 3000, Austin, Texas
78701, and our telephone number at that address is (737) 704-2300.
You should read carefully this prospectus, the documents incorporated by reference in
this prospectus and any prospectus supplement before you invest. See “Risk Factors”
beginning on page 6 of this prospectus for information on certain risks related to the
purchase of our securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission
has approved or disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is
truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Table of Contents
The date of this prospectus is June 5, 2015.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
ABOUT PARSLEY ENERGY, INC.
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
1  
     1  
     2  
     3  
     4  
     6  
     7
RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
8  
     9  
     11  
     16  
     17  
     18  
     19  
     19  
     19  
    F-1
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement
and the documents we have incorporated by reference. We have not authorized any dealer,
salesperson or other person to provide you with additional or different information. If anyone
provides you with different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it. This prospectus
and any prospectus supplement are not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any
securities other than the securities to which they relate and are not an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to
make an offer or solicitation in that jurisdiction. You should not assume that the information
contained in this prospectus is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of
this prospectus, or that the information contained in any document incorporated by reference is
accurate as of any date other than the date of the document incorporated by reference,
regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus or any sale of a security.
Table of Contents
i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we have filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) using a “shelf” registration process. Under this shelf
registration process, we may, from time to time, offer and sell any combination of the securities
described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. This prospectus generally describes
Parsley Energy, Inc. and the debt securities, Class A common stock, preferred stock, depositary
shares and warrants that we may offer. Each time securities are offered by means of this
prospectus, we will provide a prospectus supplement that will contain specific information about
the terms of that offering. We may also authorize one or more free writing prospectuses to be
provided to you that may contain material information relating to these offerings. We may also
add or update in the prospectus supplement (and in any related free writing prospectus that we
may authorize to be provided to you) any of the information contained in this prospectus or in the
documents that we have incorporated by reference into this prospectus. We urge you to carefully
read this prospectus, any applicable prospectus supplement and any related free writing
prospectus, together with the information incorporated herein by reference as described under
the heading “Where You Can Find Additional Information,” before buying any of the securities
being offered.
This prospectus contains summaries of certain provisions contained in some of the documents
described herein, but reference is made to the actual documents for complete information. All of
the summaries are qualified in their entirety by the actual documents. Copies of some of the
documents referred to herein have been filed, will be filed or will be incorporated by reference as
exhibits to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part, and you may obtain
copies of those documents as described below under the heading “Available Information.”
ABOUT PARSLEY ENERGY, INC.
Overview
We are an independent oil and natural gas company focused on the acquisition, development
and exploitation of unconventional oil and natural gas reserves in the Permian Basin. The
Permian Basin is located in West Texas and Southeastern New Mexico and is comprised of
three primary sub-areas: the Midland Basin, the Central Basin Platform and the Delaware Basin.
These areas are characterized by high oil and liquids-rich natural gas content, multiple vertical
and horizontal target horizons, extensive production histories, long-lived reserves and historically
high drilling success rates. Our properties are primarily located in the Midland and Delaware
Basins and our activities have historically been focused on the vertical development of the
Spraberry, Wolfberry and Wolftoka Trends of the Midland Basin. Our vertical wells in the Permian
Basin are drilled into stacked pay zones that include the Spraberry, Wolfcamp, Upper
Pennsylvanian (Cline), Strawn, Atoka and Mississippian formations. During the course of 2014
we transitioned from primarily vertical development drilling to predominantly horizontal
development drilling activity. For additional information about our company, please read the
documents listed under “Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference.”
Organizational Structure
We are a holding company that was incorporated as a Delaware corporation on December 11,
2013, for the purpose of facilitating our initial public offering (the “IPO”) and to become the sole
managing member of Parsley Energy, LLC, which we refer to as “Parsley LLC.” Our principal
asset is a controlling equity interest in Parsley LLC. On May 22, 2014, a registration statement
filed on Form S-1 with the SEC related to shares of our Class A common stock, par value $0.01
per share (“Class A common stock”), was declared effective. The IPO closed on May 29, 2014.
Prior to the IPO, we had not engaged in any business or other activities except in connection with
our formation and the IPO. As a result of the IPO and certain related reorganization transactions,
we became the sole managing member of, and have a controlling equity interest in, Parsley LLC.
As the sole managing member of Parsley LLC, we operate and control all of the business and
affairs of Parsley LLC and,
Table of Contents
1
through Parsley LLC and its subsidiaries, conduct our business. We consolidate the financial
results of Parsley LLC and its subsidiaries and record noncontrolling interests for the economic
interest in Parsley LLC held by the other holders of equity interests in Parsley LLC.
Company Information
We are a Delaware corporation. Our principal executive offices are located at 303 Colorado
Street, Suite 3000, Austin, Texas 78701 and our telephone number at that address is (737) 704-
2300. Our website address is www.parsleyenergy.com.
As used in this prospectus, the “Company,” “we,” “our,” “us” or like terms mean Parsley Energy,
Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries unless we state otherwise or the context otherwise
requires.
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” the information we have filed with the SEC. This
means that we can disclose important information to you without actually including the specific
information in this prospectus by referring you to other documents filed separately with the SEC.
The information incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus. Information that
we later provide to the SEC, and which is deemed to be “filed” with the SEC, will automatically
update information previously filed with the SEC, and may replace information in this prospectus
and information previously filed with the SEC.
We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and any future filings we make with the
SEC under Section 13 (a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, after the date of this prospectus and before the termination of this offering (excluding
any information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K).
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014;
•
our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015;
•
our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on February 11, 2015, and April 27, 2015;
•
•
the information specifically incorporated by reference into the Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the year ended December 31, 2014 from our Definitive Proxy Statement on
Schedule 14A filed on April 28, 2015; and
the description of our Class A common stock contained in our Form 8-A filed on May 20,
2014, including any amendment to that form that we may file in the future for the purpose
of updating the description of our Class A common stock.
These reports contain important information about us, our financial condition and our results of
operations.
You may request a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus, including
the exhibits thereto, at no cost, by writing or telephoning us at the following address or telephone
number:
Parsley Energy, Inc.
303 Colorado Street, Suite 3000
Austin, Texas 78701
Phone: (737) 704-2300
2
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
Table of Contents
We are required to file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other
information with the SEC. You may read and copy documents filed by us with the SEC at the
SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F. Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. You may obtain
information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-
0330. Our filings with the SEC are also available to the public from commercial document
retrieval services and at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Our Class A common stock is listed and traded on The New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”).
Our reports, proxy statements and other information filed with the SEC can also be inspected and
copied at the NYSE, 20 Broad Street, New York, New York 10005.
We also make available free of charge on our website at www.parsleyenergy.com all of the
documents that we file with the SEC as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file
such material with the SEC. Information contained on our website is not incorporated by
reference into this prospectus.
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we have filed with the SEC relating to the
securities to be offered. This prospectus does not contain all of the information we have included
in the registration statement and the accompanying exhibits and schedules in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the SEC, and we refer you to the omitted information. The statements
this prospectus makes pertaining to the content of any contract, agreement or other document
that is an exhibit to the registration statement necessarily are summaries of their material
provisions and do not describe all exceptions and qualifications contained in those contracts,
agreements or documents. You should read those contracts, agreements or documents for
information that may be important to you. The registration statement, exhibits and schedules are
available at the SEC’s Public Reference Room or through its Internet website.
3
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference contain “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. All statements, other than statements of
historical fact included in this prospectus, regarding our strategy, future operations, financial
position, estimated revenues and losses, projected costs, prospects, plans and objectives of
management are forward-looking statements. When used in this prospectus, the words “could,”
“believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project” and similar expressions are
intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements
contain such identifying words. These forward-looking statements are based on our current
expectations and assumptions about future events and are based on currently available
information as to the outcome and timing of future events. When considering forward-looking
statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary statements described
under, but not limited to, the heading “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in our most recent Annual
Report on Form 10-K, any subsequently filed Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and any
subsequently filed Current Reports on Form 8-K (excluding any information furnished pursuant to
Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K), all of which are incorporated by
reference in this prospectus, and any risk factors included in any applicable prospectus
supplement. These forward-looking statements are based on management’s current belief,
based on currently available information, as to the outcome and timing of future events.
Forward-looking statements may include statements about our:
•
business strategy;
•
reserves;
•
exploration and development drilling prospects, inventories, projects and programs;
•
ability to replace the reserves we produce through drilling and property acquisitions;
•
financial strategy, liquidity and capital required for our development program;
•
realized oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids (“NGLs”) prices;
•
timing and amount of future production of oil, natural gas and NGLs;
•
hedging strategy and results;
•
future drilling plans;
•
competition and government regulations;
•
ability to obtain permits and governmental approvals;
•
pending legal or environmental matters;
•
marketing of oil, natural gas and NGLs;
•
leasehold or business acquisitions;
•
costs of developing our properties;
•
general economic conditions;
•
credit markets;
•
uncertainty regarding our future operating results; and
•
plans, objectives, expectations and intentions contained in this prospectus that are not
historical.
We caution you that these forward-looking statements are subject to all of the risks and
uncertainties, most of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control,
incident to the exploration for and
Table of Contents
4
development, production, gathering and sale of oil, natural gas, and NGLs. These risks include,
but are not limited to, commodity price volatility, inflation, lack of availability of drilling and
production equipment and services, environmental risks, drilling and other operating risks,
regulatory changes, the uncertainty inherent in estimating reserves and in projecting future rates
of production, cash flow and access to capital, the timing of development expenditures, and the
other risks described under “Risk Factors” in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K, which
is incorporated by reference herein.
Reserve engineering is a process of estimating underground accumulations of oil, natural gas,
and NGLs that cannot be measured in an exact way. The accuracy of any reserve estimate
depends on the quality of available data, the interpretation of such data and price and cost
assumptions made by reserve engineers. In addition, the results of drilling, testing and production
activities may justify revisions of estimates that were made previously. If significant, such
revisions would change the schedule of any further production and development drilling.
Accordingly, reserve estimates may differ significantly from the quantities of oil, natural gas and
NGLs that are ultimately recovered.
Should one or more of the risks or uncertainties described in this prospectus occur, or should
underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results and plans could differ materially from
those expressed in any forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements, expressed or implied, included in this prospectus are expressly
qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. This cautionary statement should also be
considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we
or persons acting on our behalf may issue.
Except as otherwise required by applicable law, we disclaim any duty to update any forward-
looking statements, all of which are expressly qualified by the statements in this section, to reflect
events or circumstances after the date of this prospectus.
Table of Contents
5
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our securities involves a significant degree of risk. Before you invest in our
securities you should carefully consider those risk factors described under, but not limited to, the
heading “Risk Factors” in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K, any subsequently filed
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and any subsequently filed Current Reports on Form 8-K
(excluding any information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 on any Current Report on
Form 8-K), which are incorporated herein by reference, and those risk factors that may be
included in any applicable prospectus supplement, together with all of the other information
included in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement and the documents we incorporate by
reference, in evaluating an investment in our securities. If any of these risks were actually to
occur, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely
affected. Additional risks not presently known to us or that we currently believe are immaterial
may also significantly impair our business operations and financial condition. Please read
“Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Table of Contents
6
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless we inform you otherwise in a prospectus supplement or free writing prospectus, we intend
to use the net proceeds from the sale of securities we are offering for general corporate purposes.
This may include, among other things, additions to working capital, repayment or refinancing of
existing indebtedness or other corporate obligations, financing of capital expenditures and
acquisitions and investment in existing and future projects. Any specific allocation of the net
proceeds of an offering of securities to a specific purpose will be determined at the time of the
offering and will be described in an accompanying prospectus supplement or free writing
prospectus.
Unless otherwise set forth in a prospectus supplement, we will not receive any proceeds in the
event that securities are sold by a selling stockholder.
Table of Contents
7
RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
The following table sets forth our ratios of consolidated earnings to fixed charges for the periods
presented:
($ in thousands)
Fixed charges:
Year Ended December 31,
Three
Months
Ended
March
31,
2010      2011     2012     2013     2014
2015(a)
Fixed charges:
Interest expense
Capitalized interest
Portion of rental expense which
represents interest factor
Total Fixed Charges
Earnings available for fixed
charges:
Pre-tax income
Less: (income)/loss from equity
investments
Add: fixed charges
Add: capitalized interest
amortized during period
Less: capitalized interest
Less: net (income)/loss -
noncontrolling interests
Total earnings available for
fixed charges
Ratio of earnings to fixed
charges(b)(c)
$
34     $
     —
$
3      
        
36     $
492    $ 6,362    $13,949    $ 38,922    $ 15,050  
234     
—
999      3,409
2,689
6
79  
 
732    $ 7,374    $17,393    $ 41,681    $ 15,129
69
14
35
$1,566     $11,935    $13,453    $29,415    $ 93,190    $(39,819)
8      
36
(87) 
(136)    
732      7,374      17,393      41,681      15,129
(267)
(184)
(348)
—        
     —
2     
(234)
6
131     
(999)     (3,409)
193     
(2,689)
—    
—
—         —        —        —        (33,294)     13,342
$1,611     $12,299    $19,567    $43,346    $ 98,733    $(11,434)
43.9x       16.8x
2.7x
2.5x
2.4x
(0.8x)
(a) We would have needed to generate additional $26.6 million to achieve coverage of 1:1 for
the quarter ended March 31, 2015.
(b) We had no preferred stock outstanding for any period presented, and accordingly, the ratio of
earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is the same as the ratio of
earnings to fixed charges.
(c) For purposes of calculating the ratios of consolidated earnings to fixed charges, “earnings”
consists of pre-tax income (loss) from continuing operations. “Fixed charges” consist of
interest expense and capitalized interest. Interest expense includes amortization of
discounts, financing fees, and deferred financing amortization.
Table of Contents
8
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
The “Debt Securities” will be either our senior debt securities (“Senior Debt Securities”) or our
subordinated debt securities (“Subordinated Debt Securities”). The Senior Debt Securities and
the Subordinated Debt Securities will be issued under separate indentures among us, the
subsidiary guarantors of such Debt Securities (each a “Subsidiary Guarantor”), if applicable, and
a trustee to be determined (the “Trustee”). Senior Debt Securities will be issued under a “Senior
Indenture” and Subordinated Debt Securities will be issued under a “Subordinated Indenture.”
Together, the Senior Indenture and the Subordinated Indenture are called “Indentures.”
The Debt Securities may be issued from time to time in one or more series. The particular terms
of each series that are offered by a prospectus supplement will be described in the prospectus
supplement.
Our rights and the rights of our creditors, including holders of the Debt Securities, to participate in
the assets of any subsidiary (other than the Subsidiary Guarantors of such securities, if
applicable), upon the latter’s liquidation or reorganization, will be subject to the prior claims of the
subsidiary’s creditors, except to the extent that we may ourself be a creditor with recognized
claims against such subsidiary.
We have summarized selected provisions of the Indentures below. The summary is not complete.
The form of each Indenture has been filed with the SEC as an exhibit to the registration statement
of which this prospectus is a part, and you should read the Indentures for provisions that may be
important to you.
General
The Indentures provide that Debt Securities in separate series may be issued thereunder from
time to time without limitation as to aggregate principal amount. We may specify a maximum
aggregate principal amount for the Debt Securities of any series. We will determine the terms and
conditions of the Debt Securities, including the maturity, principal and interest, but those terms
must be consistent with the Indenture. The Debt Securities will be our unsecured obligations. If
the prospectus supplement so indicates, the Debt Securities will be convertible into our Class A
common stock.
The Subordinated Debt Securities will be subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in
full of all of our Senior Debt (as defined) as described in the prospectus supplement applicable to
any Subordinated Debt Securities.
If specified in the prospectus supplement respecting a particular series of Debt Securities, one or
more Subsidiary Guarantors identified therein will fully and unconditionally guarantee (the
“Subsidiary Guarantee”) that series described in the prospectus supplement. Each Subsidiary
Guarantee will be an unsecured obligation of the Subsidiary Guarantor. A Subsidiary Guarantee
of Subordinated Debt Securities will be subordinated to the Senior Debt of the Subsidiary
Guarantor on the same basis as the Subordinated Debt Securities are subordinated to our Senior
Debt.
The applicable prospectus supplement will set forth the price or prices at which the Debt
Securities to be issued will be offered for sale and will describe the following terms of such Debt
Securities:
(1) the title of the Debt Securities;
(2) whether the Debt Securities are Senior Debt Securities or Subordinated Debt Securities and,
if Subordinated Debt Securities, the related subordination terms;
(3) whether any Subsidiary Guarantor will provide a Subsidiary Guarantee of the Debt Securities;
(4) any limit on the aggregate principal amount of the Debt Securities;
(5) each date on which the principal of the Debt Securities will be payable;
Table of Contents
9
(6) the interest rate that the Debt Securities will bear and the interest payment dates for the Debt
Securities;
(7) each place where payments on the Debt Securities will be payable;
(8) any terms upon which the Debt Securities may be redeemed, in whole or in part, at our option;
(9) any sinking fund or other provisions that would obligate us to redeem or otherwise repurchase
the Debt Securities;
(10) the portion of the principal amount, if less than all, of the Debt Securities that will be payable
upon declaration of acceleration of the Maturity of the Debt Securities;
(11) whether the Debt Securities are defeasible;
(12) any addition to or change in the Events of Default;
(13) whether the Debt Securities are convertible into our Class A common stock and, if so, the
terms and conditions upon which conversion will be effected, including the initial conversion
price or conversion rate and any adjustments thereto and the conversion period;
(14) any addition to or change in the covenants in the Indenture applicable to the Debt Securities;
and
(15) any other terms of the Debt Securities not inconsistent with the provisions of the Indenture.
Debt Securities, including any Debt Securities that provide for an amount less than the principal
amount thereof to be due and payable upon a declaration of acceleration of the maturity thereof
(“Original Issue Discount Securities”), may be sold at a substantial discount below their principal
amount. Special United States federal income tax considerations applicable to Original Issue
Discount Securities may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement. In addition,
special United States federal income tax or other considerations applicable to any Debt
Securities that are denominated in a currency or currency unit other than United States dollars
may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement.
Global Securities
Some or all of the Debt Securities of any series may be represented, in whole or in part, by one or
more global securities (each a “Global Security”) that will have an aggregate principal amount
equal to that of the Debt Securities they represent. Each Global Security will be registered in the
name of a depositary or its nominee identified in the applicable prospectus supplement, will be
deposited with such depositary or nominee or its custodian and will bear a legend regarding the
restrictions on exchanges and registration of transfer thereof referred to below, and any such
other matters as may be provided for pursuant to the applicable Indenture.
Governing Law
The Indentures and the Debt Securities will be governed by, and construed in accordance with,
the law of the State of New York.
The Trustee
We will enter into the Indentures with a Trustee that is qualified to act under the Trust Indenture
Act of 1939, as amended, and with any other Trustees chosen by us and appointed in a
supplemental indenture for a particular series of Debt Securities. We may maintain a banking
relationship in the ordinary course of business with our Trustee and one or more of its affiliates.
Table of Contents
10
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
As of June 3, 2015, our authorized capital stock consisted of 600,000,000 shares of Class A
common stock, $0.01 par value per share, of which 108,823,744 were issued and 108,752,611
were outstanding; 125,000,000 shares of Class B common stock, $0.01 par value per share, of
which 32,145,296 were issued and outstanding; and 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par
value $0.01 per share, of which no shares were issued and outstanding. The following summary
of our capital stock, amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated
bylaws does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the
provisions of applicable law and to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and
amended and restated bylaws.
Class A Common Stock
Voting Rights. Holders of shares of our Class A common stock are entitled to one vote per share
held of record on all matters to be voted upon by the stockholders. The holders of shares of our
Class A common stock do not have cumulative voting rights in the election of directors.
Dividend Rights. Holders of shares of our Class A common stock are entitled to ratably receive
dividends when and if declared by our board of directors out of funds legally available for that
purpose, subject to any statutory or contractual restrictions on the payment of dividends and to
any prior rights and preferences that may be applicable to any outstanding preferred stock.
Liquidation Rights. Upon our liquidation, dissolution, distribution of assets or other winding up,
the holders of shares of our Class A common stock are entitled to receive ratably the assets
available for distribution to the stockholders after payment of liabilities and the liquidation
preference of any of our outstanding shares of preferred stock.
Other Matters. The shares of Class A common stock have no preemptive or conversion rights and
are not subject to further calls or assessment by us. There are no redemption or sinking fund
provisions applicable to the Class A common stock. All outstanding shares of our Class A
common stock, including the Class A common stock offered in this offering, are fully paid and
non-assessable.
Class B Common Stock
Generally. In connection with our IPO and concurrent corporate reorganization, Parsley LLC
distributed to its then-existing owners a class of units known as “PE Units.” Upon completion of
the IPO, each holder of PE Units (a “PE Unit Holder”) received one share of Class B common
stock for each PE Unit that it held. Accordingly, each PE Unit Holder has a number of votes in
Parsley Energy, Inc. equal to the aggregate number of PE Units that it holds.
Voting Rights. Holders of shares of our Class B common stock are entitled to one vote per share
held of record on all matters to be voted upon by the stockholders. Holders of shares of our
Class A common stock and Class B common stock vote together as a single class on all matters
presented to our stockholders for their vote or approval, except with respect to the amendment of
certain provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation that would alter or
change the powers, preferences or special rights of the Class B common stock so as to affect
them adversely, which amendments must be by a majority of the votes entitled to be cast by the
holders of the shares affected by the amendment, voting as a separate class, or as otherwise
required by applicable law.
Dividend and Liquidation Rights. Holders of our Class B common stock do not have any right to
receive dividends, unless the dividend consists of shares of our Class B common stock or of
rights, options, warrants or other securities convertible or exercisable into or exchangeable for
shares of Class B common stock paid
Table of Contents
11
proportionally with respect to each outstanding share of our Class B common stock, and a
dividend consisting of shares of Class A common stock or of rights, options, warrants or other
securities convertible or exercisable into or exchangeable for shares of Class A common stock
on the same terms is simultaneously paid to the holders of Class A common stock. Holders of our
Class B common stock do not have any right to receive a distribution upon our liquidation or
winding up.
Preferred Stock
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation authorizes our board of directors, subject to
any limitations prescribed by law, without further stockholder approval, to establish and to issue
from time to time one or more classes or series of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share,
covering up to an aggregate of 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock. Each class or series of
preferred stock will cover the number of shares and will have the powers, preferences, rights,
qualifications, limitations and restrictions determined by the board of directors, which may
include, among others, dividend rights, liquidation preferences, voting rights, conversion rights,
preemptive rights and redemption rights. Except as provided by law or in a preferred stock
designation, the holders of preferred stock will not be entitled to vote at or receive notice of any
meeting of stockholders.
Anti-Takeover Effects of Provisions of Our Amended and Restated Certificate of
Incorporation, our Amended and Restated Bylaws and Delaware Law
Some provisions of Delaware law, and our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and
our amended and restated bylaws described below, will contain provisions that could make the
following transactions more difficult: acquisitions of us by means of a tender offer, a proxy contest
or otherwise; or removal of our incumbent officers and directors. These provisions may also have
the effect of preventing changes in our management. It is possible that these provisions could
make it more difficult to accomplish or could deter transactions that stockholders may otherwise
consider to be in their best interest or in our best interests, including transactions that might result
in a premium over the market price for our shares.
These provisions, summarized below, are expected to discourage coercive takeover practices
and inadequate takeover bids. These provisions are also designed to encourage persons
seeking to acquire control of us to first negotiate with us. We believe that the benefits of
increased protection and our potential ability to negotiate with the proponent of an unfriendly or
unsolicited proposal to acquire or restructure us outweigh the disadvantages of discouraging
these proposals because, among other things, negotiation of these proposals could result in an
improvement of their terms.
Delaware Law
Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law (“DGCL”) prohibits a Delaware
corporation, including those whose securities are listed for trading on the NYSE, from engaging
in any business combination with any interested stockholder for a period of three years following
the date that the stockholder became an interested stockholder, unless:
•
•
•
the transaction is approved by the board of directors before the date the interested
stockholder attained that status;
upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an
interested stockholder, the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of the voting stock
of the corporation outstanding at the time the transaction commenced; or
on or after such time the business combination is approved by the board of directors and
authorized at a meeting of stockholders by at least two-thirds of the outstanding voting
stock that is not owned by the interested stockholder.
We are not subject to the provisions of Section 203 of the DGCL.
Table of Contents
12
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and Amended and Restated Bylaws
Provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and our amended and
restated bylaws may delay or discourage transactions involving an actual or potential change in
control or change in our management, including transactions in which stockholders might
otherwise receive a premium for their shares, or transactions that our stockholders might
otherwise deem to be in their best interests. Therefore, these provisions could adversely affect
the price of our Class A common stock.
Among other things, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and
restated bylaws:
•
•
establish advance notice procedures with regard to stockholder proposals relating to the
nomination of candidates for election as directors or new business to be brought before
meetings of our stockholders. These procedures provide that notice of stockholder
proposals must be timely given in writing to our corporate secretary prior to the meeting at
which the action is to be taken. Generally, to be timely, notice must be received at our
principal executive offices not less than 90 days nor more than 120 days prior to the first
anniversary date of the annual meeting for the preceding year. Our amended and restated
bylaws specify the requirements as to form and content of all stockholders’ notices. These
requirements may preclude stockholders from bringing matters before the stockholders at
an annual or special meeting;
provide our board of directors the ability to authorize undesignated preferred stock. This
ability makes it possible for our board of directors to issue, without stockholder approval,
preferred stock with voting or other rights or preferences that could impede the success of
any attempt to change control of us. These and other provisions may have the effect of
deferring hostile takeovers or delaying changes in control or management of our
company;
•
provide that the authorized number of directors may be changed only by resolution of the
board of directors;
•
provide that all vacancies, including newly created directorships, may, except as
otherwise required by law or, if applicable, the rights of holders of a series of preferred
stock, be filled by the affirmative vote of a majority of directors then in office, even if less
than a quorum;
provide that any action required or permitted to be taken by the stockholders must be
effected at a duly called annual or special meeting of stockholders and may not be
effected by any consent in writing in lieu of a meeting of such stockholders, subject to the
rights of the holders of any series of preferred stock with respect to such series;
provide that our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and
restated bylaws may be amended by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least two-
thirds of our then outstanding Class A common stock;
provide that special meetings of our stockholders may only be called by the board of
directors, the chief executive officer or the chairman of the board;
provide for our board of directors to be divided into three classes of directors, with each
class as nearly equal in number as possible, serving staggered three-year terms, other
than directors which may be elected by holders of preferred stock, if any. This system of
electing and removing directors may tend to discourage a third party from making a tender
offer or otherwise attempting to obtain control of us, because it generally makes it more
difficult for stockholders to replace a majority of the directors;
provide that we renounce any interest in existing and future investments in other entities
by, or the business opportunities of, the Sponsors (as defined in our amended and
restated certificate of incorporation) or any of their officers, directors, agents, stockholders,
members, partners, affiliates and subsidiaries (other than our directors that are presented
business opportunities in their capacity as our directors) and that they have no obligation
to offer us those investments or opportunities; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
provide that our amended and restated bylaws can be amended by the board of directors.
13
Table of Contents
Forum Selection
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that unless we consent in writing
to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware will, to the
fullest extent permitted by applicable law, be the sole and exclusive forum for:
•
any derivative action or proceeding brought on our behalf;
•
•
•
any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any of our directors,
officers, employees or agents to us or our stockholders;
any action asserting a claim against us or any director or officer or other employee of ours
arising pursuant to any provision of the DGCL, our amended and restated certificate of
incorporation or our bylaws; or
any action asserting a claim against us or any director or officer or other employee of ours
that is governed by the internal affairs doctrine, in each such case subject to such Court of
Chancery having personal jurisdiction over the indispensable parties named as
defendants therein.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation also provides that any person or entity
purchasing or otherwise acquiring any interest in shares of our capital stock will be deemed to
have notice of, and to have consented to, this forum selection provision. Although we believe
these provisions benefit us by providing increased consistency in the application of Delaware
law for the specified types of actions and proceedings, the provisions may have the effect of
discouraging lawsuits against our directors, officers, employees and agents. The enforceability of
similar exclusive forum provisions in other companies’ certificates of incorporation has been
challenged in legal proceedings, and it is possible that, in connection with one or more actions or
proceedings described above, a court could rule that this provision in our amended and restated
certificate of incorporation is inapplicable or unenforceable.
Limitation of Liability and Indemnification Matters
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation limits the liability of our directors for
monetary damages for breach of their fiduciary duty as directors, except for liability that cannot be
eliminated under the DGCL. Delaware law provides that directors of a company will not be
personally liable for monetary damages for breach of their fiduciary duty as directors, except for
liabilities:
•
for any breach of their duty of loyalty to us or our stockholders;
•
for acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a
knowing violation of law;
•
for unlawful payment of dividend or unlawful stock repurchase or redemption, as provided
under Section 174 of the DGCL; or
•
for any transaction from which the director derived an improper personal benefit.
Any amendment, repeal or modification of these provisions will be prospective only and would
not affect any limitation on liability of a director for acts or omissions that occurred prior to any
such amendment, repeal or modification.
Our amended and restated bylaws also provide that we will indemnify our directors and officers
to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law. Our amended and restated bylaws also permit us
to purchase insurance on behalf of any officer, director, employee or other agent for any liability
arising out of that person’s actions as our officer, director, employee or agent, regardless of
whether Delaware law would permit indemnification. We have entered into indemnification
agreements with each of our directors and officers. These agreements require us to indemnify
these individuals to the fullest extent permitted under Delaware law against liability that may
Table of Contents
14
arise by reason of their service to us, and to advance expenses incurred as a result of any
proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. We believe that the limitation of
liability provision in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the indemnification
agreements facilitate our ability to continue to attract and retain qualified individuals to serve as
directors and officers.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our capital stock is American Stock Transfer & Trust
Company, LLC.
Listing
Our Class A common stock is listed on the NYSE under the symbol “PE.”
Table of Contents
15
DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES
We may offer depositary shares (either separately or together with other securities) representing
fractional interests in our preferred stock of any series. In connection with the issuance of any
depositary shares, we will enter into a deposit agreement with a bank or trust company, as
depositary, which will be named in the applicable prospectus supplement. Depositary shares will
be evidenced by depositary receipts issued pursuant to the related deposit agreement.
Immediately following our issuance of the preferred stock related to the depositary shares, we will
deposit the preferred stock with the relevant preferred stock depositary and will cause the
preferred stock depositary to issue, on our behalf, the related depositary receipts. Subject to the
terms of the deposit agreement, each owner of a depositary receipt will be entitled, in proportion
to the fraction of a share of preferred stock represented by the related depositary share, to all the
rights, preferences and privileges of, and will be subject to all of the limitations and restrictions
on, the preferred stock represented by the depositary receipt (including, if applicable, dividend,
voting, conversion, exchange redemption and liquidation rights).
Table of Contents
16
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
We may issue warrants for the purchase of our Class A common stock, debt securities, preferred
stock or any combination of the foregoing securities. Warrants may be issued independently or
together with our securities offered by any prospectus supplement and may be attached to or
separate from any such offered securities. Each series of warrants will be issued under a
separate warrant agreement to be entered into between us and a bank or trust company, as
warrant agent, all as set forth in the prospectus supplement relating to the particular issue of
warrants. The warrant agent will act solely as our agent in connection with the warrants and will
not assume any obligation or relationship of agency or trust for or with any holders of warrants or
beneficial owners of warrants. The following summary of certain provisions of the warrants does
not purport to be complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, all
provisions of the warrant agreements.
You should refer to the prospectus supplement relating to a particular issue of warrants for the
terms of and information relating to the warrants, including, where applicable:
(1) the number of securities purchasable upon exercise of the warrants and the price at which
such securities may be purchased upon exercise of the warrants;
(2) the date on which the right to exercise the warrants commences and the date on which such
right expires (the “Expiration Date”);
(3) the United States federal income tax consequences applicable to the warrants;
(4) the amount of the warrants outstanding as of the most recent practicable date; and
(5) any other terms of the warrants.
Warrants will be offered and exercisable for United States dollars only. Warrants will be issued in
registered form only. Each warrant will entitle its holder to purchase such number of securities at
such exercise price as is in each case set forth in, or calculable from, the prospectus supplement
relating to the warrants. The exercise price may be subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of
events described in such prospectus supplement. After the close of business on the Expiration
Date (or such later date to which we may extend such Expiration Date), unexercised warrants will
become void. The place or places where, and the manner in which, warrants may be exercised
will be specified in the prospectus supplement relating to such warrants.
Prior to the exercise of any warrants, holders of the warrants will not have any of the rights of
holders of securities, including the right to receive payments of any dividends on the securities
purchasable upon exercise of the warrants, or to exercise any applicable right to vote.
Table of Contents
17
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
Selling stockholders are persons or entities that, directly or indirectly, have acquired or will from
time to time acquire from us, securities in various private transactions. Such selling stockholders
may be parties to registration rights agreements with us, or we otherwise may have agreed or will
agree to register their securities for resale. The initial purchasers of our securities, as well as their
transferees, pledges, donees or successors, all of whom we refer to as “selling stockholders,”
may from time to time offer and sell the securities pursuant to this prospectus and any applicable
prospectus supplement.
The applicable prospectus supplement will set forth the name of each of the selling stockholders
and the number of shares of our common stock beneficially owned by such selling stockholder
that are covered by such prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
18
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities offered by this prospectus will be passed upon for us by Vinson &
Elkins L.L.P., Houston, Texas. Legal counsel to any underwriters may pass upon legal matters
for such underwriters.
EXPERTS
The consolidated and combined financial statements of Parsley Energy, Inc. and subsidiaries as
of December 31, 2014 and 2013, and for each of the years in the three-year period ended
December 31, 2014, have been incorporated by reference herein in reliance upon the report of
KPMG LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, incorporated by reference herein, and
upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The statements of revenues and direct operating expenses of properties acquired by Parsley
Energy, L.P. from Pacer Energy, Ltd. for the year ended December 31, 2013 have been included
herein in reliance upon the report of KPMG LLP, independent auditors, appearing elsewhere
herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The information incorporated by reference in this prospectus regarding estimated quantities of
proved reserves, the future net revenues from those reserves and their present value as of
December 31, 2014 is based on the proved reserves report prepared by Netherland, Sewell &
Associates, Inc., our independent petroleum engineers. These estimates are incorporated by
reference in this prospectus in reliance upon the authority of such firm as an expert in these
matters.
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
On May 1, 2014, Parsley Energy, L.P., a Texas limited partnership and wholly owned subsidiary
of Parsley LLC, acquired certain oil and gas leaseholds located in the State of Texas and various
other related rights, permits, contracts, equipment and other assets from Pacer Energy, Ltd., a
Delaware limited partnership (the “Pacer Acquisition”). The aggregate purchase price for the
Pacer Acquisition was $165.3 million, including customary post-effective date adjustments, all of
which was paid in cash.
Had the Pacer Acquisition been effective on January 1, 2014, Parsley would have had the
following pro forma effects to its income statement:
•
Revenue increase of $6.2 million from the sale of approximately 91,000 barrel
equivalents of production;
•
Lease operating expense increase of $0.3 million;
•
Production and ad valorem taxes increase of $0.3 million;
•
Depreciation, depletion and amortization increase of $1.8 million; and
•
Interest expense increase of $2.3 million
19
Table of Contents
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PACER ASSETS ACQUISITION
Historical Financial Statements
Independent Auditor’s Report
Statements of revenues and direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31,
2013 and the three months ended March 31, 2014
Notes to statements of revenues and direct operating expenses
F-2
F-3  
    F-4
Table of Contents
F-1
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Board of Managers
Parsley Energy, LLC:
Report on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying statement of revenues and direct operating expenses of
properties acquired by Parsley Energy, L.P. from Pacer Energy, Ltd. (the “Properties”) for the year
ended December 31, 2013.
Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statement
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the statement of revenues
and direct operating expenses in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles;
this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the
preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement,
whether due to fraud or error.
Auditors’ Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the statement of revenues and direct operating
expenses based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards
generally accepted in the United States of America. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the statement of revenues and
direct operating expenses is free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditors’
judgment, including assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements,
whether due to fraud or error. In making these risk assessments, the auditor considers the
internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation and fair presentation of the financial
statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not
for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
basis for our audit opinion.
The accompanying statement of revenues and direct operating expenses referred to above was
prepared for the purpose of complying with the rules and regulations of the Securities and
Exchange Commission. The statement of revenues and direct operating expenses is not
intended to be a complete presentation of the operations of the Properties.
Opinion
In our opinion, the statement of revenues and direct operating expenses referred to above
presents fairly, in all material respects, the revenues and direct operating expenses of the
Properties for the year ended December 31, 2013, in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Dallas, Texas
May 5, 2014
Table of Contents
F-2
STATEMENTS OF REVENUES AND DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES
OF PROPERTIES ACQUIRED BY PARSLEY ENERGY, L.P. FROM PACER ENERGY, LTD.
REVENUES:
For the Year Ended
December 31, 2013
(in thousands)
For the Three
Months Ended
March 31, 2014
(unaudited)
REVENUES:
Oil sales
Natural gas and natural gas liquids
Total operating revenues
DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES:
Lease operating expense
Production taxes
Total direct operating expenses
OPERATING REVENUES IN EXCESS OF
DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES
$
$
6,741
1,762    
    
8,503    
  
140    
443    
    
583
7,920
$
$
3,966
1,369  
 
5,335
199  
295  
 
494
4,841
See accompanying notes to the Statements of Revenues
and Direct Operating Expenses of Properties Acquired by Parsley Energy, L.P. from Pacer
Table of Contents
Energy, Ltd.
F-3
NOTES TO THE STATEMENTS OF REVENUES AND DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES OF
PROPERTIES ACQUIRED BY PARSLEY ENERGY, L.P., FROM PACER ENERGY, LTD.
1. BASIS OF PRESENTATION
On May 1, 2014, Parsley Energy, L.P., a Texas Limited Partnership, (referred to herein as
“Parsley LP,”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Parsley Energy, LLC, (“Parsley Energy”) acquired
(the “Acquisition”) certain oil and gas leaseholds located in the State of Texas and various other
related rights, permits, contracts, equipment and other assets (the “Acquired Properties”) from
Pacer Energy, Ltd., a Delaware limited partnership (the “Seller). The effective date for the
Acquisition was May 1, 2014 (the “Effective Date”). The aggregate purchase price for the
Acquisition was $165.3 million, including customary post-effective date adjustments, all of which
was paid in cash.
The accompanying Statement of Revenues and Direct Operating Expenses of the Properties
Acquired by Parsley Energy, L.P. (the “Statement”) was prepared by Parsley Energy based on
carved-out financial information and data from the Seller’s historical accounting records.
Because the Acquired Properties are not separate legal entities, the accompanying Statement
varies from a complete income statement in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America in that they do not reflect certain expenses that were
incurred in connection with the ownership and operation of the Acquired Properties including, but
not limited to, general and administrative expenses, interest expense, and other indirect
expenses. These costs were not separately allocated to the Acquired Properties in the
accounting records of the Seller. In addition, these allocations, if made using historical general
and administrative structures, would not produce allocations that would be indicative of the
historical performance of the Acquired Properties had they been owned by Parsley Energy due to
the differing size, structure, operations and accounting policies of the Seller and Parsley Energy.
The accompanying Statements also do not include provisions for depreciation, depletion,
amortization and accretion, as such amounts would not be indicative of the costs which Parsley
Energy will incur upon the allocation of the purchase price paid for the Acquired Properties. For
these reasons, the Statement is not indicative of the results of operations of the Acquired
Properties on a going forward basis due to changes in the business and the omission of various
operating expenses. Furthermore, no balance sheet has been presented for the Acquired
Properties because not all of the historical cost and related working capital balances are
segregated or easily obtainable, nor has information about the Acquired Properties’ operating,
investing and financing cash flows been provided for similar reasons. Accordingly, the
accompanying Statement is presented in lieu of the financial statements required under Rule 3-
05 of Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Regulation S-X.
The Seller commenced exploratory operations on the Acquired Properties during the year ended
December 31, 2013. Accordingly, there is no historical financial or other information available
with respect to any period prior to January 1, 2013.
2. COMMITMENT USE OF ESTIMATES IN PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The preparation of this Statement in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of operating revenues and direct operating expenses during the respective
reporting periods. Actual results may differ from the estimates and assumptions used in the
preparation of the Statement.
3. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
As represented by the Seller in the Acquisition Agreement, there are no known claims, litigation
or disputes pending as of the effective date of the Acquisition Agreement, or any matters arising
in connection with indemnification, and neither Parsley Energy nor the Seller are aware of any
legal, environmental or other commitments or contingencies that would have a material adverse
effect on the Statement.
F-4
Table of Contents
4. REVENUE RECOGNITION
Seller records revenues from the sales of crude oil and natural gas when they are produced and
sold. There were no gas imbalances at December 31, 2013 or March 31, 2014.
5. DIRECT OPERATING EXPENSES
Direct operating expenses are recorded when the related liability is incurred. Direct operating
expenses include lease and gathering operating expenses, ad valorem taxes and production
taxes. Certain costs such as depletion, depreciation and amortization, accretion of asset
retirement obligations, general and administrative expenses and interest expense were not
allocated to the Acquired Properties.
6. SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND GAS RESERVE INFORMATION (unaudited):
Estimated quantities of proved oil and gas reserves of the Acquired Properties were derived from
reserve estimates prepared by Parsley Energy’s in-house petroleum engineers. Proved reserves
were estimated in accordance with the guidelines established by the SEC and the FASB.
Estimates of proved reserves are inherently imprecise and are continually subject to revision
based on production history, results of additional exploration and development, price changes
and other factors. All of the Acquired Properties’ proved reserves are located in the continental
United States.
Guidelines prescribed in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting
Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 932, Extractive Industries – Oil and Gas, have been
followed for computing a standardized measure of future net cash flows and changes therein
relating to estimated proved reserves. Future cash inflows and future production and
development costs are determined by applying prices and costs, including transportation, quality,
and basis differentials, to the year-end estimated quantities of oil and gas to be produced in the
future. The resulting future net cash flows are reduced to present value amounts by applying a
ten percent annual discount factor. Future operating costs are determined based on estimates of
expenditures to be incurred in producing the proved oil and gas reserves in place at the end of
the period using year-end costs and assuming continuation of existing economic conditions, plus
overhead incurred. Future development costs are determined based on estimates of capital
expenditures to be incurred in developing proved oil and gas reserves.
The assumptions used to compute the standardized measure are those prescribed by the FASB
and the SEC. These assumptions do not necessarily reflect Parsley Energy’s expectations of
actual revenues to be derived from those reserves, nor their fair value. The limitations inherent in
the reserve quantity estimation process, as discussed previously, are equally applicable to the
standardized measure computations since these reserve quantity estimates are the basis for the
valuation process. Parsley Energy emphasizes that reserve estimates are inherently imprecise
and that estimates of new discoveries and undeveloped locations are more imprecise than
estimates of established proved producing oil and gas properties. Accordingly, these estimates
are expected to change as future information becomes available. The standardized measure
excludes federal income taxes as the tax basis for the Acquired Properties could not be
determined or reasonably estimated for the periods presented. In addition, the tax basis of the
Acquired Properties will differ from that of the Seller so any tax provision is not relevant. The
Acquired Properties’ operations are located in Texas and are subject to an entity-level tax, the
Texas margin tax, at a statutory rate of up to 1.0% of income that is apportioned to Texas.
Table of Contents
F-5
The following table sets forth information for the year ended December 31, 2013 with respect to
changes in the Acquired Properties’ proved (i.e., proved developed and undeveloped) reserves:
Proved Developed and
Undeveloped Reserves:
Beginning of the year
Extensions and discoveries
Production
End of the year
Proved developed reserves,
included above:
December 31, 2013
Proved undeveloped reserves,
included above:
December 31, 2013
Year Ended December 31, 2013
Crude Oil
(Bbls)
Liquids
(Bbls)
Natural Gas
(Mcf)
(in thousands)
Boe
—      
4,625    
(70)   
    
4,555
—      
  2,131    
(6)   
 
  
    
  2,125
878
517
3,677
1,608
—      
11,814    
(342)   
    
11,472
—    
 8,725  
  (133) 
  
 
 8,592
2,791
8,681
1,860
6,732
The following values for the crude oil and natural gas reserves at December 31, 2013, are based
on prices of $93.42 per bbl and $3.47 per Mcf. These prices were based on the 12 month
arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month prices for the proceeding 12-month period. The
crude oil pricing was based off the West Texas Intermediate price and natural gas pricing was
based off of average Henry Hub spot natural gas prices. All prices have been adjusted for
transportation, quality and basis differentials.
The following summary sets forth the Acquired Properties’ future net cash flows relating to proved
oil and gas reserves based on the standardized measure prescribed in ASC Topic 932:
Future cash inflows
December 31,
2013
(in thousands)
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expenses
Future net cash flows
10% discount to reflect timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted future net
cash flows
$
$
543,307  
(122,052)
(52,656) 
(3,803) 
 
364,796  
(230,320)
134,476
The principal sources of changes in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash
flows were:
December 31,
2013
(in thousands) 
—    
$
 
(7,920) 
143,955  
 
(1,559) 
 
 
 
134,476  
$
Standardized measure, beginning of period
  
Sales of oil and natural gas, net of production costs  
Extensions and discoveries
  
  
Net change in income taxes
Standardized measure, end of period
F-6
Table of Contents
7,250,000 Shares
Parsley Energy, Inc.
Class A Common Stock
J.P. Morgan
BMO Capital Markets
Scotia Howard Weil
UBS Investment Bank
Wells Fargo Securities
Barclays
Capital One Securities
Johnson, Rice & Company L.L.C.   Northland Capital Markets   Seaport Global Securities
Stephens Inc.
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co.
RBC Capital Markets
SunTrust Robinson Humphrey
Canaccord Genuity