
EX-10.1 2 ex10-1.htm EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT EX10-1
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
Exhibit 10.1
This Employment Agreement (this "Agreement"), is entered into this 12nd day of July, 2015, by and
between Diamante Minerals, Inc., a Nevada corporation (the "Company"), and Jennifer Irons, with an address at
203-1634 Harvey Avenue, Kelowna, BC V1Y 6G2 (the "Executive").
W I T N E S S E T H:
WHEREAS, the Company desires to employ the Executive as the Chief Financial Officer of the
Company,  and  the  Executive  desires  to  accept  such  employment,  on  the  terms  and  conditions
contained in this Agreement;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the mutual promises and covenants
hereinafter set forth, and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which
are hereby acknowledged, the parties agree as follows:
1.       Employment. The Company agrees to employ Executive as its Chief Financial Officer, and
Executive hereby agrees to such employment, , in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in
this  Agreement.  In  her  capacity  as  Chief  Financial  Officer,  the  Executive  shall  have  principal
responsibility for developing the business strategies, policies and operations of the Company and shall
perform  such  other  duties  for  the  Company  as  are  consistent  with  her  position,  including,  without
limitation, the senior supervisory responsibility for equity and debt financings; all corporate transaction
activities, including without limitation, establishing joint ventures and strategic alliances and having the
sole authority to approve any contract or arrangement with a third party involving the expenditure or
commitment of Company funds.
The services to be performed by the Executive shall be commensurate with the position of the
Executive as a senior executive employee of the Company. The Executive shall report to the Chief
Executive Officer and the Board of Directors of the Company.
2.       Compensation.
a.       Base Salary. In consideration for the services rendered by Executive hereunder, Company
agrees  to  pay  Executive  an  annual  base  salary  (the  "Base  Salary")  in  the  amount  of  One  Hundred
Twenty  Five  Thousand  Dollars  ($125,000)  for  the  first  year  of  the  Term,  One  Hundred  Thirty  Seven
Thousand  Five  Hundred  Dollars  ($137,500)  for  the  second  year  of  the  Term  and  One  Hundred  Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($150,000) for the third year. The Company shall pay the salary every three months of
the Term. All payments of compensation hereunder shall be subject to normal withholdings and all other
applicable  federal,  state  and  local  tax  deductions  as  required  by  law.  The  Executive  agrees  that  the
Company shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to pay the salary or any other amounts
payable to the Executive hereunder in shares of deferred stock units (DSU) of the Company based on
the 90-day VWAP at the end of each quarter. Promptly after the execution and deliver of this Agreement,
the Executive and the Company will structure a DSU plan for the Executive. If there is an adverse tax
implication as a result of the issuance of DSU to the Executive, the Company agrees to work with the
Executive and his representatives to obtain more favorable tax treatment.
b.       Additional Compensation. In addition to the Base Salary as defined in subsection (a) herein,
the Executive shall be entitled to such further compensation and/or bonuses as may decided on by a
majority of the Board of Directors of the Company based upon the performance and/or profitability of
the Company.
3.       Benefits. During the term of Executive's employment with Company under this Agreement,
Executive will be entitled to the following benefits:
(a)       three (3) weeks paid vacation;
(b)       reimbursement for all related work, educational classes paid for and
attended by the Executive; and
(c)       reimbursement for ordinary and necessary expenses incurred by Executive
on behalf of the Company, including expenses for travel, entertainment and
business development in accordance with the usual policies of the Company.
4.       Term.
a.       Subject to Section 4 hereof, the term of Executive's employment with the Company under
this Agreement shall commence as of the date first written above, and shall continue for three (3) years
thereafter ("Term"), unless Executive's employment is earlier terminated by Company or Executive in
accordance with this Agreement. The Term shall automatically renew on each year anniversary of this
Agreement  for  one  additional  year  unless  one  party  provides  the  other  with  at  least  thirty  (30)  days
written notice prior to such anniversary date that such party does not desire to renew this Agreement.
For purposes of this Agreement, "Term" shall mean collectively the initial term and any renewal term, if
any, during which this Agreement remains in effect.
b.       The Company may terminate Executive's employment with Company at any time, for cause,
immediately upon Company giving written notice of termination to Executive, upon the occurrence of
any of the following events:
i.       Executive's refusal to perform such duties as are reasonably assigned to him
by the Company; or
ii.      Executive's fraud, dishonesty, or other deliberate injury to Company; or
iii.     Executive's conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude which constitutes
a felony in the jurisdiction in which Executive is employed; or
iv.      Executive's material breach of any provision hereunder; or
2
v.              The  death  or  disability  of  Executive. Executive  shall  be  deemed  to  be
disabled  if,  due  to  the  physical  or  mental  illness  or  incapacity  of  Executive,
Executive is unable to perform his duties under this Agreement for (i) ninety (90)
consecutive  days,  or  (ii)  any  one  hundred  and  twenty  (120)  days  in  any  six  (6)
month period.
c.       In the event of termination of Executive's employment with Company for cause pursuant to
Section  4(b)  above  (other  than  pursuant  to  Section  4(b)(i)  or  (iv)),  or  if  Executive  terminates  his
employment for any reason, Company shall not be liable to Executive for any compensation or other
payment, other than the payment of Executive's Base Salary through the effective date of termination.
d.       In the event of termination of Executive's employment with Company for cause pursuant to
Section  4(b)(i)  or  (iv)  above,  the  Company  shall  first  deliver  ten  (10)  days  prior  written  notice
("Termination Notice") of its intent to terminate the Executive for Cause, which notice shall specify in
reasonable  detail  the  basis  for  the  Company's  determination  that  such  Cause  exists.  The  Executive
shall be given a reasonable time not exceeding twenty (20) days to terminate the conduct or cure the
breach specified in the Termination Notice. If the Executive so requests in writing within ten (10) days
after  delivery  to  him  of  the  Termination  Notice,  the  Company  shall  promptly  afford  the  Executive  the
right, in person and accompanied by his counsel, to a full, fair and complete hearing before the Board, in
which  event  such  termination  shall  not  take  place  unless  and  until  the  Company  shall  have  sent  a
further written notice confirming the Termination Notice.
e.       If, before the last day of the Term, (i) the Company terminates the Executive's employment
other than for Cause, (ii) the Executive terminates his employment for Good Reason (as defined below),
or  (iii)  his  employment  is  terminated  pursuant  to  Section  (f)  below,  the  Executive  shall  be  paid  an
immediate lump sum cash payment equal to the sum of:
(i)       the unpaid Base Salary to which he would have been entitled for the remainder of
the Term (based upon the Base Salary in effect on the date of termination); plus
(ii)      an amount equal to the product of the number of years and fractional years for the
remainder of the Term multiplied by fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the annual Base Salary in effect
as of the date of termination.
The following events or circumstances shall constitute "Good Reason," entitling the Executive to
terminate his employment in the manner set forth above:
(i)       the assignment to the Executive of any duties materially inconsistent with the
Executive's  position  (including  status,  offices,  and  reporting  requirements),  authority,  duties  or
responsibilities as contemplated by this Agreement or any other material breach of this Agreement by
the Company, excluding for this purpose any action not taken in bad faith and which is remedied by the
Company within ten (10) days after receipt of notice thereof given by the Executive; and
3
(ii)      any failure by the Company, in any respect, to comply with any of the compensation
or benefits provisions of this Agreement, other than a failure not occurring in bad faith and which is
remedied by the Company within ten (10) days after receipt of notice thereof given by the Executive.
f.       If a Change of Control (as defined in the Annex attached hereto) occurs and, (a) within two (2)
years  following  such  Change  of  Control,  the  Company  terminates  the  Executive's  employment  other
than  for  Cause,  or  the  Executive  terminates  his  employment  for  Good  Reason,  or  (b)  no  earlier  than
twelve (12) months nor more than eighteen (18) months after such Change of Control, the Executive
voluntarily terminates his employment with or without Good Reason, then, for purposes of determining
the  amounts  to  be  paid  to  the  Executive  pursuant  to  Section  (e)  above,  the  Term  shall  be  deemed
extended to a date which is the later of (x) two (2) years from the date of such Change of Control and (y)
two (2) years after the date of termination. While it is not expected that payments made to the Executive
with  respect  to  the  Contract  Extension  and  other  payments  hereunder  will  be  treated  as  payments
subject  to  any  excise  tax  under  Internal  Revenue  Code  Section  4999,  to  the  extent  they  are,  the
Company shall pay to the Executive an amount which, net of any applicable taxes thereon, will provide
the  Executive  with  sufficient  cash  to  pay  any  excise  tax  payable  by  him  by  reason  of  all  payments
hereunder.
5.       Confidential Information.
a.       Executive agrees that during the course of Executive's employment with Company,
Executive will create, have contact with and receive information, documents and materials (collectively,
"Confidential  Information")  which  contain  confidential  information  and/or  trade  secrets  of  Company
and/or  its  operations,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  information  regarding  the  business  operations  of
Company, methods and processes, trade secrets and other intellectual property, financial information,
books of accounts, marketing plans and information, accounting records, sales and business records,
drawings,  correspondence,  engineering,  maintenance,  operating  and  production  records,  and  other
information which Company shall from time to time designate as confidential.
b.       Executive shall not, directly or indirectly, disclose to any third party, or use for his own
benefit, or for the benefit of any other person, firm, association or entity whether or not in competition
with  Company,  any  of  the  Confidential  Information,  except  during  the  performance  of  Executive's
employment  with  Company. Company  acknowledges  that  Executive  may  be  required  to  disclose
portions of the Confidential Information in legal proceedings or to governmental agencies as required
by law and consents to such disclosure. Executive agrees, in connection with any such disclosure, to
notify Company prior to making any disclosures and to make requests for confidential treatment by all
such  governmental  agencies  to  which  such  Confidential  Information  is  disclosed,  as  Company  may
request. Upon termination of Executive's employment with Company, or upon the request of Company,
Executive shall return to Company any and all of the Confidential Information, and all copies, recordings
and  reproductions  of  the  Confidential  Information  in  Executive's  possession  or  under  Executive's
control.
4
c.       Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, Confidential Information does
not  include  information  (i)  in  the  public  domain,  (ii)  received  by  Executive  outside  of  Executive's
employment with Company from a party not directly or indirectly under an obligation of confidentiality to
Company, or (iii) which later becomes public, unless such information is made public by Executive in
breach of this Agreement.
6.       Assignment of Intellectual Property.
a.       Executive will promptly disclose to the Company all improvements, inventions, formulae,
processes,  techniques,  trademarks,  know-how,  data,  source  code  and  object  code,  whether  or  not
patentable or copyrightable, made, conceived, reduced to practice or learned by him, either alone or
jointly with others, during the period of his employment which are related to or useful in the business of
the Company, or result from tasks assigned to him by the Company, or result from use of any premises
owned,  leased  or  contracted  for  by  the  Company  (all  said  improvements,  inventions,  formulae,
processes, techniques, know-how, and data shall be collectively hereinafter called "Inventions").
b.       Company Sole Owner of Patent Rights. Executive agrees that all Inventions shall be the sole
property of the Company and its assigns, and the Company and its assigns shall be the sole owner of
all patents and other rights in connection therewith.
c.       Assignment of Patent Rights; Duty to Cooperate. Executive hereby assigns to the Company
any rights he may have or acquire in all Inventions. Executive further agrees as to all Inventions to assist
the Company in every proper way (but at the Company's expense) to obtain all Inventions from time to
time enforce patents, trademarks or copyrights on the Inventions in any and all countries, and to that
end Executive will execute all documents for use in applying for and obtaining such patents, trademarks
or copyrights thereon and enforcing same, as the Company may desire, together with any assignment
thereof to the Company or persons designated by it. Executive's obligation to assist the Company in
obtaining and enforcing patents, trademarks or copyrights for the Inventions in any and all countries
shall continue beyond the termination of his employment, but the Company shall compensate him at a
reasonable rate after such termination for time actually spent by him at the Company's request on such
assistance.
7.       Severability. The  provisions  contained  herein  are  severable. If  any  provision  of  this
Agreement shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable in any respect, such provision shall be carried
out  and  enforced  to  the  extent  to  which  it  shall  be  valid  and  enforceable,  and  any  such  invalidity  or
unenforceability shall not affect any other provision of this Agreement; provided, however, that if any
invalid or unenforceable provision may be modified as to time, geographic or subject matter scope so
as  to  be  enforceable  at  law,  such  provision  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  modified  so  as  to  be
enforceable to the fullest extent permitted at law.
8.       Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding and agreement of
the parties with regard to the subject matter hereof.
5
9.       Amendment. This Agreement may not be amended or modified except in writing signed by
all of the parties hereto.
10.       Governing Law. This Agreement shall be construed and enforced pursuant to the laws of
the State of Nevada, without regard to the choice of law provisions thereof.
11.       Headings. The headings, titles or designations of the various paragraphs are not a part of
this  Agreement,  but  are  for  the  convenience  of  reference  only,  and  do  not  and  shall  not  be  used  to
define, limit or construe the contents of the paragraphs.
12.       Benefit. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties and
each of their respective heirs, personal representatives, successors and permitted assigns.
13.       Assignment. Executive may not assign or delegate any of this duties, obligations or
covenants under this Agreement without the prior written consent of Company. Company may assign
its rights and delegate its duties hereunder to any person or entity which acquires all or substantially all
of  the  assets  of  Company,  or  to  any  entity  that,  directly  or  indirectly,  controls,  is  controlled  by,  or  is
under common control with Company, without the consent of Executive of such assignment promptly
after such assignment.
14.       Waiver. The failure of either party to enforce any provision of this Agreement shall not be
construed  as  a  waiver  or  limitation  of  that  party's  right  to  subsequently  enforce  and  compel  strict
compliance with any provision of this Agreement.
15.       Counterparts. This agreement may be executed in counterparts; each such executed
counterpart will be considered an original and no other counterpart need be produced for any purpose
whatsoever.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Agreement has been entered into as of the date first written above.
"Jennifer Irons"
______________________________
JENNIFER IRONS, Executive
DIAMANTE GROUP, INC.
"Chad Ulansky"
     By:______________________________
           Name: Chad Ulansky
           Title: Chief Executive Officer
6
ANNEX
(a) An acquisition (other than directly from the Company) of any voting securities of the Company
(the "Voting Securities") by any "Person" (as the term person is used for purposes of Section 13(d) or
14(d)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended  (the  "Exchange  Act")),  immediately  after
which such Person has "Beneficial Ownership" (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 promulgated under
the Exchange Act) of thirty percent (30%) or more of the then outstanding shares of Voting Securities;
provided, however, in determining whether a Change of Control has occurred pursuant to this Section,
Voting Securities which are acquired in a "Non-Control Acquisition" (as hereinafter defined) shall not
constitute  an  acquisition  which  would  cause  a  Change  of  Control. A "Non-Control Acquisition"  shall
mean an acquisition by (i) an employee benefit plan (or a trust forming a part thereof) maintained by (A)
the Company or (B) any corporation or other Person of which a majority of its voting power or its voting
securities  or  equity  interest  is  owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  the  Company  (for  purposes  of  this
definition, a "Subsidiary"), (ii) the Company or its Subsidiaries, or (iii) any Person in connection with a
"Non-Control Transaction" (as hereinafter defined);
(b)  The  individuals  who,  as  of  the  date  of  this  Agreement,  are  members  of  the  Board  (the
"Incumbent Board") cease for any reason to constitute at least two-thirds of the members of the Board;
provided,  however,  that  if  the  election,  or  nomination  for  election  by  the  Company's  common
stockholders, of any new director was approved by a vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent Board,
such new director shall be considered as a member of the Incumbent Board, provided, however, that no
individual shall be considered as a member of the Incumbent Board if such individual initially assumed
office  as  a  result  of  either  an  actual  or  threatened  "Election  Contest"  (as  described  in  Rule  14a-11
promulgated under the Exchange Act) or other actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents
by  or  on  behalf  of  a  Person  other  than  the  Board  (a  "Proxy  Contest")  including  by  reason  of  any
agreement intended to avoid or settle any Election Contest or Proxy Contest; or
(c)       The consummation of:
(i)       A merger, consolidation or reorganization with or into the Company or
in which securities of the Company are issued, unless such merger, consolidation
or  reorganization  is  a  "Non-Control  Transaction".  A  "Non-Control  Transaction"
shall mean a merger, consolidation or reorganization with or into the Company or
in which securities of the Company are issued where:
(A)       the stockholders of the Company, immediately before such
merger,  consolidation  or  reorganization,  own  directly  or  indirectly
immediately  following  such  merger,  consolidation  or  reorganization  at
least  fifty  percent  (50%)  of  the  combined  voting  power  of  the
outstanding  voting  securities  of  the  corporation  resulting  from  such
merger or consolidation or reorganization (the "Surviving Corporation")
in  substantially  the  same  proportion  as  their  ownership  of  the  Voting
Securities 
immediately  before  such  merger,  consolidation  or
reorganization,
7
(B)       the individuals who were members of the Incumbent Board
immediately prior to the execution of the agreement providing for such
merger, consolidation or reorganization constitute at least two-thirds of
the members of the board of directors of the Surviving Corporation, or a
corporation  beneficially  directly  or  indirectly  owing  a  majority  of  the
voting securities of the Surviving Corporation, and
(C)       no Person other than (1) the Company, (2) any Subsidiary,
(3) any employee benefit plan (or any trust forming a part thereof) that,
immediately prior to such merger, consolidation or reorganization, was
maintained by the Company or any Subsidiary, or (4) any Person who,
immediately prior to such merger, consolidation or reorganization had
Beneficial  Ownership  of  thirty  percent  (30%)  or  more  of  the  then
outstanding  Voting  Securities,  has  Beneficial  Ownership  of  thirty
percent  (30%)  or  more  of  the  combined  voting  power  of  the  Surviving
Corporation's then outstanding voting securities.
(ii) A complete liquidation or dissolution of the Company; or
(iii) the sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of the Company
to  any  Person  (other  than  a  transfer  to  a  Subsidiary  or  the  distribution  to  the  Company's
stockholders of the stock of a Subsidiary or any other assets).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Change of Control shall not be deemed to occur solely because any
Person (the "Subject Person") acquired Beneficial Ownership of more than the permitted amount of the
then outstanding Voting Securities as a result of the acquisition of Voting Securities by the Company
which,  by  reducing  the  number  of  Voting  Securities  then  outstanding,  increases  the  proportional
number  of  shares  Beneficially  Owned  by  the  Subject  Persons, provided  that  if  a  Change  of  Control
would occur (but for the operation of this sentence) as a result of the acquisition of Voting Securities by
the  Company  and  after  such  share  acquisition  by  the  Company,  the  Subject  Person  becomes  the
Beneficial  Owner  of  any  additional  Voting  Securities  which  increases  the  percentage  of  the  then
outstanding Voting Securities Beneficially Owned by the Subject Person, then a Change of Control shall
occur.
8