
S-1/A 1 v445811_s1a.htm S-1/A
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 3, 2016
Registration No. 333-207216
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 2
TO
FORM S-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
Montana
 1400
 82-0305765
(State or Other Jurisdiction of
(Primary Standard Industrial
(I.R.S. Employer
 
 
Classification Code Number)
Incorporation or Organization)
Identification Number)
Marc J. Andrews
President and Chief Executive Officer
Brilliant Sands Incorporated
3983 S. McCarran Blvd. Suite 458
Reno, Nevada 89502
Phone: (775) 461-2545
Email: marc@brilliantsands.com
(Address, including zip code and telephone number,
including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Copy to:
Douglas M. Berman
Law Office of Douglas M. Berman, PLLC
4925 Greenville Ave., Suite 200
Dallas, Texas 75206
Phone: (214) 562-7069
Facsimile: (214) 382-9435
Email: doug@dougbermanlaw.com
(Name, address, including zip code and telephone number,
including area code, of agent for service)
From time to time after the effective date of this Registration Statement.
(Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public)
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act, as amended, check the following box. ¨
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the
Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering. ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,”
“accelerated filer,” “non-accelerated filer,” or “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange
Act.
Large accelerated filer ¨
 
Non-accelerated filer (do not check if a smaller reporting company ¨ Smaller reporting company x
Accelerated filer ¨
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be
necessary to delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which
specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in
accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, or until the Registration Statement
shall become effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a),
may determine.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. The selling security holders
may not sell these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting
offers to buy these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.
PROSPECTUS (Subject to Completion)
Issued August 3, 2016
16,903,645 Shares of Common Stock
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
We are registering 16,903,645 shares of our common stock. The selling security holders may offer the
shares of our common stock from time to time through public or private transactions at prevailing market
prices, at prices related to prevailing market prices, or at previously negotiated prices.
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the securities owned by the selling security
holders pursuant to this prospectus. See “Selling Security Holders” on page 48 of this prospectus.
The selling security holders may dispose of their securities from time to time through one or more of the
means described in the section entitled “Plan of Distribution” beginning on page 50.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Pink marketplace under the symbol “BRSD.” The last reported
sale price of our common stock on August 1 was $0.05 per share.
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. See “Risk Factors” beginning on
page 4 of this prospectus.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has
approved or disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this
prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is           , 2016.
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Summary
Page
1
4
Risk Factors
15
Price Range of Common Stock
15
Use of Proceeds
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
16
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations18
22
Business
30
Management
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
38
41
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
43
Description of Capital Stock
 
 
48
Selling Security Holders
50
Plan of Distribution
52
Validity of Common Stock
Experts
52
52
Where You Can Find More Information
Index to Financial Statements
F-1
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. We have not, and the selling
security holders have not, authorized anyone to provide you with different information. No dealer,
salesperson or other person is authorized to give any information or to represent anything not contained
in this prospectus. You must not rely on any unauthorized information or representations. If anyone
provides you with different information, you should not rely on it. We are not, and the selling security
holders are not, making an offer to sell these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not
permitted. You should assume that the information contained in this prospectus is accurate only as of the
date on the front cover of this prospectus. Our business, financial condition, results of operations and
prospects may have changed since that date.
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this prospectus. This summary does not
contain all the information you should consider before buying our common stock. You should read the
following summary together with the more detailed information appearing in this prospectus, including
our financial statements and related notes, and our risk factors beginning on page 4, before deciding
whether to purchase our securities. Unless the context otherwise requires, we use the terms “Brilliant
Sands,” the “company,” “we,” “us” and “our” in this prospectus to refer to Brilliant Sands Incorporated. The
information included in this prospectus reflects the effects of the 1-for-3 reverse stock split of our issued
and outstanding common stock, which was effective March 16, 2015. For more information about our
common stock see “Description of Capital Stock” below.
The Company
We were incorporated as the Helena and Livingston Smelting and Reduction Company in the State of
Montana in May 1888. We changed our name to “Helena Silver Mines, Inc.” in June 1970 and to
“Consolidated Goldfields Corporation” in July 2006 in connection with our acquisition of Dome Copper,
Inc., a Colorado corporation engaged in the mining business. At the time of the transaction, Dome
Copper had fifteen projects consisting of unpatented claims and mining leases.
From July 2006 to December 2014, we were an independent exploration stage mining company in the
business of acquiring, exploring and developing mineral natural resource properties, primarily gold and
silver. From February 2010 to September 2014, we had worked with another company to develop what
had been our largest asset, known as the Cahuilla project, pursuant to two Exploration Earn-In
Agreements with Teras Resources Inc. We were also engaged in maintaining, exploring and developing
our other mineral projects. We currently have four exploration stage projects in our gold and silver
property portfolio.
In December 2014, we acquired rights to three properties in Canada and began our strategy to become a
leading producer and supplier of frac sand in Canada. The transaction included an initial cash payment
of approximately $43,000 and the issuance of 7,833,334 shares of our common stock, an additional
7,833,334 shares of our common stock held in escrow to be released under certain conditions, an
additional cash payment of CAD$50,000 within the 45 days after closing and an additional cash
payment of CAD$175,000 to be paid concurrently with the completion of a financing transaction by us.
Since our acquisition of the frac sand properties, our immediate priorities have been to finance the
exploration of these properties and then to begin the process to bring them into development and
production. Following this transaction, we changed our name to “Brilliant Sands Incorporated” to reflect
our evolution from a junior gold-silver company to a more diversified mining company with interests in
other minerals.
In January 2014, we acquired the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining Corporation. The Muskox
Data consists of several years’ worth of work on the Ni-Cu-Pd-Pt bearing Muskox Layered Intrusion in
Nunavut, Canada. The Muskox intrusion is believed to be one of the most promising targets for platinum
group elements. We are currently analyzing and preparing the data for possible sale.
Corporate Information
Our corporate headquarters are located at 3983 S. McCarran Blvd., Suite 458, Reno, Nevada 89502. Our
telephone number is (775) 461-2545. Our website address is www.brilliantsands.com. Information
contained on our website is not incorporated by reference into this prospectus, and you should not
consider information contained on our website to be part of this prospectus or in deciding whether to
purchase shares of our common stock.
This prospectus contains additional trade names and trademarks of ours and of other companies. We do
not intend our use or display of other companies’ trade names or trademarks to imply a relationship with,
or endorsement or sponsorship of us by, these other companies.
1
THE OFFERING
Securities offered
by the selling
security holders
Common stock
16,903,645 shares of issued and outstanding common stock
30,336,283 shares(1)
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the securities owned by the
selling security holders pursuant to this prospectus.
Prior to making an investment decision, you should carefully consider all of the
information in this prospectus and, in particular, you should evaluate the risk factors
set forth under the caption “Risk Factors” beginning on page 4.
BRSD
Common stock
outstanding as of
August 1, 2016
Use of proceeds
Risk Factors
OTC Pink
marketplace
symbol
(1)
Excludes 2,996,696 shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of options outstanding as of
August 1, 2016 and reflects the 1-for-3 reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding common
stock, effective as of March 16, 2015.
2
SUMMARY HISTORICAL FINANCIAL DATA
The following tables summarize the financial data for our business for the periods presented. We derived
the following summary historical financial data for the two years ended December 31, 2015 from our
audited financial statements. We derived the following summary unaudited financial data for the three
months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 from our unaudited financial statements for such periods and
dates. The unaudited financial statements were prepared on a basis consistent with our audited financial
statements and include, in the opinion of management, all adjustments necessary for the fair
presentation of the financial information contained in those statements. All per share data set forth below
have been adjusted to reflect the 1-for-3 reverse stock split of our common stock, which was effective as
of the close of business on March 16, 2015. The historical results presented below are not necessarily
indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods. You should read this data in conjunction
with, and it is qualified by reference to, the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and our financial statements and the notes thereto, all
included elsewhere in this prospectus.
As of
 
 March 31, 2016  December 31, 2015
Balance Sheet Data:
 $ 296,310
Total current assets
   1,670,181
Mineral properties and interests
   1,994,682
Total assets
Total liabilities
   1,219,093
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity   1,994,682
$ 306,780
    1,690,181
    2,025,152
    1,086,711
    2,025,152
Statements of Operations Data:
Income (Loss) from operations
Total other income (expense)
Net income (loss)
Comprehensive income (loss)
Net income (loss) per common share, basic
and diluted
Three Months Ended March 31,  Year Ended December 31, 
 2016
 
  2015
 
    
    
)  (1,811,230 ) $700,634
 $ (160,174
 
)  (1,523,333 )   (1,481,066 )
   (2,678
   (162,852
)  (3,334,563 )   (780,702
)
)  (2,061,927 )   (1,681,669 )
   (162,852
2015
     
) $ (234,401
)   (496,986
)   (731,387
)   (1,196,493
2014
(0.01
)   (0.02
)  (0.11
)   (0.05
)
Three Months Ended March 31,  Year Ended December 31, 
 
 
 2016
 
 
    
Statements of Cash Flows Data:
 $ (26,894
)
Net cash used by operating activities
 
Net cash provided by investing activities    20,000
 
Net cash provided by financing activities    -
)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents    (6,894
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period   1,879
2015
    
)  (845,448 ) $ (671,538
    648,160
   780,944
    -
   13,600
)   (23,378
)  (50,904
   8,773
    59,677
2015
    
) $ (294,427
     273,895
     -
)   (20,532
     39,145
2014
3
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should consider carefully the risks and
uncertainties described below, together with all of the other information in this prospectus, including our
financial statements and related notes, before deciding whether to purchase shares of our common
stock. Any of these risks may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results
of operations and cash flows and our prospects could be harmed. In that event, the price of our common
stock could decline and you could lose part or all of your investment.
Risks Related to Our Business
None of our properties has commenced commercial production, and if we continue to experience
significant operating losses, we may need additional financing to fund our operations, which may
not be available to us.
None of our properties has commenced commercial production, and we have a limited history of
earnings or cash flow from our operations. We had working capital of $(922,783) as of March 31, 2016.
We believe that additional financing will be required in the future to fund our operations. While we may
attempt to generate additional working capital through the operation, development, sale or possible joint
venture development of our properties, there is no assurance that any such activity will generate funds
that will be available for operations. We do not know whether additional financing will be available when
needed or on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional financing when necessary,
we may have to delay our exploration efforts or any property acquisitions or be forced to cease
operations.
Our business is subject to the cyclical nature of our customers' businesses and depend upon the
continued demand for crude oil and natural gas.
We intend to sell our frac sand to customers in the oil and natural gas industry, a historically cyclical
industry. This industry was adversely affected by the uncertain global economic climate in 2008, 2009
and in 2016, and oil and natural gas prices have continued to be low and volatile. Worldwide economic,
political and military events, including war, terrorist activity, events in the Middle East and initiatives by
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries have contributed, and are likely to continue to
contribute, to commodity price volatility. Additionally, weather patterns may adversely impact the short-
term demand for oil and natural gas and, therefore, demand for our products.
During periods of economic slowdown, oil and natural gas exploration and production companies often
reduce their oil and natural gas production rates and capital expenditures and defer or cancel pending
projects, which may result in decreased demand for frac sand. Such developments occur even among
companies that are not experiencing financial difficulties. A continued or renewed economic downturn in
one or more of the industries or geographic regions that we intend to serve, or in the worldwide economy,
could adversely affect our ability to achieve commercial production, our financial condition and our
results of operations. In addition, any future decreases in the rate at which oil and natural gas reserves
are discovered or developed, whether due to increased governmental regulation, limitations on
exploration and drilling activity or other factors, could have a material adverse effect on our business,
even in a stronger natural gas and oil price environment.
Our sand operations may become subject to operating risks that are often beyond our control
and could adversely affect production levels and costs.
Our mining, processing and production facilities are subject to risks normally encountered in the frac
sand and gold industries. These risks include:
· changes in the price of frac sand;
· changes in the price and availability of transportation;
·inability to obtain necessary production equipment or replacement parts;
inclement or hazardous weather conditions, including flooding, and the physical impacts of climate
·
change;
· unusual or unexpected geological formations or pressures;
4
late delivery of supplies;
· unanticipated ground, grade or water conditions;
·inability to acquire or maintain necessary permits or mining or water rights;
·labor disputes and disputes with our excavation contractors;
·
·changes in the price and availability of fuel sources for our frac sand plants and equipment;
· technical difficulties or failures;
· cave-ins or similar pit wall failures;
environmental hazards, such as unauthorized spills, releases and discharges of wastes, tank ruptures
·
and emissions of unpermitted levels of pollutants;
·
changes in laws and regulations (or the interpretation thereof) related to the mining and oil and natural
·
gas industries, silica dust exposure or the environment;
·inability of our customers or distribution partners to take delivery;
· reduction in the amount of water available for processing;
· fires, explosions or other accidents; and
·facility shutdowns in response to environmental regulatory actions.
industrial accidents;
Additional risks related to our gold projects include:
· sales or leasing of gold by governments and central banks;
· a low rate of inflation and a strong U.S. dollar;
·global and regional recession or reduced economic activity;
· speculative trading;
·the demand for gold for industrial uses, use in jewelry, and investment;
·high supply of gold from production, disinvestment, scrap and hedging;
·
·sales by gold producers in forward transactions and other hedging;
·the production and cost levels for gold in major gold-producing nations; and
·the cost level (in local currencies) for gold in major consuming nations.
interest rates;
Any of these risks could result in damage to, or destruction of, our mining properties or production
facilities, personal injury, environmental damage, delays in mining or processing, losses or possible
legal liability. Any prolonged downtime or shutdowns at our mining properties or production facilities
could have a material adverse effect on us.
Any drop in these mineral prices would adversely impact our future revenues, profits and cash flows. In
addition, sustained low mineral prices can:
reduce revenues further by production cutbacks due to cessation of the mining of deposits or portions of
·
deposits that have become uneconomic at the then-prevailing prices;
· halt or delay the development of new projects; and
·reduce funds available for exploration, with the result that depleted minerals are not replaced.
Our customer contracts may contain provisions requiring us to purchase or deliver minimum
amounts of sand. If we are unable to meet our minimum requirements under these contracts, we
may be required to pay penalties or the contract counterparty may be able to terminate the
agreement.
We are not yet in commercial production and do not have any customer contracts, and there can be no
assurance that we will obtain customer contracts on favorable terms or at all. In certain instances, we
may commit to deliver products to our customers prior to production, under penalty of nonperformance.
Depending on the contract, our inability to deliver the requisite tonnage of frac sand may permit our
customers to terminate the agreement or require us to pay our customers a fee, the amount of which
would be based on the difference between the amounts of tonnage contracted for and the amount
delivered. If we are unable to meet our obligations under any of these agreements, we may have to pay
substantial penalties or the agreements may become subject to termination, as applicable. In such
events, our business, financial condition and results of operations may be materially adversely affected.
5
We may be adversely affected by a reduction in horizontal drilling activity or the development of
either effective alternative proppants or new processes to replace hydraulic fracturing.
Frac sand is a proppant used in natural gas and oil wells through the process of hydraulic fracturing. A
significant shift in demand from frac sand to other proppants could have a material adverse effect on our
business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, demand for frac sand is substantially
higher in the case of horizontally drilled wells, which allow for multiple hydraulic fractures within the
same well bore but are more expensive to develop than vertically drilled wells. The development and
use of a cheaper, more effective alternative proppant, a reduction in horizontal drilling or the
development of new processes to replace hydraulic fracturing, could also cause a decline in demand for
the frac sand we intend to produce and could have a material adverse effect on our ability to obtain
financing necessary to achieve commercial production as well as our business, financial condition and
results of operations.
Failure to maintain effective quality control systems at our facilities could have a material adverse
effect on our business and operations.
The performance, quality and safety of our products will be critical to the success of our business. For
instance, our frac sand will be required to meet stringent technical and customer specifications, in order
to be suitable for hydraulic fracturing purposes. If our frac sand fails to meet such specifications or our
customers’ expectations, we could be subject to significant contractual damages or contract terminations
and face serious harm to our reputation, and our sales could be negatively affected. The performance,
quality and safety of our products will depend significantly on the effectiveness of our quality control
systems, which, in turn, depends on a number of factors, including the design of our quality control
systems, our quality-training program and our ability to ensure that our employees adhere to our quality
control policies and guidelines. We are new to the frac sand business, and any significant failure or
deterioration of our quality control systems could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition, results of operations and reputation.
Increasing costs or a lack of dependability or availability of transportation services or
infrastructure could have an adverse effect on our ability to deliver our frac sand products at
competitive prices.
Transportation and handling costs tend to be a significant component of the total delivered cost of sales
of frac sand. If these costs increase, our customers may find alternative providers. If we are not able to
pass those increases along to end users, it could have a material adverse effect on our results of
operations and financial condition. A significant increase in transportation service rates, a reduction in
the dependability or availability of transportation services or relocation of our customers' businesses to
areas that are not served by the rail systems accessible from our production facilities could impair our
customers' ability to access our products and our ability to expand our markets.
We face significant competition.
The frac sand and refined products industries are highly competitive. The frac sand market is
characterized by a small number of large, national producers and a larger number of small, regional or
local producers. Competition in this industry is based on price, consistency and quality of product, site
location, distribution capability, customer service, reliability of supply, breadth of product offering and
technical support.
Some of our competitors have greater financial and other resources than we do. In addition, our larger
competitors may develop technology superior to ours or may have production facilities that offer lower-
cost transportation to certain specific customer locations than we do. In recent years there has been an
increase in the number of small, regional producers servicing the frac sand market due to an increased
demand for hydraulic fracturing services and to the growing number of unconventional resource
formations being developed in the United States. Should the demand for hydraulic fracturing services
decrease or the supply of frac sand available in the market increase, prices in the frac sand market could
materially decrease as less-efficient producers exit the market, selling frac sand at below market prices.
Furthermore, oil and natural gas exploration and production companies and other providers of hydraulic
fracturing services have acquired and in the future may acquire their own frac sand reserves to fulfill their
proppant requirements, and these other market participants may expand their existing frac sand
production capacity, all of which would negatively impact demand for our frac sand products. In addition,
increased competition in the frac sand industry could have an adverse impact on our ability to enter into
long-term contracts or to enter into contracts on favorable terms.
6
Diminished access to water may adversely affect our operations and the operations of our
customers.
The mining and processing activities in which we intend to engage require significant amounts of water.
Based on weather or economic conditions, our facilities may face a lack of water. In addition, the amount
of water that we are entitled to use pursuant to our water rights may be determined by the appropriate
regulatory authorities in the jurisdictions in which we operate. These authorities may amend the
regulations regarding water rights, increase the cost of maintaining such water rights or eliminate our
water rights. Such changes in laws, regulations or government policy and related interpretations
pertaining to water rights may alter the environment in which we do business, which may negatively
affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Similarly, our customers’ performance of hydraulic fracturing activities may require the use of large
amounts of water. The ability of our customers’ to obtain the necessary amounts of water sufficient to
perform hydraulic fracturing activities may well depend on those customers ability to acquire water. The
ability of our customers to obtain and maintain sufficient levels of water for these fracturing activities are
similarly subject to regulatory authority approvals, changes in applicable laws or regulations, potentially
differing interpretations of contract terms, increases in costs to provide water, and even changes in
weather that could make such water resources more scarce.
We may be unable to grow our cash flows if we are unable to expand our business.
A principal focus of our strategy is to develop our frac sand business. Our future growth will depend upon
a number of factors, some of which we cannot control. These factors include our ability to:
·develop new business and enter into contracts with new customers;
· identify and obtain additional frac sand reserves;
·recruit and train qualified personnel and retain valued employees;
· expand our geographic presence;
·effectively manage our costs and expenses, including costs and expenses related to growth;
· consummate accretive acquisitions;
· obtain required debt or equity financing for our operations;
·meet customer-specific contract requirements or pre-qualifications;
·obtain permits from federal, state and local regulatory authorities; and
make assumptions about mineral reserves, future production, sales, capital expenditures, operating
·
expenses and costs, including synergies.
As of the date of this prospectus, we have not earned any revenues through the production and sale of
frac sand. If we do not achieve our expected growth, the market price of the shares of our common stock
will likely decline materially.
We may be unable to grow successfully through future acquisitions, and we may not be able to
integrate effectively the businesses we may acquire.
From time to time, we may choose to make business acquisitions to pursue market opportunities,
increase our existing capabilities and expand into new areas of operations. While we have reviewed
acquisition opportunities in the past and will continue to do so in the future, we may not be able to
identify attractive acquisition opportunities or successfully acquire identified targets. In addition, we may
not be successful in integrating any future acquisitions into our existing operations, which may result in
unforeseen operational difficulties or diminished financial performance or require a disproportionate
amount of our management's attention. Even if we are successful in integrating future acquisitions into
our existing operations, we may not derive the benefits, such as operational or administrative synergies,
that we expected from such acquisitions, which may result in the commitment of our capital resources
without the expected returns on such capital. Furthermore, competition for acquisition opportunities may
escalate, increasing our cost of making acquisitions or causing us to refrain from making acquisitions.
Our inability to make acquisitions, or to integrate successfully future acquisitions into our existing
operations, may adversely impact our operations and financial condition.
7
Our ability to grow in the future is dependent on our ability to access external growth capital.
We expect that we will rely primarily upon external financing sources, including the issuance of debt and
equity securities, to fund growth capital expenditures. However, we may not be able to obtain equity or
debt financing on terms favorable to us, or at all. To the extent we issue additional securities in
connection with other growth capital expenditures, such issuances may result in significant dilution to our
existing shareholders. There are no limitations in our articles of incorporation or bylaws on our ability to
issue additional securities, including securities ranking senior to our common stock.
We have no full-time employees other than our officers, and we are dependent on our directors,
officers and third-party contractors.
We have two officers who are full time employees. We have a small number of individuals in
management and each person has experience in the mining industries. We are wholly dependent upon
the personal efforts and abilities of these officers and our other directors and our consultants. Our
consultants devote less than all of their time and efforts to our operations. While much of our operations
are handled by our employees, our directors and officers direct our policies and manage our operations.
The loss of any one of these individuals could adversely affect our business. Until we hire geologists and
engineers on a permanent basis and unless and until we do so, we must rely on consultants.
Competition for such personnel is intense, and there is no assurance that we will be able to hire and
retain such personnel in the future.
Inaccuracies in our estimates of mineral reserves could result in lower than expected sales and
higher than expected costs.
We intend to base our mineral reserve estimates on engineering, economic and geological data
assembled and analyzed by our engineers and geologists, which are reviewed by outside firms.
However, sand reserve estimates are necessarily imprecise and depend to some extent on statistical
inferences drawn from available drilling data, which may prove unreliable. There are numerous
uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities and qualities of mineral reserves and in estimating costs to
mine recoverable reserves, including many factors beyond our control. Estimates of recoverable mineral
reserves necessarily depend on a number of factors and assumptions, all of which may vary
considerably from actual results, such as:
geological and mining conditions and/or effects from prior mining that may not be fully identified by
·
available data or that may differ from experience;
assumptions concerning future prices of frac sand products, operating costs, mining technology
·
improvements, development costs and reclamation costs; and
assumptions concerning future effects of regulation, including our ability to obtain required permits and
·
the imposition of taxes by governmental agencies.
Estimates of proven and probable deposits and cash operating costs are subject to considerable
uncertainty. Such estimates are, to a large extent, based on interpretations of geologic data obtained
from drill holes and other sampling techniques. Mineral producers use feasibility studies to derive
estimates of cash operating costs based upon anticipated tonnage and grades of minerals to be mined
and processed, the predicted configuration of the deposits, expected recovery rates, comparable facility,
equipment and operating costs, and other factors. Actual cash operating costs and economic returns on
projects may differ significantly from original estimates. Further, it may take many years before production
is possible and, during that time, the economic feasibility of exploiting a discovery may change. Any
significant inaccuracies in these interpretations or assumptions or changes of conditions could cause the
quantities and net present value of our deposits to be overstated.
8
Our operations are dependent on our rights and eventual ability to mine our properties and on
our having renewed or received the required permits and approvals from governmental
authorities and other third parties.
A decision by a governmental agency or other third party to deny or delay issuing a new or renewed
permit, water right or approval, or to revoke or substantially modify an existing permit, water right or
approval, could have a material adverse effect on our ability to continue operations at the affected facility.
Expansion of any existing operations will also be predicated on securing the necessary environmental or
other permits, water rights or approvals, which we may not receive in a timely manner or at all.
We are subject to compliance with stringent environmental laws and regulations that may expose
us to substantial costs and liabilities.
Before and after achieving commercial production, our operations will be subject to increasingly stringent
and complex environmental laws, regulations and standards governing the discharge of materials into
the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. These laws, regulations and
standards impose numerous obligations that are applicable to our operations, including the acquisition of
permits to conduct regulated activities, the incurrence of significant capital expenditures to limit or
prevent releases of materials facilities and the imposition of remedial actions or other liabilities for
pollution conditions caused by our operations or attributable to former operations. Numerous
governmental authorities have the power to enforce compliance with these laws, regulations and
standards and the permits issued under them, often requiring difficult and costly actions.
Failure to comply with environmental laws, regulations, standards, permits and orders may result in the
assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, the imposition of remedial obligations, and the
issuance of injunctions limiting or preventing some or all of our operations. Certain environmental laws
impose strict liability for the remediation of spills and releases of oil and hazardous substances that
could subject us to liability without regard to whether we were negligent or at fault. In addition, changes
in environmental laws and regulations occur frequently, and any such changes that result in more
stringent and costly waste handling, storage, transport, disposal or remediation requirements with
respect to our operations or more stringent or costly well drilling, construction, completion or water
management activities with respect to our customers' operations could adversely affect our operations
and financial results.
Federal, state and local legislative and regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing and
the potential for related regulatory action or litigation could result in increased costs and
additional operating restrictions or delays for our customers, which could negatively impact our
business, financial condition and results of operations and cash flows.
Various state, local and foreign governments have implemented, or are considering, increased
regulatory oversight of hydraulic fracturing through additional permitting requirements, operational
restrictions, disclosure requirements and temporary or permanent bans on hydraulic fracturing in certain
areas. Heightened political, regulatory and public scrutiny of hydraulic fracturing practices could
potentially expose us or our customers to increased legal and regulatory proceedings, and any such
proceedings could be time-consuming, costly or result in substantial legal liability or significant
reputational harm. Any such developments could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition and results of operations, whether directly or indirectly.
We are subject to extensive regulations, including licensing, protection of plant and wildlife
endangered and threatened species, and reclamation regulation, that impose, and will continue to
impose, significant costs and liabilities. In addition, future regulations, or more stringent
enforcement of existing regulations, could increase those costs and liabilities, which could
adversely affect our results of operations.
We and our customers are subject to extensive governmental regulation on matters such as permitting
and licensing requirements, plant and wildlife threatened and endangered species protection,
jurisdictional wetlands protection, reclamation and restoration activities at mining properties after mining
is completed, the discharge of materials into the environment and the effects that mining and hydraulic
fracturing have on groundwater quality and availability. In order to obtain permits and renewals of permits
in the future, we may be required to prepare and present data to governmental authorities pertaining to
the potential adverse impact that any proposed mining and processing activities may have on the
environment, individually or in the aggregate. Certain approval procedures may require preparation of
various studies to assess the environmental impact of new sites or the expansion of existing sites.
Compliance with these regulatory requirements is expensive and significantly lengthens the time needed
to develop a site. Finally, obtaining or renewing required permits is sometimes delayed or prevented due
to community opposition and other factors beyond our control. The denial of a permit essential to our
operations or the imposition of conditions with which it is not practicable or feasible to comply could
impair or prevent our ability to develop or expand a site. Significant opposition to a permit by neighboring
property owners, members of the public or non-governmental organizations, or other third parties or
delay in the environmental review and permitting process also could impair or delay our ability to
develop or expand a site. New legal requirements, including those related to the protection of the
environment, could be adopted that could materially adversely affect our mining operations, our cost
structure or our customers' ability to use frac sand products. Such current or future regulations could have
a material adverse effect on our business and we may not be able to obtain or renew permits in the
future.
9
Terrorist attacks, the threat of terrorist attacks, hostilities in the Middle East, or other sustained
military campaigns may adversely impact our results of operations.
The long-term impact of terrorist attacks, such as the attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001, and
the magnitude of the threat of future terrorist attacks on the energy industry in general and on us in
particular are not known at this time. Uncertainty surrounding hostilities in the Middle East or other
sustained military campaigns may affect our operations in unpredictable ways, including disruptions of
markets for frac sand and the possibility that infrastructure facilities and pipelines could be direct targets
of, or indirect casualties of, an act of terror. Changes in the insurance markets attributable to terrorist
attacks may make certain types of insurance more difficult for us to obtain. Moreover, the insurance that
may be available to us may be significantly more expensive than our existing insurance coverage.
Instability in the financial markets as a result of terrorism or war could also affect our ability to raise
capital.
Risks Related to Our Common Stock
We may experience volatility in our stock price, which could negatively affect your investment,
and you may not be able to resell your shares at or above the offering price.
There is no established public trading market for our common stock. Currently, our common stock is
quoted on the OTC Pink marketplace. There can be no assurance that our common stock will be
admitted to trade on any established trading market or exchange. Additionally, if our common stock is
admitted for listing or trading, there can be no assurance that it will maintain the requirements for
continued listing or trading on an established trading market or exchange.
Our common stock may not be traded actively. An illiquid market for shares of our common stock may
result in lower trading prices and increased volatility, which could negatively affect the value of your
investment or your ability to sell your shares. If an active trading market does develop, it may not last and
the trading price of the shares may fluctuate widely as a result of a number of factors, many of which are
outside our control. The market price of our common stock may fluctuate significantly in response to a
number of factors, some of which are beyond our control, including:
· quarterly variations in operating results;
changes in financial estimates by us or securities analysts who may cover our stock or by our failure to
·
meet the estimates made by securities analysts;
· changes in market valuations of other similar companies;
announcements by us or our competitors of new products or of significant technical innovations,
·
contracts, acquisitions, strategic partnerships or joint ventures;
· additions or departures of key personnel;
·any deviations in net sales or in losses from levels expected by securities analysts;
· commencement of or involvement in litigation;
· the prices of oil and natural gas;
the success of our exploration and development operations, and the marketing of the minerals we
·
produce;
· changes in market valuations of companies similar to ours;
·domestic and international economic, legal and regulatory factors unrelated to our performance;
·the realization of any of the risk factors presented in this prospectus; and
· future sales of common stock.
10
In addition, the stock market has recently experienced extreme volatility that has often been unrelated to
the performance of particular companies. These market fluctuations may cause our stock price to fall
regardless of our performance.
If securities or industry analysts do not publish research or reports about our business, our stock
price and trading volume could decline.
The trading market for our common stock may depend on the research and reports that industry or
securities analysts publish about us or our business. We do not have any control over research and
reports these analysts publish or whether they will be published at all. If one or more of the analysts who
decides to cover us downgrade our stock, our stock price would likely decline. If one or more of these
analysts cease coverage of our company or fail to regularly publish reports on us, we could lose visibility
in the financial markets, which in turn could cause our stock price or trading volume to decline.
Because our shares are deemed “penny stock,” you may have difficulty selling them in the
secondary trading market.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted regulations which generally define a “penny
stock” to be any equity security that has a market price of less than $5.00 per share or with an exercise
price of less than $5.00 per share. Additionally, if the equity security is not registered or authorized on a
national securities exchange, the equity security also would constitute a “penny stock.” As our common
stock falls within the definition of penny stock, these regulations require the delivery, prior to any
transaction involving our common stock, of a risk disclosure schedule explaining the penny stock market
and the risks associated with it. Disclosure is also required to be made regarding compensation payable
to both the broker-dealer and the registered representative and current quotations for the securities. In
addition, monthly statements are required to be sent disclosing recent price information for the penny
stocks. The ability of broker-dealers to sell our common stock and the ability of shareholders to sell our
common stock in the secondary market would be limited. As a result, the market liquidity for our common
stock would be severely and adversely affected. We can provide no assurance that trading in our
common stock will not be subject to these or other regulations in the future, which would negatively affect
the market for our common stock.
Because we are a relatively small company, the requirements of being a public reporting
company may strain our resources, increase our costs and distract management, and we may be
unable to comply with these requirements in a timely or cost-effective manner.
As a public reporting company, we will need to comply with new laws, regulations and requirements,
certain corporate governance provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or Sarbanes-Oxley Act,
related regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, with which we are not required to
comply as a private company. Complying with these statutes, regulations and requirements will occupy a
significant amount of time of the board of directors and management and will significantly increase our
costs and expenses, which we cannot estimate accurately at this time. We will need to:
· institute a more comprehensive compliance function;
establish and maintain a system of internal controls over financial reporting in compliance with the
·
requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the related rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board;
prepare and distribute periodic public reports in compliance with our obligations under the federal
·
securities laws;
·involve and retain to a greater degree outside counsel and accountants in the above activities;
· establish an internal audit function; and
· establish an investor relations function.
11
In addition, we also expect that being a public company subject to these rules and regulations may
require us to accept less director and officer liability insurance coverage than we desire or to incur
substantial costs to obtain coverage. These factors could also make it more difficult for us to attract and
retain qualified members of the board of directors, particularly to serve on our audit committee, and
qualified executive officers.
If any of the material weaknesses identified by our independent registered public accountants
persist or if we fail to establish and maintain effective internal control over financial reporting in
the future, our ability to accurately report our financial results could be adversely affected.
Prior to the completion of this offering, we have been not been subject to many of the requirements
applicable to a company subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, or the Exchange Act. We have maintained limited accounting personnel to perform our
accounting processes and limited supervisory resources with which to address our internal control over
financial reporting. We have begun the process of evaluating our internal control over financial reporting
and will continue to work with our auditors to put into place new accounting process and control
procedures to address the issues set forth above. However, we cannot predict the timing or the outcome
of this process at this time.
We are not currently required to comply with the Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules
implementing Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and are therefore not required to make a formal
assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting for that purpose. Upon
becoming a public company, we will be required to comply with the Securities and Exchange
Commission’s rules implementing Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which will require our
management to certify financial and other information in our quarterly and annual reports and to provide
an annual management report on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. We will
not be required to make our first assessment of our internal control over financial reporting until the year
following the year that our first annual report is filed or required to be filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. To comply with the requirements of being a public company, we will need to
upgrade our systems, including information technology, implement additional financial and management
controls, reporting systems and procedures and hire additional accounting and financial reporting staff.
Further, our independent registered public accountants are not yet required to formally attest to the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting until the year following the year that our first
annual report is required to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Once they are
required to do so, our independent registered public accountants may issue a report that is adverse in
the event it is not satisfied with the level at which our controls are documented, designed, operated or
reviewed. Our remediation efforts may not enable us to remedy or avoid material weaknesses in the
future.
Our efforts to develop and maintain our internal controls may not be successful, and we may be unable to
maintain effective controls over our financial processes and reporting in the future and comply with the
certification and reporting obligations under Sections 302 and 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Further,
our remediation efforts may not enable us to remedy or avoid material weaknesses in the future. Any
failure to remediate deficiencies and to develop or maintain effective controls, or any difficulties
encountered in our implementation or improvement of our internal control over financial reporting, could
result in material misstatements that are not prevented or detected on a timely basis, which could
potentially subject us to sanction or investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission, any
stock exchange or quotation service for our common stock or other regulatory authorities. Ineffective
internal controls could also cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial information.
We do not presently intend to pay any cash dividends on or repurchase any shares of our
common stock.
We do not presently intend to pay any cash dividends on our common stock. Any payment of future
dividends will be at the discretion of the board of directors and will depend on, among other things, our
earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, level of indebtedness, statutory and contractual
restrictions applying to the payment of dividends, and other considerations that the board of directors
deems relevant. Cash dividend payments in the future may only be made out of legally available funds
and, if we experience substantial losses, such funds may not be available. Accordingly, you may have to
sell some or all of your common stock in order to generate cash flow from your investment.
12
A large number of shares will be eligible for future sale and may depress our stock price.
Our shares that are eligible for future sale may have an adverse effect on the price of our stock. As of
August 1, 2016 there were 30,336,283 shares of our common stock outstanding. In addition to the shares
covered by this prospectus, 10,115,336 shares will generally become available for sale in the public
market from time to time upon our meeting certain conditions, and the expiration of their respective
holding periods, under Rule 144, without substantial restriction or the requirement of future registration
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act. The remainder of our outstanding
shares are held by our officers, directors and greater than 5% shareholders and may be sold without
registration under the exemption from registration provided by Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933.
In addition, as of August 1, 2016 an additional 2,996,696 shares were subject to outstanding options.
Sales of substantial amounts of common stock, or a perception that such sales could occur, and the
existence of options or warrants to purchase shares of common stock at prices that may be below the
then current market price of the common stock, could adversely affect the market price of our common
stock and could impair our ability to raise capital through the sale of our equity securities.
Prior to our acquisition of Dome Copper, Inc. in July 2006, we were a shell company, as defined under
the rules promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act. In addition,
we are not subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or
the Exchange Act.
When selling restricted securities for which an effective registration statement is not available, holders
often rely on Rule 144 promulgated under the Securities Act. However, rule changes in 2008 removed
the ability of holders of securities of shell companies or former shell companies to use Rule 144 under
most circumstances.
However, the Rule 144 safe harbor is not available for the resale of securities “initially issued” by a shell
company or an issuer that has “at any time previously” been a shell company. Consequently, the Rule
144 safe harbor is not available for the resale of such securities unless and until all of the conditions in
Rule 144(i)(2) are satisfied at the time of the proposed sale, which generally provides that if the issuer is
subject to the reporting requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, has filed all reports and
other materials required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, as applicable, during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the issuer was required to file such reports and
materials), other than Form 8-K reports and has filed current “Form 10 information” with the Securities
and Exchange Commission reflecting its status as an entity that is no longer a shell company, then those
securities may be sold in accordance with Rule 144 after one year has elapsed from the date that the
issuer filed “Form 10 information” with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
As a result, there can be no assurance that we will meet the requirements of Rule 144(i)(2) or that Rule
144 will be available to purchasers of the shares in this offering. Consequently, these securities are
suitable only for long-term investment by persons with no need for liquidity and who can absorb the loss
of the investor’s entire investment.
We may conduct further offerings in the future in which case your shareholdings will be diluted.
Our board of directors has the authority to issue up to 200,000,000 authorized shares of our common
stock or stock options to acquire such common stock; and up to 15,000,000 shares of preferred stock
with rights, privileges and preferences designated by the board of directors. The future issuance of
common stock or preferred stock may result in dilution in the percentage of our common stock held by
our existing shareholders. Also, any stock we sell in the future may be valued on an arbitrary basis by us
and the issuance of shares of common stock or preferred stock for future services, acquisitions or other
corporate actions may have the effect of diluting the value of the shares held by our existing
shareholders.
We may conduct further equity offerings in the future. If common stock is issued in return for additional
funds, property or services, the price per share could be lower than that paid by our current shareholders.
13
We do not have cumulative voting and a small number of existing shareholders control our
company, which could limit your ability to influence the outcome of shareholder votes.
Our shareholders do not have the right to cumulative votes in the election of our directors. Cumulative
voting, in some cases, could allow a minority group to elect at least one director to the board of directors.
Because there is no provision for cumulative voting, a minority group will not be able to elect any
directors. Accordingly, the holders of a majority of the shares of common stock, present in person or by
proxy, will be able to elect all of the members of our board of directors.
Our executive officers and directors, together with our largest shareholders, beneficially own
approximately 66.7% of our common stock as of August 1, 2016. As a result, these persons may be able
to exercise significant influence over the outcome of shareholder votes, including votes concerning the
election of directors, the adoption or amendment of provisions in our charter or bylaws and the approval
of mergers and other significant corporate transactions.
Certain provisions in our charter documents could discourage takeover attempts and lead to
management entrenchment.
Our articles of incorporation and bylaws contain provisions that could have the effect of delaying or
preventing changes in control or changes in our management without the consent of our board of
directors. These provisions include:
·the ability of the board of directors to alter, amend or repeal the bylaws;
the ability of our board of directors to determine to issue shares of preferred stock and to determine the
·
price and other terms of those shares, including preferences and voting rights, without shareholder
approval, which could be used to significantly dilute the ownership of a hostile acquirer;
advance notice procedures that shareholders must comply with in order to nominate candidates to our
board of directors or to propose matters to be acted upon at a shareholders’ meeting, which may
·
discourage or deter a potential acquiror from conducting a solicitation of proxies to elect the acquiror’s
own slate of directors or otherwise attempting to obtain control of us;
the requirement that a special meeting of shareholders may be called only by the board of directors,
·
which may delay the ability of our shareholders to force consideration of a proposal or to take action,
including the removal of directors;
the right of our board of directors to elect a director to fill a vacancy created by the expansion of the
·
board of directors or the resignation, death or removal of a director, which prevents shareholders from
being able to fill vacancies on our board of directors; and
no cumulative voting in the election of directors, which limits the ability of minority shareholders to elect
·
director candidates.
14
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK
Market for Our Common Stock
There is no established public trading market for our common stock. Our common stock is quoted under
the symbol “BRSD” on the OTC Pink marketplace. We began trading on the OTCQX on January 13,
2013 and moved from the OTCQX to the OTC Pink marketplace on December 8, 2014. On June 25,
2015, we began trading on the OTCQX again, and we returned to the OTC Pink marketplace on
February 1, 2016.
The following table sets forth the high and low bid information for our common stock for the periods
indicated, which reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission and may
not represent actual transactions:
Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2016    
 $.13
First Quarter
Second Quarter
 $.12
Third Quarter (through August 1, 2016) $.06
Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2015    
First Quarter
Second Quarter
$0.155  $0.0111 
 
 $0.17   $0.06
High   Low
$.05
  $.05
  $.05
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2014
$0.168  $0.022  
 
 $0.14   $0.05
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
$0.17   $0.06
 $0.101  $0.03
 
 $0.035  $0.025  
 $0.04   $0.011
On August 1, 2016 the last reported sale price of our common stock on the OTC Pink marketplace was
$0.05 per share.
Holders
As of August 1, 2016, there were approximately 988 shareholders on record of our common stock.
Dividends
Since January 1, 2013, we have not declared or paid dividends on our common stock. We currently
intend to retain future earnings, if any, for use in our business, and, therefore, we do not anticipate
declaring or paying any dividends in the foreseeable future. Payments of future dividends, if any, will be
at the discretion of our board of directors after taking into account various factors, including our financial
condition, operating results, current and anticipated cash needs and plans for expansion.
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of our securities by the selling security holders pursuant
to this prospectus.
15
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus includes forward-looking statements that relate to future events or our future financial
performance and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our
actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to differ materially from any future results,
levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking
statements. Words such as, but not limited to, “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,”
“targets,” “likely,” “will,” “would,” “could,” and similar expressions or phrases identify forward-looking
statements.
Forward-looking statements may include statements about:
industrial accidents;
labor disputes;
·our ability to achieve commercial production on any of our projects;
the amount of frac sand we are able to excavate and process, which could be adversely affected by,
·
among other things, operating difficulties and unusual or unfavorable geologic conditions;
· the volume of frac sand we are able to buy and sell;
·the price at which we are able to produce and sell frac sand;
·changes in the price and availability of natural gas, diesel fuel or electricity;
· changes in prevailing economic conditions;
· unanticipated ground, grade or water conditions;
· inclement or hazardous weather conditions;
· environmental hazards;
· difficulties in obtaining or renewing environmental permits;
·
changes in laws and regulations (or the interpretation thereof) related to the mining and hydraulic
·
fracturing industries, silica dust exposure or the environment;
·the outcome of litigation, claims or assessments, including unasserted claims;
·inability to acquire or maintain necessary permits or mining or water rights;
·facility shutdowns in response to environmental regulatory actions;
·inability to obtain necessary production equipment or replacement parts;
· reduction in the amount of water available for processing;
· technical difficulties or failures;
·
·
· difficulty collecting receivables;
· inability of our customers to take delivery;
· fires, explosions or other accidents;
· cave-ins, pit wall failures or rock falls;
· our ability to borrow funds and access capital markets;
·changes in the political environment of the drilling basins in which we and our customers operate;
changes in railroad infrastructure, price, capacity and availability, including the potential for rail line
·
washouts;
·anticipated trends and challenges in our business and the markets in which we operate;
· expected future financial performance;
· expectations regarding our operating expenses;
·our ability to anticipate market needs or develop new or enhanced products to meet those needs;
·our ability to expand into other sectors of the storage market, beyond protection storage;
·our ability to compete in our industry and innovation by our competitors;
·our ability to protect our confidential information and intellectual property rights;
·our ability to successfully identify and manage any potential acquisitions;
our ability to remediate any material weakness in our internal controls identified by our independent
·
registered public accounting firm;
late delivery of supplies;
16
our ability to maintain or broaden our business relationships and develop new relationships with
·
strategic alliances, suppliers, customers, distributors or otherwise; and
· our ability to manage growth.
All forward-looking statements involve risks, assumptions and uncertainties. The occurrence of the
events described, and the achievement of the expected results, depend on many events, some or all of
which are not predictable or within our control. Actual results may differ materially from expected results.
These risks, assumptions and uncertainties are not necessarily all of the important factors that could
cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any of our forward-looking statements.
Other unknown or unpredictable factors also could harm our results. In light of these risks, uncertainties
and assumptions, the forward-looking events might not occur.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, as there can be no
assurance that the plans, intentions or expectations upon which they are based will occur. By their
nature, forward-looking statements involve numerous assumptions, known and unknown risks and
uncertainties, both general and specific, that contribute to the possibility that the predictions, forecasts,
projections and other things contemplated by the forward-looking statements will not occur. Forward-
looking statements in this prospectus are based on management’s beliefs and opinions at the time the
statements are made. The forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are expressly
qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. The forward-looking statements included in this
prospectus are made as of the date of this prospectus and we undertake no obligation to publicly update
or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect new information, future events or otherwise, except as
required by applicable securities laws.
17
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of our operations should be
read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this
prospectus. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our
actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute
to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the
section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Overview
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of our operations should be
read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this
prospectus.
From July 2006 to December 2014, we were an independent exploration stage mining company in the
business of acquiring, exploring and developing mineral natural resource properties, primarily gold and
silver. From February 2010 to September 2014, we had worked with another company to develop what
had been our largest asset, known as the Cahuilla project, pursuant to two Exploration Earn-In
Agreements with Teras Resources Inc. We were also engaged in maintaining, exploring and developing
its other mineral projects. We currently have four exploration stage projects in our gold and silver
property portfolio.
Our December 2014 acquisition of rights to three properties in Canada from 1824455 Alberta Ltd., which
we refer to as 182, transformed us into a company focused on becoming a leading producer, transporter,
marketer and distributor of frac sand. Since the acquisition, we have devoted the vast majority of our time
and efforts in our transition from an exploration stage gold and silver mining company to becoming a
leading producer and supplier of monocrystalline sand, a specialized mineral that is used as a proppant
to enhance the recovery rates of hydrocarbons from oil and natural gas wells.
In January 2014, we acquired the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining Corporation. The Muskox
Data consists of several years’ worth of work on the Ni-Cu-Pd-Pt bearing Muskox Layered Intrusion in
Nunavut, Canada. The Muskox intrusion is believed to be one of the most promising targets for platinum
group elements. We are currently analyzing and preparing the data for possible sale.
Factors Impacting Comparability of Our Financial Results
Our historical results of operations are not indicative of results of operations and cash flows to be
expected in the future, principally for the following reasons:
We completed our acquisition of frac sand properties from 182 in December 2014. In December
2014, we acquired three properties from 182, transforming us into a company focused on becoming a
·
leading producer, transporter, marketer and distributor of frac sand. As a result of the acquisition, our
business plan has transitioned from advancing exploration stage precious metals projects in Nevada to
advancing our frac sand projects in Canada.
Our historical financial results include capital expenditures and other costs related to assets
outside of our current and anticipated business plan. For the periods in the years ended
·
December 31, 2014, we had capital expenditures that related to our gold and silver projects. Since the
182 transaction, we have shifted our focus to the frac sand business.
We terminated certain gold and silver projects during 2014 and 2015. As a result, we expect
·
reductions in our royalty payments, claim maintenance fees and exploration expenses related to these
projects.
We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as an SEC reporting
company. We expect to incur additional expenses following the effective date of the registration
·
statement of which this prospectus is a part. These expenses are associated with compliance under the
Exchange Act.
18
Critical Accounting Policies
See Note 2 to the financial statements contained in this registration statement for a complete summary of
the significant accounting policies used in the presentation of our financial statements. The summary is
presented to assist the reading in understanding the financial statements. The financial statements are
prepared using the accrual basis of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America “U.S. GAAP”.
Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
Mineral Exploration and Development Costs
All exploration expenditures are expensed as incurred. Expenditures to develop new mines, to define
further mineralization in existing ore bodies, and to expand the capacity of operating mines, are currently
expensed and will be capitalized and amortized on a unit of production basis over proven and probable
reserves when and if we have proven and probable reserves.
Review of Carrying Value of Property for Impairment
Mineral properties and exploration assets are assessed annually for impairment. If it is determined that
the undiscounted expected future cash flows from the asset are less that the asset’s carrying value, an
impairment loss is recognized equal to an amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of
the asset. Factors considered by management in performing the assessment include current operating
results, trends and prospects, the manner in which the property is used, and the effects of obsolescence,
demand, competition, and other economic factors.
Management determined that as of December 31, 2014, the estimated fair value of the Muskox Data had
decreased. We determined the estimated fair value of $250,000 after considering a report from a third
party who performed an evaluation of the Muskox Data in early 2015. An impairment loss of $1,100,000
was recognized for the year ending December 31, 2014 bringing the investment balance to its fair value
of $250,000. The fair value was based on Level 3 input variables under the fair value measurement
accounting principles.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when the services are rendered and collection of payment is deemed probable.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In June 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standard Update No. 2014-
10 (“the ASU”). This update changed the requirements for disclosures as it relates to development stage
entities. The ASU specifies that the “inception-to-date” information is no longer required to be presented
in the financial statements of a development stage entity. The amendments in the ASU are effective for
annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2014 and interim periods therein, with early
application permitted for any financial statements that have not yet been issued. We have elected to
apply the amendments as of December 31, 2014.
Results of Operations
Three Months Ended March 31, 2016 Compared to the Three Months Ended March 31, 2015
Operating Expenses (Income). Total operating expenses decreased $74,227 to $160,174 for the three
months ended March 31, 2016, as compared to operating income of $234,401 for the three months
ended March 31, 2015. The decreases were primarily due to a gain on mining properties and interests
primarily in connection with the signing of an exploration agreement on the Pyramid project along with a
reduction in general and administrative expenses.
Other Income (Expense). Other expenses decreased $494,308, or 99.5%, to $2,678 for the three months
ended March 31, 2016 from $496,986 for the three months ended March 31, 2015. The decreases were
primarily related to the termination of sales of Teras common shares.
Exploration Expense. Exploration expenses decreased $19,329, or 64.3%, to $10,739 for the three
months ended March 31, 2016 from $30,068 for the three months ended March 31, 2015. The decreases
were due to the temporary halt of exploration work on the McClelland and Alberta projects.
Payroll and related expenses. Payroll and related expenses increased $36,040, or 82.6%, to $79,661 for
the three months ended March 31, 2016 from $43,621 for the three months ended March 31, 2015. The
increase was due to additional obligations we incurred for expenses that were previous paid by Teras
Resources in connection with our earn-in agreements.
Professional fees and consulting. Professional and consulting fees decreased approximately $8,609, or
15.3%, to $47,474 for the three months ended March 31, 2016 from $56,083 for the three months ended
March 31, 2015. The decreases were due to a reduction in outside consulting.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $73,572 or 76.7%, to
$22,300 for the three months ended March 31, 2016 from $95,872 for the three months ended March 31,
2015. The decreases were due to the termination of sale of Teras common shares.
19
Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2014
Operating Expenses (Income). Total operating expenses increased $2.5 million to $1.8 million for the
year ended December 31, 2015, as compared to operating income of $0.7 million for the year ended
December 31, 2014. The increases were primarily due to a gain on mining properties and interests
primarily related our receipt and disposition of common shares of Teras Resources in connection with
our earn in agreements offset by a loss on mineral properties related to the abandonment of a gold and
silver project and costs related to exploration work on our frac sand projects.
Other Income (Expense). Other expenses increased $42,267, or 2.7%, to $1.5 million for the year ended
December 31, 2015 from $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2014. The increases were
primarily related to loss on investments available for sale of $1,529,490 for the year ended December 31,
2015 due to lower prices received for the sale of Teras common shares compared to the book value of
the Teras common shares on our financial statements.
Exploration Expense. Exploration expenses increased $492,250, or 318.7%, to $646,700 for the year
ended December 31, 2015 from $154,450 for the year ended December 31, 2014. The increases were
due to the initiation of exploration work on the McClelland and Alberta projects.
Payroll and related expenses. Payroll and related expenses increased $97,908, or 47%, to $306,377 for
the year ended December 31, 2015 from $208,469 for the year ended December 31, 2014. The increase
was due to additional obligations we incurred for expenses that were previous paid by Teras Resources
in connection with our earn-in agreements and the September 2013 bonus program, respectively.
Professional fees and consulting. Professional and consulting fees increased approximately $50,644, or
23.5%, to $265,851 for the year ended December 31, 2015 from $215,207 for the year ended December
31, 2014. The increases were due to additional obligations we incurred for expenses that were previous
paid by Teras Resources in connection with our earn-in agreements.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased $117,778, or 48.6%, to
$360,218 for the year ended December 31, 2015 from $242,440 for the year ended December 31, 2014.
The increases were due to the acquisition of Teras common shares.
20
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of the date of this prospectus, there is limited historical financial information regarding our company
upon which to base an evaluation of our performance.
Development of our frac sand properties and plans for further growth of the company depend on our
ability to obtain additional capital through the issuance of additional debt or equity and through the
generation of revenue. None of our properties has commenced commercial production, and we have no
history of earnings or cash flow from our operations. While we may attempt to generate additional
working capital through the operation, development, sale or possible joint venture development of our
properties, there is no assurance that any such activity will generate funds that will be available for
operations. We are not yet in commercial production and do not have any customer contracts, and there
can be no assurance that we will obtain customer contracts on favorable terms or at all.
At March 31, 2016, we had cash of $1,879 and total current assets of approximately $296,310. We are
currently spending between $5,000 and $10,000 per month for our ongoing corporate functions. In
addition, we are preparing our budgets for exploration or development of our frac sand properties.
We had working capital of $(922,783) as of March 31, 2016. As of the date of this prospectus, we do not
believe that we have sufficient working capital to make the royalty and other payments required on our
properties, to conduct preliminary exploration programs and to satisfy our cash requirements for the
twelve months following the date of this prospectus. We will need to obtain additional funds, either
through equity offerings or debt, to fund our general and administrative expenses, make the royalty
payments required on our properties and conduct exploration programs on our properties. Failure to
obtain such additional financing will result in the loss by us of our interests in our mineral properties. We
have no agreements or understandings with any person for additional financing.
Net cash used by operating activities decreased to $(26,894) in the three months ended March 31, 2016
from approximately $(294,427) in the three months ended March 31, 2015. A significant component of
cash provided by (used in) operating activities is in the termination of the sale of Teras stock.
Net cash provided by investing activities primarily relate to capital expenditures relating to mineral
interests and proceeds from the sale of common shares of Teras Resources. Net cash provided by
investing activities was approximately $20,000 in the three months ended March 31, 2016 compared to
$273,895 during the three months ended March 31, 2015. Included in the three months ended March 31,
2016 is a decrease due to the termination of the sale of Teras common shares.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At March 31, 2016 and 2015, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
21
BUSINESS
Overview
We were incorporated as the Helena and Livingston Smelting and Reduction Company in the State of
Montana in May 1888. We changed our name to “Helena Silver Mines, Inc.” in June 1970 and to
“Consolidated Goldfields Corporation” in July 2006 in connection with our acquisition of Dome Copper,
Inc., a Colorado corporation engaged in the mining business. At the time of the transaction, Dome
Copper had fifteen projects consisting of unpatented claims and mining leases.
From July 2006 to December 2014, we were an independent exploration stage mining company in the
business of acquiring, exploring and developing mineral natural resource properties, primarily gold and
silver. From February 2010 to September 2014, we had worked with another company to develop what
had been our largest asset, known as the Cahuilla project, pursuant to two earn-in agreements. We were
also engaged in maintaining, exploring and developing its other mineral projects. We currently have four
exploration stage projects in our gold and silver property portfolio.
In February 2010, we entered into an earn-in agreement regarding what was then our largest asset, the
Cahuilla project, with Teras Resources Inc., a Canadian company engaged in the acquisition,
exploration and development of mineral resource properties. We entered into a second earn-in
agreement with Teras Resources for the balance of the project in September 2011. The agreements
provided for various financial and operational milestones for the project. Over the course of the
agreement, the parties met their various obligations, including the issuance by Teras Resources of
24,300,000 of its common shares to us, and Teras Resources earned the right to acquire Cahuilla. The
transfer of Cahuilla to Teras Resources was completed in September 2014.
In December 2014, we acquired rights to three properties in Canada and began our strategy to become a
leading producer and supplier of frac sand in Canada. The transaction included an initial cash payment
of approximately $43,000 and the issuance of 7,833,334 shares of our common stock, an additional
7,833,334 shares of our common stock held in escrow to be released under certain conditions, an
additional cash payment of CAD$50,000 within the 45 days after closing and an additional cash
payment of CAD$175,000 to be paid concurrently with the completion of a financing transaction by us.
Since our acquisition of the frac sand properties, our immediate priorities have been to finance the
exploration of these properties and then to begin the process to bring them into development and
production. Following this transaction, we changed our name to “Brilliant Sands Incorporated” to reflect
our evolution from a junior gold-silver company to a more diversified mining company with interests in
other minerals. As of the date of this prospectus, we have not earned any revenues through the
production and sale of frac sand.
In January 2014, we acquired the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining Corporation. The Muskox
Data consists of several years’ worth of work on the Ni-Cu-Pd-Pt bearing Muskox Layered Intrusion in
Nunavut, Canada. The Muskox intrusion is believed to be one of the most promising targets for platinum
group elements. We are currently analyzing and preparing the data for possible sale.
Market Opportunity
Relationship to Oil and Gas Industry
Over the past decade, oil and gas companies in North America have focused a great deal on
unconventional oil and natural gas reservoirs through advanced techniques, such as horizontal drilling
and hydraulic fracturing. A hydraulic fracturing job on one well can require a few thousand tons of sand.
As a result, North American demand for proppant has increased rapidly. We believe that the market for
frac sand will continue to grow based on the expected long-term development of these plays.
The oil and natural gas proppant industry is based on businesses involved in the mining or
manufacturing of the materials used in the drilling and completion of oil and natural gas wells. Hydraulic
fracturing is the most widely used method for stimulating increased production from wells. The process
consists of pumping fluids, mixed with granular proppants, into the geologic formation at pressures
sufficient to create fractures in the rock. The fractures create channels through which the hydrocarbons
can flow more freely from the formation into the wellbore and then to the surface. Alternatives to frac sand
include ceramic beads and resin-coated silica, but they can be more costly to produce.
22
Raw frac sand is a naturally occurring mineral that is mined and processed. It is a high-purity quartz sand
with very durable and very round grains. It is a crush-resistant material produced for use by the petroleum
industry. It is used in the hydraulic fracturing process known as “fracking” to produce petroleum fluids,
such as oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids from rock units that lack adequate pore space for these
fluids to flow to a well.
While the specific extraction method utilized depends primarily on the geologic setting, most raw frac
sand is mined using conventional open-pit bench extraction methods. The composition, depth and
chemical purity of the sand also dictate the processing method and equipment utilized. After extraction,
the raw frac sand is washed, dried and sorted according to mesh size.
Most frac sand is shipped in bulk from the processing facility to customers by truck, rail or barge. For bulk
frac sand, transportation costs often represent a significant portion of the customer’s overall product cost.
As a result, facility location and logistics capabilities are among the most important considerations for
producers, distributors and customers.
We intend to use the significant mining industry experience of our management team to take advantage
of what we believe are favorable, long-term market dynamics as we execute our growth strategy, which
includes the development of our frac sand properties. We intend to remain focused on the frac sand
market as we believe it offers attractive long-term growth fundamentals.
Business Strategy
We believe the frac sand market offers attractive long-term growth fundamentals, and we intend to
position ourselves as a producer of quality frac sand located in the provinces of Alberta and Manitoba.
Over the past several years, the demand for frac sand in the United States and Canada has grown
significantly, primarily as a result of increased horizontal drilling, technological advances that allowed for
the development of many unconventional resource formations, increased proppant use per well and cost
advantages over other proppants such as resin coated sand and ceramic alternatives. In particular, the
demand for natural Tier 1 and Tier 2 frac sand, such as the type we intend to mine and sell from our
properties, is very strong among end users who are focused on the extraction of oil and liquids-rich
natural gas. We believe frac sand supply will continue to be constrained by a variety of factors, including
but not limited to:
the difficulty in finding reserves suitable for use as frac sand, which are largely limited to select areas of
·
the United States and Canada and which must meet the technical specifications of the American
Petroleum Institute (“API”);
challenges associated with locating contiguous reserves of frac sand sufficient to justify the capital
·
investment required to develop a mine and processing plant; and
· securing necessary permits required for operations.
We may selectively pursue favorable acquisitions in our areas of operation that we believe will allow us
to realize growth and operational efficiencies. We also intend to maintain financial strength and flexibility
to enable us to pursue our growth strategy, including acquisitions, organic growth and asset optimization
opportunities as they arise.
We are continuing the work needed to complete the NI 43-101 exploration reports on our three frac sand
properties. Thereafter, we intend to obtain a preliminary economic assessment report for the frac sand
properties. We have already engaged in discussions with logistics companies for the shipment of frac
sand from our properties and potential purchasers of frac sand. We intend to continue these discussions
and engage with additional third parties, particularly when our exploration reports are completed.
However, we are still in the testing stages with respect to our frac sand properties. There can be no
assurance that we will obtain or be able to perform contracts relating to the transport and sale of frac
sand on favorable terms or at all. As of the date of this prospectus, we do not believe that we have
sufficient working capital to make the royalty and other payments required on our properties, to conduct
preliminary exploration programs and to satisfy our cash requirements for the twelve months following
the date of this prospectus. We will need to obtain additional funds, either through equity offerings or
debt, to fund our general and administrative expenses, make the royalty payments required on our
properties and conduct exploration programs on our properties. Failure to obtain such additional
financing will result in the loss by us of our interests in our mineral properties. We have no agreements or
understandings with any person for additional financing.
Competitive Strengths
We believe that we are well positioned to successfully execute our business strategy. Our frac sand
properties are located near other projects have proven successful in developing frac sand projects. Our
properties are located relatively closely to many potential customers in the Canadian oil and natural gas
industry. As transportation is a large cost in the frac sand industry, location near our potential customer
base can allow us to achieve revenues at a lower cost than many of our competitors. In addition, we
believe that there is limited availability of Tier 1 and Tier 2 sand because the current Canadian industry
sources are focusing on the growing U.S. market demand. This provides an opportunity to a potential
producer focused on the Canadian oil and gas industry.
23
Although our directors have not directly engaged in the frac sand business specifically, our directors
have more than 70 years of combined mining industry experience. They have managed numerous
mining projects and businesses and successfully led acquisitions and exits in the industry.
Acquisition of Frac Sand Properties
182 Transaction
In December 2014, we purchased from 1824455 Alberta Ltd., or 182, one hundred percent of the right,
title and interest in and to:
the McClelland Lake Property, consisting of applications for Alberta Metallic and Industrial Minerals
·
Permits Nos. A93 140158005, A93 140158003 and A93 140158004;
the Tofield Property, which we refer to as our Alberta project, consisting of the application for Alberta
·
Metallic and Industrial Minerals Permits No. A93 140190601 and the application for Alberta Metallic and
Industrial Minerals Permit for certain lands in northern Alberta of approximately 35,000 hectares;
the Washow Peninsula Property, consisting of the applications for Manitoba quarry leases QL 2944, QL
·
2948, QL 2949, QL 2946, QL 2950, QL 2945, QL 2951 and QL 2947; and
·the technical information relating to the properties owned by 182.
In connection with the transaction, 182 agreed to noncompetition provisions in respect of property
located within a 20 km radius of the outer boundary of the area encompassed by the respective Alberta
Metallic and Industrial Minerals Permits and Quarry Leases, as the case may, of each of the McClelland
Lake Property and the Washow Peninsula Property without our express written consent. We also have
the right to acquire, for no additional consideration, 50% of 182’s interest in any properties subject to
Alberta Metallic and Industrial Minerals Permits that are located within the 20 km radius of the outer
boundary of the area encompassed by the respective Alberta Metallic and Industrial Minerals Permits of
the Alberta project.
The purchase price was CAD$2.75 million payable as follows:
at the closing, 7,833,334 shares of our common stock, approximately $43,000 in cash and the delivery
·
into escrow of an additional 7,833,334 shares of our common stock;
·approximately $43,000 cash payable within 45 days of the closing; and
·approximately $150,280 payable concurrently with the completion of a financing by us.
As part of the transaction, we agreed to grant to 182:
advance minimum royalties for the period starting one year after the closing date and continuing yearly
up to date of commencement of commercial production in an aggregate annual amount of
CAD$225,000. The advance minimum royalties paid prior to commencement of production will be
·
credited against future production royalties on each property on a dollar-for-dollar basis up to the
maximum rate of CAD$18,750 per quarter per property. In March 2016, 182 agreed to extend the
advance minimum royalty payments which were due in December 2015 and March 2016 until we have
raised additional funds or obtained financing; and
a production royalty equal to 2% of the actual proceeds we receive from the sale or other disposition of
·
minerals produced from the properties beginning on the date commercial production is achieved.
Under the escrow agreement related to the transaction, the escrowed shares will be released upon the
satisfaction of the following milestones:
24
2,350,000 of the escrowed shares upon the completion of a NI 43-101 resource report that identifies a
·
resource deposit which is sufficient to move forward with a “project,” which refers to development and
operation of a project designed to produce and sell product from the property;
2,350,000 of the escrowed shares upon completion of a preliminary economic assessment report which
·
demonstrates a financial return which is sufficient to move forward with a project; and
3,133,334 of the escrowed shares upon the award of all necessary permits that will allow for the mining
·
of product.
Notwithstanding the other conditions, all escrowed shares will be released to 182:
·upon the award of all necessary permits that will enable the mining of product;
·upon the sale, assignment or transfer of the properties, or any part thereof;
·upon the properties being pledged as collateral by us as security for indebtedness; or
·a change of control of us.
If we decide not to proceed with the development of the properties, all remaining escrowed shares will be
returned to us for cancellation, and we will re-convey the properties, with all improvements and technical
information, to 182, subject to:
·the properties being free and clear from all liens, encumbrances, security interests and claims;
·all permits, concessions and agreements in respect of the properties being in good standing;
all payments and other governmental or third party charges owing in respect of the properties having
·
been paid in full and satisfied for a minimum period of 120 days following the re-conveyance;
all work requirements or commitments in respect of the properties having been satisfied for a minimum
·
period of one year following the re-conveyance; and
the conditions existing on or related to the properties and our ownership and operations of the properties
having been in compliance with any material laws (including without limitation any environmental laws),
·
if we have not caused or permitted any material damage to the properties or material impairment to the
health, safety or enjoyment of any person at or on, or in the general vicinity of, the properties.
If these conditions are not met, 182 will not be obligated to accept the re-conveyance of the properties,
and the escrow agent will deliver to 182 all of the escrowed shares then still in escrow. In addition, if we
default on our obligation to pay the advance minimum royalty, we may re-convey the properties to 182,
subject to the same conditions, and the royalty agreement will be terminated. 182 granted an irrevocable
proxy to us related to the escrowed shares to vote the escrowed shares until the shares are released
from escrow.
We and 182 are cooperating in the proceedings to obtain governmental approvals for the permits and
leases for the frac sand properties. We are not yet in commercial production and do not have any
customer contracts, and there can be no assurance that we will obtain customer contracts on favorable
terms or at all.
The Projects
Our frac sand properties are our material properties and where we currently intend to spend most of our
efforts and resources. Members of our management team have visited the McClelland and Alberta
properties.
The McClelland property lies within a late Pleistocene delta referred to as the Athabasca Braid Delta, a
precursor of the modern Peace-Athabasca Delta. During the formation of the Athabasca Braid Delta,
quartzose sands of the McMurray Formation and pre-existing glacial sediments were intensively
reworked, which appears to have concentrated the more rounded quartz grains is some areas in the
vicinity of the McClelland property. The McClelland property is located 60 kilometers north of Fort
McMurray and accessible by road as well as being near power and water supply, although specific
sources of power and water have not get been identified. The McClelland property is strategically
located near the Alberta Basins, which we believe gives us a competitive advantage to suppliers that are
further away. We expect the McClelland property to enable us to produce and sell frac sand to the
Canadian oil and gas companies with Canadian dollars. The McClelland property is 83,778 acres. The
property has undergone initial sampling and testing.
The Alberta Project is strategically located in the heart of three Alberta Basins, which could provide a
competitive advantage of being within trucking distance to the well-head, which could enable us to sell
any sand directly from the mine site with substantially reduced costs. The property is accessible by both
rail and road as it sits on top of infrastructure. Faster delivery, no need for long distance rail and reduced
weather or congestion delays could result in our being able to sell the sand on favorable terms and
potentially favorable margins compared to competitors.  The Alberta Project is also a large land position
at 87,000 acres. Sampling and further land acquisition is currently underway.
25
The Washow property is located in Manitoba, north of Winnipeg. The property is located approximately
200 kilometers north of Winnipeg on the Washow Peninsula, a major premontory on the eastern shore of
Lake Winnipeg. The property lies approximately 125 kilometers from railhead at Arborg, with access to
the property via paved Highways 68 and 8 and gravel Highway 234 (75 km). Electricity is available via
provincial grid serving nearby communities.
Historical mapping indicates that the Winnipeg Formation ranges between 30 and 35 meters in thickness
across the Washow Peninsula. The Ordovician-aged Winnipeg Formation is subdivided into the lower
Black Island Member and the upper Ice-Box Member. The Black Island Member consists of a white to
grey, poorly consolidated to friable, medium-grained, quartzose sandstone, with characteristically well
rounded quartz grains. The Black Island Member is commonly overlain by the Ice-Box Member, which
consists mainly of greenish, waxy shales interbedded with thin, gray sandstone and occasional siltstone.
The Washow property is less than 100 kilometers from rail and lies in an area known for the only
“Northern White” sand in Canada, which is Tier 1 sand. The Washow property is strategically located
near the Alberta basins which could allow us to access that market at a reduced cost compared to many
competitors as it is located approximately half the distance to the Alberta Basins than the U.S. suppliers
in Wisconsin.  Our current land position at Washow is 1,000 acres.
Each of the frac sand properties is without known reserves. As of the date of this prospectus, there has
only been limited, initial sampling of the frac sand properties. As a result, there is no equipment or
infrastructure on the properties, and we have not assessed the properties’ access to water or power or
transportation.
We initially plan to obtain NI 43-101 reports on the frac sand properties, beginning with the McClelland
property. We anticipate that total expenditures to obtain the reports will cost approximately $2.1 million.
We have incurred the following expenses with respect to the frac sand properties as of March 31, 2016:
Sampling
Fieldwork
Engineering Services-Land Investigations
Engineering Services-Phase 1
Engineering Services-Land Access and
Desktop Geological Study
Balance - September 30, 2015
Washow 
Property
General 
  Alberta 
 McLelland 
Property
Exploration
Property
  $24,123   $ 2,902   $ 1,678
 $ 25,667
    743
    2,381     9,979
   4,232
   -
    17,803     -
   198,636     157,084    -
-
    -
57,564
119,171    -
-
Total
$54,370  
    17,336  
    17,803  
    355,719
176,735
$ 286,099   $318,924  $ 5,283   $ 11,657
$621,963
We have engaged Morton Jagodich, a civil, structural and geotechnical engineering firm based in
Calgary, to conduct the initial geological study and field work and to prepare the 43-101 reports for the
frac sand properties. Any scope of work, budgets, commencement and timing of the work for the reports
will depend on our financial condition. As a result, we do not have final, detailed plans to conduct
exploration on the property. All of our properties are without known reserves and our proposed programs
are exploratory in nature.
As of the date of this prospectus, we do not believe that we have sufficient working capital to make the
royalty and other payments required on our properties, to conduct preliminary exploration programs and
to satisfy our cash requirements for the twelve months following the date of this prospectus. We will need
to obtain additional funds, either through equity offerings or debt, to fund our general and administrative
expenses, make the royalty payments required on our properties and conduct exploration programs on
our properties. Failure to obtain such additional financing will result in the loss by us of our interests in
our mineral properties. We have no agreements or understandings with any person for additional
financing.
Permits
In order to conduct our frac sand operations, we are required to obtain permits from various local, state
and federal government agencies. The various permits may include permits for mining, construction, air
quality, water discharge and quality, noise, dust and reclamation. Prior to receiving these permits, we
must comply with the regulatory requirements imposed by the issuing governmental authority. In some
cases, we also must have certain plans pre-approved, such as site reclamation plans, prior to obtaining
the required permits. We have not yet received any permits from governmental agencies for the three frac
sand projects. A decision by a governmental agency to deny or delay issuing a new or renewed permit or
approval, or to revoke or substantially modify an existing permit or approval, could have a material
adverse effect on our ability to continue operations at the affected facility. Expansion of our existing
operations also is predicated upon securing the necessary environmental and other permits and
approvals.
Alberta
In Alberta, the Coal and Mineral Development Unit of the Department of Energy issues and administers
agreements relating to exploration and production of Alberta-owned, or Crown, metallic and industrial
minerals. Since our projects are comprised of both Crown and private minerals, we intend to both obtain
Metallic and Industrial Mineral Permits for areas of Crown-retained mineral rights and to negotiate
exploration access in areas of private mineral rights.
In Alberta, a Metallic and Industrial Mineral Permit grants the exclusive right to explore for Alberta-owned
metallic and industrial minerals in a specified location. A permit can be held for up to 14 years, consisting
of seven two-year assessment periods, and is not renewable. While there is no annual rent, permit
holders are required to conduct exploration work and must report on the work every two years. During
each two-year period, the following needs to be spent assessing the property for the minerals in the
application:
· $5 per hectare during the first assessment period;
·$10 per hectare during the second and third assessment periods; and
· $15 per hectare during the assessment periods thereafter.
Approval must be obtained if an exploration project involves environmental disturbance, such as drilling,
trenching or bulk sampling. A licensee does not need to hold the mineral rights for an area to apply for an
Exploration Approval. Project approval is through the Alberta Environment and Parks. If an application
has been completed and the appropriate field staff have copies of the program, approval can usually be
obtained in about 10 working days. After receiving exploration approval, the exploration company may
conduct the approved activity. However, project modifications must be reviewed and approved by a
designated field officer. A final report must be submitted to Alberta’s Environment and Parks ministry
within 60 days following completion of the exploration program.
If exploration results are positive after two or more years of holding a metallic and industrial minerals
permit, the holder may apply to convert all or part of a permit to a lease. The lease grants the exclusive
right to develop and mine Alberta-owned metallic and industrial minerals in a specified location. The
term of a lease is 15 years and may be renewed. Leases provide for annual rent and royalty payments.
If the frac sand resource occurs as a surface sand deposit on Crown mineral lands, as we believe to be
likely in some areas, a Surface Material Lease is required prior to resource development. Leases are
issued by Alberta Sustainable Resource Development and are divided into two size categories: up to 80
acres and greater than 80 acres. All lease applications must be accompanied by a conservation and
reclamation plan describing how the applicant proposes to develop the resource and resolve any related
environmental and land-use issues. Additionally, leases larger than 80 acres are subject to a public
advertisement period and a more rigorous environmental assessment process.
Manitoba
In Manitoba tenure for the mining of industrial silica is currently licensed through the Quarry Lease
disposition process described in the Manitoba Mines and Minerals Act. The holder of a Manitoba mineral
exploration license from Manitoba Mineral Resources has exclusive right to explore for Crown minerals
within the boundaries of the area covered by the license. Prior to conducting exploration activities, a
Crown Lands Work Permit must be obtained from Manitoba Conservation and Water Stewardship.
Depending on the nature of the work, other permits may be required, such as for tree removal and
drilling.
A quarry lease conveys to the lessee, for the term of the lease, the exclusive right to the Crown quarry
minerals, such as frac sand, specified in the lease that are found on or under the land covered by the
lease and that are the property of the Crown; and subject to applicable law, mineral access rights in
respect of the Crown quarry minerals. A quarry lease has a term of 10 years and may be renewable for
further terms of 10 years where the lessee furnishes satisfactory evidence showing that during the
previous term of the lease the lessee complied with the Manitoba Mines and Minerals Act and the terms
and conditions of the lease. The quarry lease is subject to regulatory royalty rates, currently CAN$0.50
per tonne for silica sand with greater than 95% silica content, and a rehabilitation levy of CAN$0.12 per
tonne. Where, during the term of a quarry lease, a lessee does not commence mining or ceases to mine,
renewal of the lease, including the term of a renewal, is at the discretion of the minister. Quarry leases
are subject to an annual rental fee of CAN$27 per hectare.
Competition
The frac sand market is a highly competitive market that is comprised of a small number of large, national
producers and a larger number of small, regional or local producers. Competition in the frac sand
industry has increased in recent years due to favorable pricing and demand trends, and we expect
competition to continue to increase if those trends continue. Suppliers compete based on price,
consistency and quality of product, site location, distribution capability, customer service, reliability of
supply, breadth of product offering and technical support. We believe the leading producers of frac sand
include Emerge Energy Services LP, Hi-Crush Partners LP, Unimin Corporation, Fairmount Minerals,
Ltd. and U.S. Silica Holdings, Inc. In recent years there has also been an increase in the number of small
producers servicing the frac sand market. Due to increased demand, existing or new frac sand producers
could expand their frac sand production capacity, thereby increasing competition.
Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety Regulations
We will be subject to stringent and complex Canadian laws and regulations governing the discharge of
materials into the environment or otherwise relating to protection of worker health, safety and the
environment. These regulations include compliance obligations for air emissions, water quality,
wastewater discharges and solid and hazardous waste disposal, as well as regulations designed for the
protection of worker health and safety and threatened or endangered species. Compliance with these
environmental laws and regulations may expose us to significant costs and liabilities and cause us to
incur significant capital expenditures in our operations.
We may be obligated to obtain permits or approvals in our operations from various federal, state and
local authorities. These permits and approvals can be denied or delayed, which may cause us to delay
or interrupt our operations and limit our growth and revenue. Moreover, failure to comply with these laws
and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, imposition of
remedial obligations, and the issuance of injunctions delaying or prohibiting operations. Private parties
may also have the right to pursue legal actions to enforce compliance as well as to seek damages for
non-compliance with environmental laws and regulations or for personal injury or property damage.
There is no assurance that this degree of compliance will continue in the future. In addition, the clear
trend in environmental regulation is to place more restrictions on activities that may affect the
environment, and thus, any changes in, or more stringent enforcement of, these laws and regulations that
result in more stringent and costly pollution control equipment, waste handling, storage, transport,
disposal or remediation requirements could have a material adverse effect on our operations and
financial position.
26
Gold and Silver Projects
Our gold and silver property portfolio is comprised of four projects in Nevada. Since our acquisition of the
frac sand properties, we have, and we may continue to, pursue dispositions or joint venture transactions
for our gold and silver properties, but we do not intend to expend substantial time or resources on these
projects at the current time. We either sold, terminated or leased six gold and silver projects in 2015 and
2016.
Our other gold and silver projects consist of the following, each of which consists of unpatented mining
claims we acquired through quitclaim deeds in connection with the Dome Copper transaction in 2006:
the Pyramid Mine, a high-grade silver, gold, lead and zinc project located in Churchill County, Nevada.
·
We entered into an exploration and mining lease with options to purchase agreement for the project in
January 2016;
27
Koegel Hills, a copper and gold project located in Mineral County, Nevada. Our exploration expenses
·
for Koegel Hills for the three months ended March 31, 2016 and at December 31, 2015 were $0 and
$11,755, respectively;
the Gold Star Property, consisting of thirteen unpatented mining claims located in Mineral County,
·
Nevada, which is subject to a letter of intent as of June 2015 for an earn-in and option to purchase by
another company; and
Four Mile Basin, a gold project located in Nye County, Nevada. We entered into an Exploration and
·
Option to Purchase Agreement for the project in February 2013. During February 2015, we were given
notice that the agreement would be terminated.
We expensed a total of $32,357 and $154,450 for exploration for the years ended December 31, 2015
and 2014 respectively. In addition, we regularly make filings with the counties in which our claims are
located, demonstrating our intent to hold the claims or sites and/or notifying the authorities when labor or
improvements were performed or made on for the mining claims. We also make regular filings with and
pay fees to the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, or the BLM, relating to its
mining claims. For example, in 2015, we paid $12,090 in claim maintenance fees to the BLM for our
properties in Nevada.
Muskox Data Inventory
In January 2014, we acquired the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining Corporation. The Muskox
Data consists of several years’ worth of work on the Ni-Cu-Pd-Pt bearing Muskox Layered Intrusion in
Nunavut, Canada. The Muskox Intrusion was first worked on in the 1960’s and 1970’s by the Geological
Survey of Canada and by Inco Mining. Prize Mining began working on the project in 1998 and spent over
$18 million on the project through 2004. In addition, Prize Mining accumulated data from its joint venture
partners Anglo American and Silvermet Mining in the 2000’s valued at roughly $10 million.
The purchase price for the Muskox Data was $1 million, paid by the issuance of 3,703,334 shares of our
common stock. In addition, we agreed to pay an additional $50,000 in cash in satisfaction of certain
potential Canadian tax obligations incurred by Prize Mining as a result of the transaction, which were
later determined to be not applicable. Feisal Somji, our Chairman of the Board, is CEO and a director
and shareholder of Prize Mining.
The Muskox intrusion is believed to be one of the most promising targets for platinum group elements.
We believe demand for the Muskox Data will be significant as we believe mining companies direct their
attention to the Muskox intrusion. We are currently analyzing and preparing the data for possible sale.
Employees
As of August 1, 2016, we had three employees of which two are our officers. None of our employees are
represented by a labor union, and we consider current employee relations to be good.
Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety Regulations
We will be subject to stringent and complex Canadian laws and regulations governing the discharge of
materials into the environment or otherwise relating to protection of worker health, safety and the
environment. These regulations include compliance obligations for air emissions, water quality,
wastewater discharges and solid and hazardous waste disposal, as well as regulations designed for the
protection of worker health and safety and threatened or endangered species. Compliance with these
environmental laws and regulations may expose us to significant costs and liabilities and cause us to
incur significant capital expenditures in our operations.
We may be obligated to obtain permits or approvals in our operations from various federal, state and
local authorities. These permits and approvals can be denied or delayed, which may cause us to delay
or interrupt our operations and limit our growth and revenue. Moreover, failure to comply with these laws
and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, imposition of
remedial obligations, and the issuance of injunctions delaying or prohibiting operations. Private parties
may also have the right to pursue legal actions to enforce compliance as well as to seek damages for
non-compliance with environmental laws and regulations or for personal injury or property damage.
There is no assurance that this degree of compliance will continue in the future. In addition, the clear
trend in environmental regulation is to place more restrictions on activities that may affect the
environment, and thus, any changes in, or more stringent enforcement of, these laws and regulations that
result in more stringent and costly pollution control equipment, waste handling, storage, transport,
disposal or remediation requirements could have a material adverse effect on our operations and
financial position.
28
Legal Proceedings
We are not currently a party to any material legal proceedings. We may become from time to time
involved in legal proceedings in the ordinary course of business. We may not be successful in defending
these or other claims. Regardless of the outcome, litigation can result in substantial expense and could
divert the efforts of our management.
29
MANAGEMENT
Executive Officers and Directors
The following table sets forth certain information regarding our executive officers and directors as of the
date of this prospectus.
Name
Marc J. Andrews
Kim Neal
Lane Griffin
Thomas (Toby) K. Mancuso 56  Director
Age Position
 46  President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 54  Vice President - Finance
 66  Vice President – Exploration, Secretary
Feisal Somji
47  Director, Chairman of the Board
Marc J. Andrews was appointed as a President, Chief Executive Officer and Director in November
2011. Mr. Andrews brings over 20 years of business experience, highlighted by his successful track
record in sales, management, and finance and has been with us since November 2011. He started his
career as a sales executive in the high tech field where he was quickly promoted to operate an entire
division of a Fortune 1000 company. Looking to expand his managerial and financial experience, he
ventured out into company start-ups where he was called upon to raise millions of dollars and manage a
successful brick-and-mortar company; after which he started his own tech business that later sold to a
large corporation. Mr. Andrews then focused his efforts on the metals and mining industry where he has
been intimately involved with over 30 mining companies, helping them raise millions of dollars in capital
while increasing shareholder value through direct interface with institutional, retail, and high net worth
investors throughout the United States. From 2006 to 2010, Mr. Andrews worked in sales management
for Peter Imlay & Associates, and from 2010 through 2011, worked as a consultant to individual mining
and exploration companies. Mr. Andrews received a B.S. in Finance specializing in International
Finance along with minors in Accounting and French at Clemson University. We believe Mr. Andrews’
qualifications to serve on our board of directors includes prior service to our company as its President,
Chief Executive Officer and Director and his more than twenty years of diversified business and
management experience, including significant experience in the mining industry, and his intimate
knowledge of our company are critical to the oversight of our strategic initiatives and the operations.
Kim Neal was appointed to Vice President of Finance and the Company’s principal financial officer in
September 2012. Ms. Neal brings more than 30 years of experience in accounting including 23 years in
the gold mining industry. From 2009 to 2012, Ms. Neal was Assistant Controller for Jipangu
International’s Florida Canyon Mining and was promoted to Corporate Controller during that time. From
2006 to 2009, Ms. Neal was the Office Manager for Consolidated Goldfields Corporation and continued
to work on a part time basis for us during the period 2009 to 2012. Prior to 2006, Ms. Neal worked for
several mining companies including Meridian Gold’s Royal Mountain King Mine, Western Goldfields
Inc.’s Mesquite Mine and Pegasus Gold/Apollo Gold. Ms. Neal has been involved in virtually every
aspect of finance in the minerals industry. She also offers substantial expertise in dealing with complex
corporate auditing and compliance issues, as well as her superior organizational, management and
communication skills.
Lane Griffin has served as our Vice President of Exploration since April 2009 and Secretary since
February 2011. Mr. Griffin was also a Director from April 2009 until August 2011. Mr. Griffin has been
active in the natural resource business for over 30 years. Beginning in uranium exploration, he worked
for Utah Power and Light, and Mobil Oil throughout the western United States. As president and founder
of Diversified Development Company, he managed a successful underground gold mine in the North
Cascades of Washington State for over 20 years. Mr. Griffin has been President, CEO and a director of
Idaho North Resources Corp., an exploration stage mining company, since March 2015. Mr. Griffin is the
owner of several claim blocks in prospective areas of Nevada, and has experience in precious metals
exploration throughout the Great Basin. Mr. Griffin is a licensed geologist in the state of Washington, a
registered member of the Society of Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration, and is a 'Qualified Person'
according to the definition of Canadian NI 43-101 reports. He was an officer for 4 years in the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and received a B.S. degree in geology from Washington State University.
30
Thomas (Toby) K. Mancuso has served as a Director since 2006 and as Managing Director since May
2011. Mr. Mancuso served as our President and Chief Executive Officer from May 2006 to November
2008, Vice President – Corporate Development from November 2008 to March 2010 and Vice President
– Operations from March 2010 to May 2011. Mr. Mancuso has held the positions of President and CEO
of Western Goldfields Inc. from March 2000 to May 2006 and Vice President of Project Development for
Teras Resources Inc. from March 2010 to March 2014. He also served as Senior Geologist for Freeport
McMoRan Gold Company and Chief Geologist for Kennecott Corporation where he specialized in
advancing projects from exploration to production, including mine planning, start-up and supervision of
the Rawhide Mine near Fallon, Nevada and Flambeau Mine in Ladysmith, Wisconsin. Mr. Mancuso also
operates his own consulting company, Mancuso Resource Development Services, where he specializes
in the exploration and development of a variety of commodities, including sand and gravel projects in the
United States and Mexico. Mr. Mancuso has been a member of the board of directors of Idaho North
Resources Corp. since June 2014 and Walker Lane Exploration, Inc. since August 2014. He received
his Masters of Science in Geology from the Idaho School of Mines at the University of Idaho. Mr.
Mancuso is a well-respected mine development geologist with more than 35 years of experience in
exploration, operations and management of various mining companies and brings substantial
governance experience from his position as a director with several other companies involved in the
mining industry. We believe Mr. Mancuso’s extensive industry, management and director expertise
qualify him to serve on the board of directors.
Feisal Somji has served as a Director and Chairman of the Board since March 2013. Mr. Somji has over
20 years of experience in mineral exploration and development ranging from grassroots exploration to
mine development. Mr. Somji has acted as an officer and director of several public companies involved
in diamond, gold, silver, copper, base metal and platinum assets in Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Philippines,
Peru, Colombia and Africa. Mr. Somji’s last company was recently sold for $1.3 billion. He has served as
a director of Rokmaster Resources Corp. since 2012 and as CEO of Prize Mining Corporation since July
2011 and as director from February 2003 to present. Mr. Somji previously served as President and CEO
of Mexican Silver Mines Ltd. from April 2004 to July 2009 when it merged with Rio Alto Mining Limited;
as President, CEO and a director of Rio Alto Mining Limited from July 2009 to February 2011; as CEO
and Director of Philippine Metals Inc. from March 2011 to December 2012; and as Director of Altair Gold
Inc. from July 2013 to December 2014. Mr. Somji is Chairman of the Board and has been an acting
Managing Director since February 1, 2015. Due to his long mineral exploration and development
industry career and significant operational and international experience, we believe that Mr. Somji
provides valuable insight to our board of directors on our exploration, operations and management.
Board of Directors
Board Composition and Election of Directors
We operate under the direction of our board of directors. Our board of directors is responsible for the
management of our business and affairs. Our articles of incorporation provide that the number of
directors may be determined pursuant to our bylaws, which provide that such number may be determined
from time to time by our board of directors. Our directors hold office until their successors have been
elected and qualified or until their earlier death, resignation or removal. There are no family relationships
among any of our directors or executive officers. Our board of directors is currently composed of three
members.
The board of directors has the authority to create or terminate committees to assist it with its duties. Due
to the small size of the board of directors and our limited operations, currently, there are no standing
committees or committee charters. However, the full board of directors reviews, discusses and acts on
matters that would otherwise be the subject of typical committee meetings. As our company evolves, the
Board may use working committees with functional responsibility in areas where committee oversight is
deemed necessary. The Board will adopt charters for each committee it creates. Each committee may
have the authority to hire, at Company expense, independent legal, financial, or other consultants as it
may deem necessary, without consulting or obtaining the approval of any Company officer in advance.
Possible committees may include:
·Audit Committee
·Compensation Committee
·Nominating Committee
·Corporate Governance Committee
31
Independent Directors
We do not have any independent directors, as defined by the listing requirements of The Nasdaq Stock
Market. The Nasdaq independence definition includes a series of objective tests, such as that the
director is not, and has not been for at least three years, one of our employees and that neither the
director, nor any of his family members has engaged in various types of business dealings with us and
that no relationships exist which, in the opinion of our board of directors, would interfere with the exercise
of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director.
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
Due to the small number of employees, we do not have a formal written code of business conduct and
ethics that applies to our senior management and financial employees.
Executive Compensation
Summary Compensation Table for Fiscal Year 2014
The following table sets forth the total compensation awarded to, earned by, or paid to Mr. Andrews,
referred to as our “named executive officer,” during the year ended December 31, 2015.
Name and Principal Position
Marc J. Andrews
President and Chief Executive Officer
Year Salary ($) 
 2015 $120,000 (1) $120,000(1)
Total ($)
(1)Includes $45,000 of accrued but unpaid salary.
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End 2015
The following table sets forth information regarding unexercised options held by our named executive
officer as of December 31, 2015.
Name
Number of Securities
Underlying
Unexercised Options
 
(#)
Number of Securities
Underlying
Unexercised Options
 
(#)
Exercisable
Unexercisable
Option
Exercise Price
  
($)
Option
  
Expiration Date
Marc J. Andrews   83,334
   83,334
 
 
   83,334
(1)  
(2)  
(3)
-
-
-
$ 1.05
  $ 0.66
  $ 0.09
5/24/2017
  11/15/2017
  12/22/2024
(1)
(2)
(3)
This award fully vested on May 24, 2012.
This award fully vested on November 15, 2012.
This award fully vested on December 22, 2014.
Employment Agreement
We entered into an employment agreement with Mr. Andrews in November 2011. The agreement was for
a three year term and is automatically extended for an additional twelve months and on each anniversary
date of this Agreement unless written notice of cancellation is provided by either party 60 days prior to
the anniversary date.
The agreement provides for a minimum annual base salary of $96,000, to be reviewed annually utilizing
budget performance review standards. If our financial performance is “better than budget”, the increase in
base salary payable to Mr. Andrews will not be less than 10% of the annual salary. If our financial
performance is “worse than budget”, the amount of the increase in base salary will be at the discretion of
the board of directors. The agreement provides that Mr. Andrews will be entitled to receive and
participate in health, insurance and retirement programs dental, long-term disability and life insurance
programs if such are made available by us to other employees.
32
The agreement also provided for a grant of options to purchase 83,334 shares of our common stock that
vest in the first 6 months of employment, priced at market price on the day of vesting, and a grant of
options to purchase 83,334 shares of our common stock to be granted on the one year anniversary date
of employment at market price on that day. The agreement also provided for an incentive bonus,
consisting of 333,334 shares of our common stock to be issued once the price of our shares of common
stock reached $4.20 and holds for a period of 20 consecutive trading days and 333,334 shares of our
common stock once the price of our shares of common stock reached $6.30 and holds for a period of 20
consecutive trading days. In the event our company is sold or merges with another company and the
value reaches above the deemed price, then the 666,668 shares will be distributed to Mr. Andrews. Our
board of directors, at their discretion, may determine that the shares have been earned prior to reaching
the above share price objectives and can issue them to Mr. Andrews at any time.
If a change in control occurs, then a bonus will automatically become payable and not be less than 100%
of Mr. Andrews’ annual salary. In addition, any and all shares of common stock, options or other forms of
securities issued by us and beneficially owned by Mr. Andrews that are unvested, restricted or subject to
any similar restriction that would otherwise require continued ownership to be vested will vest
automatically without further action by the board of directors.
Upon Mr. Andrews’ death or disability, all stock options granted to him will immediately vest and be
exercisable. Upon Mr. Andrews’ death, his heirs will be entitled to receive a payment equal to six
months’ salary, with a gross up for all federal and state taxes.
If Mr. Andrews’ employment is terminated without cause, as defined under the agreement, any stock
options granted but not vested will be deemed to have immediately vested, and we will be obligated to
pay him 24 months’ salary, together with a payment equal to 100% of the greater of any target bonus or
bonus actually earned for each year in such 24 month period and any other compensation which he is
entitled to receive. Substantially similar health related benefits as we have provided will also continue for
a period of 12 months. All payments will be subject to a gross-up for all federal and state taxes and
federal excise taxes, or parachute taxes. In the event of a change of control, as defined under the
agreement, Mr. Andrews’ employment will be deemed to have been terminated without cause
We may terminate Mr. Andrews’ employment for cause without notice or payment.
Amended 2013 Stock Option and Stock Bonus Plan
General
The purpose of the plan is to encourage stock ownership by our employees, consultants, officers and
directors and our controlled, affiliated and subsidiary entities so that they may acquire or increase their
proprietary interest in us. The plan is intended to facilitate our efforts to:
induce qualified persons to become our employees, officers and directors (whether or not they are
·
employees) and consultants;
·compensate employees, officers, directors and consultants for services to us; and
encourage such persons to remain in our employ or association and to put forth maximum efforts for our
·
success.
Administration
The plan is administered by a committee appointed by the board of directors to administer, and if no
committee has been appointed, the plan will be administered by the board of directors. The committee
has the authority in its discretion to administer the plan and to exercise all the powers and authorities
either specifically conferred under the plan or necessary or advisable in the administration of the plan,
including the authority:
33
· to grant options and bonuses;
·to determine the vesting schedule and other restrictions, if any, relating to options and nonuses;
·to determine the purchase price of the shares of common stock covered by each option;
to determine the persons to whom, and the time or times at which, options and bonuses shall be
·
granted;
·to determine the number of shares to be covered by each option or bonus;
· to determine fair market value per share;
· to interpret the plan; to prescribe;
·to amend and rescind rules and regulations relating to the plan;
to determine the terms and provisions of the option agreements (which need not be identical) entered
·
into in connection with options granted under the plan; and
·to make all other determinations deemed necessary or advisable for the administration of the plan.
Eligibility
Options and bonuses may be granted to our employees (including officers), consultants and directors,
whether or not they are employees.
Shares Subject to the Plan
The aggregate number of shares of our common stock as to which options and bonuses may be granted
from time to time under the plan shall not exceed 3,333,334, subject to adjustment as provided in the
plan. If any option outstanding under the plan for any reason expires or is terminated without having
been exercised in full, or if any bonus granted is forfeited because of vesting or other restrictions
imposed at the time of grant, the shares of our common stock allocable to the unexercised portion of the
option or the forfeited portion of the bonus will become available for subsequent grants of options and
bonuses under the plan.
Stock Options
The plan provides for the award of non-qualified and incentive stock options. Only employees are
entitled to receive incentive stock options. The aggregate fair market value, determined as of the date of
grant, of the shares of our common stock with respect to which incentive stock options granted under this
and any other plan of ours are exercisable for the first time by a recipient during any calendar year may
not exceed the amount set forth in Section 422(d) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Option Agreements
Each option granted pursuant to the plan must be evidenced by a written option agreement between us
and the recipient, which shall comply with and be subject to the following terms and conditions:
·the number of shares of our common stock covered by the option;
the portion, if any, of the option which constitutes an incentive stock option and non-qualified stock
·
option;
·the option price, which shall be determined by the committee subject only to the following restrictions:
34
each option agreement shall state the option price, which, except as otherwise provided below, may not
·
be less than 100% of the fair market value per share on the date of grant;
any incentive stock option granted under the plan to a person owning more than ten percent of the total
·
combined voting power of the our common stock shall be at a price of no less than 110% of the fair
market value per share on the date of grant; and
the date on which the committee adopts a resolution expressly granting an option shall be considered
·
the day on which such option is granted, unless a future date is specified in the resolution.
the period during and times at which the option shall be exercisable, in accordance with the following
·
limitations:
the date on which the committee adopts a resolution expressly granting an option shall be considered
the day on which such option is granted, unless a future date is specified in the resolution, although the
·
grant shall not be effective until the recipient has executed an option agreement with respect to such
option;
·the exercise period of any option shall not exceed ten years from the date of grant of the option;
incentive stock options granted to a person owning more than ten percent of the total combined voting
·
power of the our common stock will be for no more than five years;
the committee has the authority to accelerate or extend the exercisability of any outstanding option at
·
such time and under such circumstances as it, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate;
in any event, no exercise period may be so extended to increase the term of the option beyond ten years
·
from the date of the grant; and
the exercise period will be subject to earlier termination as provided in plan, and, furthermore, will be
·
terminated upon surrender of the option by the holder thereof if we authorized the surrender authorized
in advance; and
· other provisions in accordance with the plan.
Termination
Unless otherwise provided in the option agreement, if the recipient ceases to be an employee, officer,
director or consultant other than by reason of death, disability or retirement, all options granted to the
recipient but not then exercised will terminate three months following the date the recipient ceased to be
an employee, officer, director or consultant. The options will terminate upon the date of termination of
employment or other relationship if discharged the recipient is for cause.
Nothing in the plan or in any option or bonus granted under the plan confers upon an individual any right
to continue in the employ of or other relationship with us or interferes in any way with our right to
terminate employment or other relationship with the individual.
Unless otherwise provided in an option agreement, if a recipient shall die while an employee, officer,
director or consultant, or within ninety days after the termination of the recipient as an employee, officer,
director or consultant other than for cause, or if the recipient’s relationship with us terminates by reason
of disability or retirement, all outstanding options then granted to the recipient, whether or not otherwise
exercisable, may be exercised by the recipient or by the recipient’s estate or by a person who acquired
the right to exercise such options by bequest or inheritance or otherwise by reason of the death or
disability, at any time within one year after the date of death, disability or retirement of the recipient.
However, incentive stock options must be exercised within three months in the case of retirement.
Transferability
Options granted under the plan are not transferable other than by will or by the laws of descent and
distribution or pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order. Options may be exercised during the
lifetime of the recipient only by the recipient and thereafter only by his or her legal representative.
35
Effect of Certain Changes
If there is any change in the number of shares of outstanding our common stock through the declaration
of stock dividends, or through a recapitalization resulting in stock splits or combinations or exchanges of
such shares, the number of shares of our common stock available for options and the number of such
shares covered by outstanding options, and the exercise price per share of the outstanding options, shall
be proportionately adjusted by the committee to reflect any increase or decrease in the number of issued
shares of our common stock. Any fractional shares resulting from such adjustment will be eliminated.
In the event of the proposed dissolution or liquidation of us, or any corporate separation or division,
including, but not limited to, split-up, splitoff or spin-off, or a merger or consolidation with another
corporation, the committee may provide that the holder of each option then exercisable shall have the
right to exercise the option at its then current option price solely for the kind and amount of shares of
stock and other securities, property, cash or any combination thereof receivable upon the dissolution,
liquidation, corporate separation or division, or merger or consolidation by a holder of the number of
shares of our common stock for which such option might have been exercised immediately prior to such
dissolution, liquidation, corporate separation or division, or merger or consolidation. In the alternative, the
committee may provide that each option granted under the plan will terminate as of a date fixed by the
committee upon notice in accordance with the plan.
If we are the surviving corporation in a merger or consolidation and shares of our common stock are not
converted into or exchanged for stock, securities of any other corporation, cash or any other thing of
value, the preceding paragraph does not apply. However, in case of any consolidation or merger with
another corporation in which we are the surviving corporation and in which there is a reclassification or
change of the shares of our common stock, the committee may provide that the holder of each option
then exercisable shall have the right to exercise such option solely for the kind and amount of shares of
stock and other securities, property, cash or any combination thereof receivable upon the reclassification,
change, consolidation or merger by the holder of the number of shares of our common stock for which
such option might have been exercised.
No Rights as Shareholder
Neither a recipient of an option nor such recipient’s legal representative, heir, legatee or distributee, will
be deemed to be the holder of, or to have any rights of a holder with respect to, any shares subject to
such option until after the option is exercised and the shares are issued. No adjustment shall be made for
dividends or distributions or other rights for which the record date is prior to the date such stock certificate
is issued.
Stock Bonuses
In addition to, or in lieu of, the grant of an option, the committee may grant common stock bonuses
pursuant to the provisions of this plan. At the time of grant of a bonus, the committee may impose a
vesting period of up to ten years, and such other restrictions which it deems appropriate. Unless
otherwise directed by the committee at the time of grant of a bonus, the recipient will be considered a
shareholder as to the bonus shares which have vested in the grantee at any time regardless of any
forfeiture provisions which have not yet arisen.
Term of Plan
Options and bonuses may be granted under the plan from time to time within a period of ten years from
the date the plan was adopted.
Amendment and Termination of the Plan
The board of directors may at any time, without further action by the shareholders, amend the plan or any
bonus or option granted hereunder in such respects as it may consider advisable, including to ensure
that bonuses and options comply with any provisions respecting stock issuances or stock options in the
income tax and other laws in force in any country or jurisdiction of which any bonus or option holders
may from time to time be a resident or citizen. The board of directors may at any time without action by
shareholders terminate the plan.
36
Any amendment that would:
materially increase the number of securities issuable under the plan to persons who are subject to
·
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act; or
grant eligibility to a class of persons who are subject to Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act and are not
·
included within the terms of the plan prior to the amendment; or
materially increase the benefits accruing to persons who are subject to Section 16(a) of the Exchange
·
Act under the plan; or
require shareholder approval under applicable state law, the rules and regulations of any national
·
securities exchange on which our securities then may be listed, the Internal Revenue Code or any other
applicable law,
is subject to shareholder approval.
No suspension, termination, modification or amendment of the plan may adversely affect any bonus or
option previously granted, unless the written consent of the recipient is obtained.
2015 Director Compensation
The following table sets forth the compensation awarded to, earned by, or paid to each person who
served as a director during the year ended December 31, 2015, other than a director who also served as
an executive officer.
Name
Fees Earned
 
or Paid in
Cash ($)
Thomas K. Mancuso $  96,000
Feisal Somji (2)
-
Total ($)
(1)  $96,000(1)
-
(1)
(2)
Consists of salary payable to Mr. Mancuso in his capacity as our Managing Director. Includes $42,500
of accrued but unpaid salary.
Does not include consulting fees of $60,000 and expenses of $9,663, of which $20,000 is accrued but
unpaid, pursuant to our consulting agreement with Somji Consulting, Ltd. See “Certain Relationships
and Related Transactions—Chairman of the Board Incentive Package and Consulting Agreements.”
37
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Chairman of the Board Incentive Package and Consulting Agreements
Feisal Somji was appointed as our Chairman of the Board on March 8, 2013, and Mr. Somji received an
incentive package for joining the board of directors, which included:
· 116,667 shares of our common stock;
·66,667 shares of our common stock after successful completion of six months as a board member;
·50,000 shares of our common stock after successful completion of 12 months as a board member; and
333,334 shares of our common stock if he generates a property that the board of directors votes to
·
accept and acquire.
For the year ended December 31, 2013, we incurred $192,500 of expense for the incentive package. In
January 2014, we acquired the Muskox Data Inventory, and as a result, we issued Mr. Somji 333,334
shares of our common stock.
In March 2013, we entered into a consulting agreement with Mr. Somji to provide us assistance in
corporate affairs. The agreement provided that we would issue 8,333 shares of our common stock per
month to Mr. Somji for services rendered, payable at the end of each quarter. The term of this agreement
is for one year and is automatically renewed for additional one year terms until terminated in accordance
with the agreement. For the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2015, we incurred $105,000 and
$40,000, respectively of consulting fees under the agreement.
Our consulting agreement with Mr. Somji was replaced by a new agreement in January 2015. The
agreement provides that Mr. Somji will:
provide market intelligence services as to the identification of business development opportunities for
·
us;
·be available for all investor presentations as requested by our President & CEO;
· oversee document negotiations as required;
advise the board of directors on all matters associated with business development, including merger
·
and acquisition initiatives; and
·provide such further and other consulting services as we request.
As compensation for his services, we will:
·pay a base monthly fee of $5,000, plus certain taxes where applicable;
where possible, provide Mr. Somji with full participation in any benefit programs as we made generally
·
available to our employees and/or consultants from time to time;
grant options to Mr. Somji pursuant to our stock option plan, in such amounts as determined from time to
·
time by the board of directors in its sole discretion;
pay an annual bonus, if the board of directors feels that same is warranted, in an amount to be
·
determined by the board of directors in its sole discretion; and
reimburse Mr. Somji for all out of pocket expenses he incurred while providing the services upon the
·
provision of supporting receipts or other necessary documentation of which $9,663 was reimbursed for
2015.
38
Release and Settlement Agreement
In November 2012 we entered into a mutual release and settlement agreement with Thomas Callicrate
and certain of his affiliates. Mr. Callicrate was our President, CEO and a director until October 2011 and,
at the time of the agreement, was the beneficial holder of more than 5% of our common stock. Pursuant
to the agreement:
we agreed to pay approximately $75,000, issue 94,447 shares of our common stock and create an
·
escrow consisting of Teras common shares then held by us at a value of $72,000 in satisfaction of
outstanding loans;
we agreed to pay approximately $247,000 of deferred salary payable in Teras common shares then held
·
by us, valued at $1.10 per share, and transferred 224,654 Teras common shares in satisfaction of this
provision;
we agreed to certain registration rights described under the heading “Description of Capital Stock—
·
Registration Rights”;
Mr. Callicrate agreed not to compete with us within one mile from the exterior boundaries of any of the
·
properties controlled, claimed, held or owned by us on the date of the agreement; and
the parties agreed to mutually release each other from any and claims or demands they may have
·
against each other.
King Solomon Agreement
We entered into Exploration and Mining Lease with Option to Purchase Agreements in November and
December 2014 with Mountain Gold Claims, LLC Series (“MGCLLC”), an affiliate of Thomas Callicrate, a
former director and officer, and then a greater than 5% shareholder of ours, and other related property
owners. The property consists of a two adjoining claim blocks for a total of 66 unpatented mining claims
situated in Nye County, Nevada.
Upon signing, we issued 8,334 shares of our common stock to the third party property owner, made cash
payments of $5,000 and agreed to make various advanced royalty payments and work commitment
expenditures. We abandoned the project in 2015.
Rokmaster Loan Agreement
On November 8, 2013, we entered into an agreement to loan Rokmaster Resources Corporation
$40,000 in the form of a note. We also entered into additional agreements to loan Rokmaster Resources
Corporation $125,000 during the first quarter of 2014. Our Chairman of the Board was a Director of
Rokmaster at the time of the transaction. The agreement provided that the principal amount of the note
and any due and unpaid interest thereon would bear interest from the date of advance to and including
the date of payment calculated monthly at the rate of 10% per annum and payable on the applicable
maturity date. The maturity date of the loan was one year from the date of the note or upon the borrower
receiving a financing of more than $700,000, whichever is sooner or such later date as we may be have
agreed. In April 2014, Rokmaster fulfilled its obligations under the terms of all loan agreements by
paying, in full, the principal amount due plus all accrued interest to us.
39
Prize Mining Agreement
In January 2014, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Prize Mining Corporation relating to
our acquisition of the Muskox Data Inventory, as described in more detail under the heading “Business—
Muskox Data Inventory.” Mr. Somji is CEO and a director and shareholder of Prize Mining.
182 Agreement
In December 2014, we entered into an agreement of purchase and sale with 182 relating to our frac sand
properties, as described in more detail under the heading “Business—Acquisition of Frac Sand
Properties—182 Transaction.” Mr. Somji is a consultant to 182.
Convertible Notes
In July and August 2008, we entered into two convertible note transactions with Thomas Mancuso, our
former president and current director, each for an aggregate of $25,000. The parties have agreed to
extend the terms, increase the interest rate and reduce the conversion price since the original issuance
of the notes. The interest rate is currently 20% per annum, increased from 8% per annum. Accrued
interest related to the outstanding notes was $46,479 as of March 31, 2016. The notes mature on July 21,
2016 and August 4, 2016, extended from six months from the issuance date. The notes are convertible at
the note holder’s option into shares of our common stock. The number of shares that the note can be
converted into will be determined as follows:
prior to the maturity date, the balance of the unpaid principal plus all accrued interest divided by 90% of
·
the offering price of our most recent equity offering or $0.45 if there have been no recent equity offerings;
and
·at the maturity date, the balance of the unpaid principal plus all accrued interest divided by $0.45.
Consulting Agreement
We have a consulting agreement with Lane Griffin, our Vice President – Exploration and Secretary,
pursuant to which Mr. Griffin provides consulting services with respect to various matters related to the
exploration, development and mining of precious metals. We pay Mr. Griffin under the agreement:
· $450 per day for general consulting;
·$700 per day for general consulting underground, which includes all equipment provided; and
· reimbursement of expenses.
We had outstanding payables under the agreement of $18,080 and $17,762 at March 31, 2016 and
December 31, 2015, respectively.
Policies for Related Party Transactions
The board of directors is responsible for reviewing and approving any related person transactions.
40
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
AND MANAGEMENT
The following table provides information concerning beneficial ownership of our capital stock as of
August 1, 2016 by:
each shareholder, or group of affiliated shareholders, that we know owns more than 5% of our
·
outstanding capital stock;
· each of our executive officers;
· each of our directors; and
· all of our directors and executive officers as a group.
The following table lists the applicable percentage beneficial ownership based on 30,336,283 shares of
common stock outstanding as of August 1, 2016. Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with
the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission and generally includes voting power or investment
power with respect to the securities held. Shares of voting securities subject to options or warrants
currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days of August 1, 2016 are deemed outstanding and
beneficially owned by the person holding such options for purposes of computing the number of shares
and percentage beneficially owned by such person, but are not deemed outstanding for purposes of
computing the percentage beneficially owned by any other person. Except as indicated in the footnotes
to this table, and subject to applicable community property laws, the persons or entities named have sole
voting and investment power with respect to all shares of our common stock shown as beneficially
owned by them.
Unless otherwise indicated, the principal address of each of the shareholders below is c/o Brilliant
Sands Incorporated, 3983 S. McCarran Blvd., Suite 458.
Name of Beneficial Owner
Shares
Percent
Number of
5% Shareholders
1824455 Alberta Ltd.
Executive Officers and Directors
Marc J. Andrews
Thomas K. Mancuso
Feisal Somji
Kim Neal
Lane Griffin
All current officers and directors as a group (5 persons)  5,520,963
Beneficially Owned
   
  15,666,668
   
  350,002
  1,811,937
  2,384,013
  775,007
  200,004
*Less than 1%
(1)  51.6 %
 
 
(2)  1.1 %
(3)  5.9 %
(4)  7.8 %
(5)  2.5 %
(6)  *
 
(7)  17.4 %
Includes 7,833,334 shares of our common stock issued into escrow pursuant to the agreement of
purchase and sale relating to our acquisition of our frac sand properties. The escrowed shares are
also subject to a proxy granting us the us the power to vote the shares until the shares are released or
returned in accordance with the terms of the escrow agreement. William Dynes is the Chief Executive
Officer of 182 with voting and investment control over the shares held by 182. The address for
1824455 Alberta Ltd. is Suite 810, 706 – 7th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 0Z1.
Includes 250,002 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of options within 60 days of
August 1, 2016.
Includes 383,338 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of options within 60 days of
August 1, 2016.
(1)
(2)
(3)
41
(4)
Includes 542,343 shares of our common stock held by Prize Mining and 100,002 shares of our
common stock issuable upon the exercise of options within 60 days of August 1, 2016. Also includes
1,175,000 shares of common stock owned by Somji Consulting, Ltd., of which Mr. Somji is the
beneficial owner. Mr. Somji is CEO and a director and shareholder of Prize Mining. Mr. Somji
disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares held by Prize Mining.
Includes 516,672 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of options within 60 days of
August 1, 2016.
Includes 183,336 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of options within 60 days of
August 1, 2016.
Includes 1,433,350 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of options within 60 days
of August 1, 2016.
(5)
(6)
(7)
42
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
General
The following is a summary of the rights of our capital stock and certain provisions of our articles of
incorporation and bylaws. For more detailed information, please see our articles of incorporation and
bylaws filed as exhibits to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part.
Our authorized capital stock consists of 215,000,000 shares, of which:
·200,000,000 shares are designated as common stock, par value $0.001 per share; and
·15,000,000 shares are designated as preferred stock, par value $0.10 per share.
At August 1, 2016, we had outstanding 30,336,283 shares of common stock, held of record by 988
shareholders. In addition, as of August 1, 2016, we had no outstanding shares of preferred stock and
outstanding options to purchase a total of 2,996,696 shares of common stock. All of the outstanding
options are vested.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Pink marketplace under the symbol “BRSD.”
Common Stock
Each share of common stock has one vote on each matter submitted to a vote of our shareholders.
Subject to preferences that may be applicable to any outstanding shares of preferred stock, holders of
common stock are entitled to receive ratably such dividends as may be declared by our board of
directors out of funds legally available therefor. In the event we dissolve, holders of common stock are
entitled to share ratably the net assets remaining after payment of liabilities and the liquidation
preferences of any outstanding shares of preferred stock. Holders of common stock have no preemptive,
conversion or subscription rights. There are no redemption or sinking fund provisions applicable to the
common stock. All outstanding shares of common stock are fully paid and nonassessable.
Preferred Stock
Our board of directors has the authority, without further action by the shareholders, to issue from time to
time the preferred stock in one or more series, to fix the number of shares of any such series and the
designations, preferences, limitations, restrictions and relative rights of the preferred stock, and variations
in the relative rights and preferences as between different series. Except for the voting powers with
respect to the election of directors or other matters as may be stated in the resolutions of the board of
directors creating any series of preferred stock, the holders of the series will have no voting power. The
issuance of preferred stock could adversely affect the voting power of holders of common stock and
reduce the likelihood that such holders will receive dividend payments and payments upon liquidation.
Such issuance could have the effect of decreasing the market price of our common stock. The issuance
of preferred stock or even the ability to issue preferred stock could have the effect of delaying, deterring
or preventing a change in control.
Options
As of August 1, 2016 we had options outstanding to purchase 2,996,696 shares of our common stock at
exercise prices ranging from $0.09 to $1.05 with expiration dates through December 22, 2024.
43
Registration Rights
In connection with the 182 transaction, we agreed to file a registration statement under the Securities Act,
which is not a registration statement solely to implement an employee benefit plan, a registration
statement on Form S-4 (or successor form) or a transaction to which Rule 145, promulgated under the
Securities Act, or any other similar rule of the Commission is applicable, to effect the registration of the
shares of our common stock under the Securities Act. We are only obligated to effect the registration if
we and 182, acting reasonably and in good faith, enter into a mutually agreeable agreement relating to
the rights and obligations of the parties with respect to the registration, including agreements of the
selling security holder with respect to providing information required for the preparation of the registration
statement, customary information requirements of a selling security holder, manner of offering and sale of
the shares and customary indemnification agreements, unless we determine that the registration would
not be permitted under applicable law or Commission rules and regulations without undue hardship or
expense.
In November 2012, we entered into a mutual release and settlement agreement with Thomas Callicrate,
a former director and executive officer of ours and a greater than 5% shareholder of ours. As part of the
agreement, we agreed that we would cause “to become unrestricted” all of our shares then currently
owned by Mr. Callicrate or any of his affiliates and any and all future shares issued to Mr. Callicrate or
any of his affiliates, within 30 days after receipt of a written request from Mr. Callicrate or any of his
affiliates in accordance with Rule 144 at our sole cost. However, as a former shell company, our ability to
use Rule 144 for this purpose was limited. We also agreed that if we file a registration statement with the
Commission, we would cause all of the shares of our common stock held by Mr. Callicrate and his
affiliates to be included and “unrestricted.” In addition, we agreed that at our sole expense, we will cause
all future shares issued to Mr. Callicrate or any of his affiliates to be “unrestricted” within 30 days of
receipt of a written request from Mr. Callicrate or any his affiliates. If we fail to cause the shares to
become unrestricted within 30 days after receipt of written request from Mr. Callicrate or any of his
affiliates as described above, Mr. Callicrate or any of his affiliates will be entitled to equitable relief,
including injunctive relief, without a showing of actual damages and specific performance, which shall
not be deemed to be exclusive remedies, but shall be in addition to all other remedies available at law or
equity.
Anti-Takeover Effects of Montana Law and Our Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws
Certain provisions of Montana law and our articles of incorporation and our bylaws contain provisions
that could have the effect of delaying, deferring or discouraging another party from acquiring control of
us. These provisions, which are summarized below, may have the effect of discouraging coercive
takeover practices and inadequate takeover bids. These provisions are also designed, in part, to
encourage persons seeking to acquire control of us to first negotiate with our board of directors. We
believe that the benefits of increased protection of our potential ability to negotiate with an unfriendly or
unsolicited acquirer outweigh the disadvantages of discouraging a proposal to acquire us because
negotiation of these proposals could result in an improvement of their terms.
Bylaw Amendments
Our bylaws provide that the bylaws may be altered, amended or repealed and new bylaws may be
adopted by the board of directors at any regular or special meeting of the board of directors.
Authorized but Unissued Shares
Our authorized but unissued shares of common stock and preferred stock will be available for future
issuance without shareholder’s approval. We may use additional shares for a variety of corporate
purposes, including future public offerings to raise additional capital, corporate acquisitions and
employee benefit plans. In addition, as discussed above, our board of directors has the ability to issue
preferred stock with voting or other rights or preferences that could impede the success of any attempt to
change control of us. The existence of authorized but unissued shares of common stock and preferred
stock could render more difficult or discourage an attempt to obtain control of us by means of a proxy
contest, tender offer, merger or otherwise.
44
Advance Notice of Nominations and Proposals
Our bylaws include advance notice procedures with respect to shareholder proposals and the
nomination of candidates for election as directors, other than nominations made by or at the direction of
our board of directors or a committee of our board of directors. Our bylaws may have the effect of
precluding the conduct of certain business at a meeting if the proper procedures are not followed. These
provisions may also discourage or deter a potential acquirer from conducting a solicitation of proxies to
elect the acquirer’s own slate of directors or otherwise attempting to obtain control of our company.
Board Vacancies Filled by Majority of Directors
Vacancies and newly created seats on our board of directors may be filled by the vote of a majority of the
remaining members of our board of directors. Only our board of directors may determine the number of
directors on our board of directors. The inability of shareholders to determine the number of directors or
to fill vacancies or newly created seats on our board of directors makes it more difficult to change the
composition of our board of directors.
No Cumulative Voting
The Montana Business Corporation Act, or “MBCA,” provides that shareholders are not entitled to the
right to cumulate votes in the election of directors unless our articles of incorporation provide otherwise.
Our articles of incorporation prohibit cumulative voting.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our common stock is Nevada Agency and Transfer Company.
45
SHARES ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
Future sales of substantial amounts of common stock in the public market could adversely affect
prevailing market prices. Furthermore, since only a limited number of shares may be available for sale
shortly after this offering because of contractual and legal restrictions on resale described below, sales of
substantial amounts of common stock in the public market after the restrictions lapse could adversely
affect the prevailing market price for our common stock as well as our ability to raise equity capital in the
future.
As of August 1, 2016, we had outstanding 30,336,283 shares of common stock and no shares of
preferred stock. All of the shares sold in this offering will be freely tradable unless held by an affiliate of
ours. An additional 10,082,002 shares will generally become available for sale in the public market from
time to time thereafter upon expiration of their respective holding periods under Rule 144, a portion of
which will be subject to Rule 144 volume limitations.
Rule 144
In general, under Rule 144 as currently in effect, beginning 90 days after the effective date of the
registration statement of which this prospectus is a part, any person who is not deemed to have been an
affiliate of ours for purposes of the Securities Act at any time during 90 days preceding a sale and who
has beneficially owned their shares for at least six months, including the holding period of any prior
owner other than one of our affiliates, may sell shares without restriction, subject to compliance with the
public information requirements of Rule 144. In addition, under Rule 144, any person who is not an
affiliate of ours and has held their shares for at least one year, including the holding period of any prior
owner other than one of our affiliates, would be entitled to sell an unlimited number of shares
immediately upon the closing of this offering without complying with any of the requirements of Rule 144.
In general, under Rule 144, as currently in effect, our affiliates or persons selling shares on behalf of our
affiliates who beneficially owns shares that were purchased from us, or any affiliate, at least six months
previously, are entitled to sell upon expiration of the lock-up agreements described below, within any
three-month period beginning 90 days after the date of this prospectus, a number of shares that does not
exceed the greater of:
1% of the number of shares of our common stock then outstanding, which will equal approximately
·
shares immediately after this offering; or
the average weekly trading volume of our common stock during the four calendar weeks preceding the
·
filing of a notice on Form 144 with respect to the sale.
Sales of restricted shares under Rule 144 held by our affiliates or persons selling shares on behalf of our
affiliates are also subject to requirements regarding the manner of sale, notice and the availability of
current public information about us. Rule 144 also provides that affiliates relying on Rule 144 to sell
shares of our common stock that are not restricted shares must nonetheless comply with the same
restrictions applicable to restricted shares, other than the holding period requirement.
Prior to our acquisition of Dome Copper, Inc. in July 2006, we were a shell company, as defined under
the rules promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act. In addition,
prior to the effective date of the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part, we have not
been subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act. The Rule 144 safe harbor is not
available for the resale of securities “initially issued” by a shell company or an issuer that has “at any
time previously” been a shell company. Consequently, the Rule 144 safe harbor is not available for the
resale of such securities unless and until all of the conditions in Rule 144(i)(2) are satisfied at the time of
the proposed sale, which generally provides that if the issuer is subject to the reporting requirements of
section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, has filed all reports and other materials required to be filed by
section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, as applicable, during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter period that the issuer was required to file such reports and materials), other than Form 8-K reports
and has filed current “Form 10 information” with the Securities and Exchange Commission reflecting its
status as an entity that is no longer a shell company, then those securities may be sold in accordance
with Rule 144 after one year has elapsed from the date that the issuer filed “Form 10 information” with the
Securities and Exchange Commission.
46
Rule 701
Rule 701 generally allows a shareholder who purchased shares of our common stock pursuant to a
written compensatory plan or contract and who is not deemed to have been an affiliate of our company
during the immediately preceding 90 days to sell these shares in reliance upon Rule 144, but without
being required to comply with the public information, holding period, volume limitation, or notice
provisions of Rule 144. Rule 701 also permits affiliates of our company to sell their Rule 701 shares
under Rule 144 without complying with the holding period requirements of Rule 144.
Registration Rights
As of August 1, 2016, the holders of 16,903,645 shares of our common stock are entitled to rights with
respect to the registration of their shares under the Securities Act of 1933. Registration of these shares
under the Securities Act would result in the shares becoming freely tradable without restriction under the
Securities Act, except for shares purchased by affiliates, immediately upon the effectiveness of the
registration statement of which this prospectus is a part. Any sales of securities by these shareholders
could have a material adverse effect on the trading price of our common stock. See “Description of
Capital Stock — Registration Rights.”
Equity Incentive Plans
We may to file one or more registration statements on Form S-8 under the Securities Act after the closing
of this offering to register the shares of our common stock that are issuable pursuant to our Amended
2013 Stock Option and Stock Bonus Plan. Accordingly, shares registered under the registration
statement may be available for sale in the open market following its effective date, subject to vesting of
such shares, Rule 144 volume and other limitations and the lock-up agreements described above, if
applicable.
47
SELLING SECURITY HOLDERS
We have filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, of which this
prospectus forms a part, with respect to the resale of our securities covered by this prospectus from time
to time under Rule 415 of the Securities Act of 1933. Our securities being offered by this prospectus are
being registered to permit secondary public trading of our securities. Subject to the restrictions described
in this prospectus, the selling security holders may offer our securities covered under this prospectus for
resale from time to time. In addition, subject to the restrictions described in this prospectus, the selling
security holders may sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of all or a portion of our securities being offered
under this prospectus in transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of
1933. See “Plan of Distribution.”
The table below presents information as of August 1, 2016, regarding the selling security holders and the
securities that the selling security holders (and their donees, pledgees, assignees, transferees and other
successors in interest) may offer and sell from time to time under this prospectus. More specifically, the
following table sets forth as to the selling security holders:
the number of shares of our common stock that the selling security holders beneficially owned prior to
·
the offering for resale of any of the securities being registered by the registration statement of which this
prospectus is a part; and
the number and percent of shares of our common stock to be held by the selling security holders after
the offering of the resale securities, assuming all of the resale securities are sold by the selling security
·
holders and that the selling security holders do not acquire any other shares of our common stock or
warrants prior to their assumed sale of all of the resale shares.
The table is prepared based on information supplied to us by the selling security holders. Although we
have assumed for purposes of the table below that the selling security holders will sell all of the
securities offered by this prospectus, because the selling security holders may offer from time to time all
or some of their securities covered under this prospectus, or in another permitted manner, no assurances
can be given as to the actual number of securities that will be resold by the selling security holders or
that will be held by the selling security holders after completion of the resales. In addition, the selling
security holders may have sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of the securities in transactions
exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 since the date the selling security
holders provided the information regarding their securities holdings. Information covering the selling
security holders may change from time to time and changed information will be presented in a
supplement to this prospectus if and when necessary and required. Except as described above, there
are currently no agreements, arrangements or understandings with respect to the resale of any of the
securities covered by this prospectus.
The applicable percentages of ownership are based on an aggregate of 30,336,283 shares of our
common stock issued and outstanding on August 1, 2016. The number of shares beneficially owned by
the selling security holders is determined under rules promulgated by the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
Common Stock Owned Prior to
 
 
Completion of the Offering(a)(c)
 
 Number
%  
  15,666,668
  1,236,977
%
Percent
    51.6
    4.1
Common Stock Owned After
 
 
Completion of the Offering(b)
 
 Number
 
-
-
Percent
-
     
     
-
-
-
-
-
Name
1824455 Alberta Ltd.(1)
Thomas Callicrate
Any donees, pledgees, assignees,
transferees and other successors in
interest of the selling security
holders (a)(c)
*
Less than 1%.
(a)
Information concerning other selling security holders will be set forth in one or more prospectus
supplements from time to time, if required.
48
(b)Assumes that all of the shares of common stock offered hereby are sold by the selling security holder.
(c)
(1)
Assumes that any pledgees, assignees, transferees and other successors in interest do not
beneficially own any of our common stock other than common stock set forth in this prospectus.
William Dynes is the Chief Executive Officer of 1824455 Alberta Ltd. and has voting and dispositive
power over the shares held by 1824455 Alberta Ltd. Feisal Somji, our Chairman of the Board, is a
consultant to 1824455 Alberta Ltd.
49
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We are registering the shares of our common stock covered by this prospectus and any applicable
prospectus supplement on behalf of the selling security holders to permit the resale of these securities by
the selling security holders from time to time after the date of this prospectus. The selling security holders
may offer the securities through agents, to or through underwriters, through broker-dealers (acting as
agent or principal), through a specific bidding or auction process or otherwise, through a combination of
any such methods or through any methods described in a prospectus supplement.
The selling security holders, which as used herein includes donees, pledgees, transferees or other
successors-in-interest selling shares of common stock, or interests in shares of common stock received
after the date of this prospectus from a selling security holder as a gift, pledge, partnership distribution or
other transfer, may, from time to time, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of any or all of such shares or
such interests on any stock exchange, market or trading facility on which the shares are traded or in
private transactions. These dispositions may be at fixed prices, at prevailing market prices at the time of
sale, at prices related to the prevailing market price, at varying prices determined at the time of sale, or at
negotiated prices.
The selling security holders may use any one or more of the following methods when disposing of
shares or interests therein:
on any national securities exchange or quotation service on which our common stock may be listed or
·
quoted at the time of sale;
· in the over-the-counter market;
·in transactions other than on these exchanges or systems or in the over-the-counter market;
·ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits purchasers;
block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent, but may position and
·
resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
·purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
·an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
· privately negotiated transactions;
short sales effected after the date the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part is declared
·
effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission;
through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, whether through an options
·
exchange or otherwise;
broker-dealers may agree with the selling security holders to sell a specified number of such shares at a
·
stipulated price per share; or
· a combination of any such methods of sale.
The selling security holders are not required to sell any securities covered by this prospectus and may
transfer these securities by other means not described in this prospectus. Each selling security holder
may sell all, some or none of the securities covered by this prospectus or interests therein.
The selling security holders may, from time to time, pledge or grant a security interest in some or all of the
shares of common stock, as applicable, owned by them and, if they default in the performance of their
secured obligations, the pledgees or secured parties may offer and sell such shares from time to time,
under this prospectus, or under an amendment to this prospectus under Rule 424(b)(3) or other
applicable provision of the Securities Act amending the list of selling security holders to include the
pledgee, transferee or other successors in interest as selling security holders under this prospectus. The
selling security holders also may transfer the shares of common stock in other circumstances, in which
case the transferees, pledgees or other successors in interest will be the selling beneficial owners for
purposes of this prospectus.
50
In connection with the sale of such shares or such interests, the selling security holders may enter into
hedging transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions, which may in turn engage in short
sales of the common stock in the course of hedging the positions they assume. The selling security
holders may also sell shares of our common stock short and deliver these securities to close out their
short positions, or loan or pledge such stock to broker-dealers that in turn may sell these securities. The
selling security holders may also enter into options or other transactions with broker-dealers or other
financial institutions or the creation of one or more derivative securities which require the delivery to such
broker-dealer or other financial institution of shares offered by this prospectus, which shares such broker-
dealer or other financial institution may resell pursuant to this prospectus (as supplemented or amended
to reflect such transaction).
The aggregate proceeds to the selling security holders from the sale of the common stock offered by
them will be the purchase price of such stock less discounts or commissions, if any. Each of the selling
security holders reserves the right to accept and, together with their agents from time to time, to reject, in
whole or in part, any proposed purchase of common stock to be made directly or through agents. We will
not receive any of the proceeds from this offering.
The selling security holders also may resell all or a portion of the shares in open market transactions in
reliance upon Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933, provided that they meet the criteria and
conform to the requirements of that rule.
Any selling security holder and any other person participating in a distribution will be subject to
applicable provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations under that statute, including,
without limitation, possibly Regulation M. This may limit the timing of purchases and sales of any of the
securities by a selling security holder and any other participating person. Regulation M may also restrict
the ability of any person engaged in the distribution of the securities to engage in market-making
activities with respect to the securities. All of the foregoing may affect the marketability of the securities
and the ability of any person or entity to engage in market-making activities with respect to the securities.
The selling security holders and any underwriters, broker-dealers or agents that participate in the sale of
the shares or interests therein may be “underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the
Securities Act. Any discounts, commissions, concessions or profit they earn on any resale of the shares
may be underwriting discounts and commissions under the Securities Act. Selling security holders who
are “underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the Securities Act will be subject to the
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act.
To the extent required, the shares of our common stock to be sold, the names of the selling security
holders, the respective purchase prices and public offering prices, the names of any agents, dealer or
underwriter, any applicable commissions or discounts with respect to a particular offer will be set forth in
an accompanying prospectus supplement or, if appropriate, a post-effective amendment to the
registration statement that includes this prospectus.
In order to comply with the securities laws of some states, if applicable, the common stock may be sold in
these jurisdictions only through registered or licensed brokers or dealers. In addition, in some states
such stock may not be sold unless it has been registered or qualified for sale or an exemption from
registration or qualification requirements is available and is complied with.
51
VALIDITY OF COMMON STOCK
The validity of the common stock being offered hereby will be passed upon for us by the Law Office of
Douglas M. Berman, PLLC, Dallas, Texas.
EXPERTS
DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S., an independent registered public accounting firm, has audited our
financial statements at December 31, 2015 and 2014, and for each of the two years in the period ended
December 31, 2015, as set forth in their report. We have included our financial statements in the
prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement in reliance on the report of DeCoria, Maichel &
Teague P.S., an independent registered public accounting firm, given on their authority as experts in
accounting and auditing.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed a registration statement on Form S-1 with the Securities and Exchange Commission with
respect to this offering. This prospectus, which forms a part of that registration statement, does not
contain all of the information included in the registration statement and the exhibits and schedules
thereto as permitted by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. For
further information with respect to us and the securities offered hereby, please refer to the registration
statement, including its exhibits and schedules. Statements contained in this prospectus as to the
contents of any contract or other document referred to herein are not necessarily complete and, where
the contract or other document is an exhibit to the registration statement, each such statement is qualified
in all respects by the provisions of such exhibit, to which reference is hereby made. You may review a
copy of the registration statement at the Securities and Exchange Commission’s public reference room at
100 F Street, N.E., Washington, DC 20549. Please call the Securities and Exchange Commission at 1-
800-SEC-0330 for further information on the operation of the public reference rooms. The registration
statement can also be reviewed by accessing the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website at
http://www.sec.gov. We are subject to the information and reporting requirements of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 and, in accordance therewith, file periodic reports (including annual reports on
Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K), proxy statements or
information statements, and other information with the Securities and Exchange Commission. These
reports can also be reviewed by accessing the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website.
You should rely only on the information provided in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement
or as part of the registration statement filed on Form S-1 of which this prospective is a part, as
such registration statement is amended and in effect with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. We have not authorized anyone else to provide you with different information. We
are not making an offer of these securities in any state where the offer is not permitted. You
should not assume that the information in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement or any
document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than the date of those
documents.
52
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Audited Financial Statements:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2014
Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31,
2015 and 2014
Statement of Stockholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014
Notes to Financial Statements
 
Unaudited Financial Statements:
Balance Sheets as of March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015
Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the three months ended March 31,
2016 and 2015
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
 F-6
 F-7
 
 
F-
26
F-
27
Statements of Cash Flows for the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015
Notes to Financial Statements
F-
28
F-
29
F-1
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders
Brilliant Sands Incorporated
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Brilliant Sands Incorporated (“the Company”) as of
December 31, 2015 and 2014, and the related statements of operations and comprehensive income
(loss), stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the years then ended. These financial statements are the
responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of Brilliant Sands Incorporated as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, and the results of
its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue
as a going concern. As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, at December 31, 2015, the
Company has incurred losses since its inception and has insufficient cash to fund normal operations and
meet obligations for the next twelve months. These factors raise substantial doubt about its ability to
continue as a going concern. Management's plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note
2. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this
uncertainty.
/s/ DeCoria, Maichel & Teague, P.S. 
Spokane, Washington
June 24, 2016
F-2
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments - available for sale
Prepaid expenses and deposits
Related party receivable
Mineral data held for sale (Note 5)
Total Current Assets
 
MINERAL PROPERTIES AND INTERESTS
 
OTHER ASSETS
Investment - available for sale
Reclamation bond
Total Other Assets
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Accrued payroll liabilities
Accrued interest - related party
Convertible debt, related party
Payables to related parties
Total Current Liabilities
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
 
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES (Note 4)
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2015
 
    
    
 
 
 $8,773
 
   -
 
   8,853
   39,154
 
 
   250,000
 
   306,780
    
 
 
   1,690,181
 
    
    
 
 
   15,000
 
   13,191
 
   28,191
    
 
 
 $2,025,152
 
    
    
 
 
    
 
 $504,478
   261,490
 
 
   43,951
 
   50,000
 
   226,792
   1,086,711
 
 
    
 
   1,086,711
2014
     
     
  $59,677
    1,114,210
    17,472
    39,154
    250,000
    1,480,513
     
    1,888,853
     
     
    -
    13,191
    13,191
     
  $3,382,557
     
     
     
  $21,640
    139,910
    39,701
    50,000
    267,553
    518,804
     
    518,804
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Preferred stock, $.10 par value, 15,000,000 authorized; no shares issued
and outstanding
Common stock, $0.001 par value, 200,000,000 shares authorized;
30,336,283 and 29,661,064 shares issued and outstanding, respectively
Additional paid in capital
Accumulated deficit
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
Total Stockholders' Equity
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
-
-
30,336
29,661
6,840,079
6,976,019
   (6,067,914 )   (2,733,351 )
    (1,272,636 )
   -
 
    2,863,753
   938,441
 $2,025,152
  $3,382,557
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
F-3
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
OPERATING EXPENSES (INCOME)
Exploration expense
Payroll and related `
Professional fees and consulting
General and administrative
Impairment on mineral data held for sale
Loss (gain) on mineral properties and interests
TOTAL OPERATING EXPENSES (INCOME)
 
INCOME (LOSS) FROM OPERATIONS
 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest and other miscellaneous expenses
Loss on exchange of investments available for sale for shares of common
stock (Note 7)
Foreign exchange gain
Gain (loss) on investments available for sale
Impairment of investment available for sale
TOTAL OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
 
NET INCOME (LOSS)
For the year ended
 
 December 31,
 
 2015
 
  2014
  
 
   
    
 
     
 $646,700
 
  $154,450
   306,377
 
    208,469
   265,851
 
    215,207
   360,218
    242,440
 
   -
    1,100,000  
   232,084
    (2,620,930 )
   1,811,230     (700,364 )
 
    
   (1,811,230 )   700,364
 
 
    
 
    
   (11,624
)
)   (13,804
-
(334,055 )
55,781
 
   (1,529,490 )   (1,133,207 )
   (38,000
 
   (1,523,333 )   (1,481,066 )
    
 
 $(3,334,563 ) $(780,702 )
)   -
-
(294,854 )   (2,368,229 )
   1,567,490     1,467,262  
    
 
 $(2,061,927 ) $(1,681,669 )
 
    
 $(0.11
)
) $(0.05
29,960,005    14,381,719
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Change in unrealized gain (loss) on investments available for sale
Reclassification of realized (gain) loss on investments available for sale
 
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
NET INCOME (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE, BASIC AND DILUTED
 
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON STOCK SHARES
OUTSTANDING, BASIC AND DILUTED
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
F-4
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Balance,
December 31,
2013
 
Stock based
compensation
Issuance of
common stock for:
Satisfaction of
accrued stock
payable
Legal Expenses
Director Awards
Purchase of
mineral data from
Prize Mining
Corporation
Purchase of
mineral data -
finders fee to
related party
Common Stock
 Shares
Additional
Accumulated
  Other
Accumulated  Comprehensive  Stockholders'
Income
Equity
Total
Amount   Paid in Capital  Deficit
11,121,369  $11,121  $ 4,366,278
$(1,952,649 ) $ (371,669
) $2,053,081
-
-
19,479
200,000
200
185,799
69,834
  150,000
70
    150
31,355
    157,351
-
-
-
    -
3,703,334     3,704     996,296
-
-
-
-
    -
-
19,479
185,999
31,425
    157,501
1,000,000
333,334
333
349,667
-
-
350,000
15,666,668    15,667    1,394,333
-
8,334
8
492
-
-
-
1,410,000
500
(1,591,809 )   (1,592 )   (660,971
)   -
-
(662,563
-
-
-
-
-
(900,967
)   (900,967
-
-
(780,702
)   -
(780,702
29,661,064  $29,661  $ 6,840,079
$(2,733,351 ) $ (1,272,636
) $2,863,753
)
)
)
-
-
28,017
95,238
95
9,905
80,000
80
13,520
500,000
500
84,500
(19
)   -
(2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
)   -
-
-
-
-
-
-
28,017
10,000
13,600
85,000
(2
)
1,272,636
1,272,636
-
-
(3,334,563 )   -
(3,334,563 )
30,336,283  $30,336  $ 6,976,019
$(6,067,914 ) $ -
$938,441
Purchase of
mineral properties
- frac sand
Purchase of
mineral properties
- King Solomon
Shares
repurchased in
accordance with
settlement
agreement (Note
8)
Change in
unrealized loss on
investment -
available for sale,
net
Net loss
Balance,
December 31,
2014
 
Stock based
compensation
Issuance of
common stock for:
Purchase of
mineral properties
- Fisher Canyon
Cash at $0.17 per
share
For investor
relation services
Other
Change in
unrealized loss on
investment -
available for sale,
net
Net loss
Balance,
December 31,
2015
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
F-5
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
-
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
Net Income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used by operating activities:    
(Gain) Loss on investments available for sale
(Gain) Loss on mineral property and interests
Stock based compensation
Stock issued for investor relations
Stock issued for legal expenses
Impairment on mineral data held for sale
Loss on exchange of investments available for sale for shares  of
common shares
Impairment of investment available for sale
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Decrease (increase) in:
Prepaid expenses and deposits
Related parties receivable
Interest receivable on note receivable
Increase (decrease) in:
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Accrued payroll liabilities
Accrued interest - related parties
Payable to related parties
Net cash used by operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
Purchase of mineral properties and interest
Advances under notes receivable - related party
Payments received under notes receivable - related party
Proceeds from sale/lease of mining property
Proceeds from sale of investments - available for sale
Net cash provided by investing activities
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Common stock issued for cash
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year
Supplemental cash flow information:
Interest paid
Noncash investing and financing activities:
Common stock issued for purchase of mineral properties - frac sand
38,000
    
    
   8,619
   -
   -
    
   482,836
   121,580
   4,250
   (40,761
   (845,448
    
   (10,000
   -
   -
   5,000
   785,944
   780,944
    
   13,600
   13,600
    
   (50,904
   59,677
    
 $8,773
    
 $5,889
    
 $-
2014
For the Year Ended
 
 December 31,   December 31, 
 
 2015
    
 
)
 $(3,334,563 )  $(780,702
 
      
     1,133,207
 
     (2,620,930 )
 
     176,980
 
     -
     31,425
 
 
     1,100,000
1,529,490
   232,084
   28,017
   85,000
   -
   -
334,055
-
      
      
     9,391
     27,782
     592
      
     (200,988
     (85,232
     -
)    202,882
)    (671,538
      
)    (53,964
     (125,000
     165,000
     12,000
     650,124
     648,160
      
     -
     -
      
)    (23,378
     83,055
      
   $59,677
      
   $10,140
      
   $1,410,000
)
)
 
 
)
 
)
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
Common stock issued for purchase of mineral properties - King Solomon    -
Accrued expenses related to acquisition of mineral property - frac sand
   -
Common stock issued for acquisition of mineral data from Prize Mining
Co.
Investment - available for sale exchanged for repurchase of shares of
common stock in accordance with exchange agreement
Investment - available for sale exchanged for mineral interest
Investment - available for sale exchanged for related party accounts
payable
Receivable from related party for return of investment - available for sale    -
Common stock issued for mineral property
-
-
-
9,655
10,000
500
     193,217
1,350,000
815,082
17,128
73,319
18,098
     -
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
F-6
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 - ORGANIZATION AND DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Brilliant Sands Incorporated (hereinafter “BRSD” or “the Company”) was incorporated as Helena Silver
Mines in May 1888 under the laws of the State of Montana.  In July 2006, Helena Silver Mines Inc.
completed a share acquisition agreement with Dome Copper, Inc. The acquisition was accounted for as
a reverse merger with Helena Silver Mines, Inc. being the accounting acquirer and Dome Copper, Inc.
surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary. At the time of the acquisition, the name of the Company was
changed to Consolidated Goldfields Corporation. On January 12, 2015 the Company held a Special
Meeting of Stockholders to change the name of the Company to Brilliant Sands Incorporated which
became effective on March 16, 2015.
The Company is a company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of frac sand and
mining properties. The Company’s year-end is December 31.
As disclosed in Note 7, the Company’s board of directors and stockholders approved a one-for-
three reverse stock split of the Company's common stock effective March 16, 2015.  Following the
effective date of the reverse stock split, the par value of the common stock remained at $0.001 per share.
Unless otherwise indicated, all references herein to shares outstanding and share issuances have been
adjusted to give effect to the aforementioned stock split.
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The financial statements are prepared using the accrual basis of accounting in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared under the assumption that the Company
will continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred losses since its inception and does not
have sufficient cash to fund normal operations and meet obligations for the next 12 months without
deferring payment on certain current liabilities and/or raising additional funds. The Company currently
has no historical recurring source of revenue and its ability to continue as a going concern is dependent
on the Company’s ability to raise capital to fund its future exploration and working capital requirements or
its ability to profitably execute its business plan. The Company’s plans for the long-term return to and
continuation as a going concern include the profitable exploitation of its properties and financing the
Company’s future operations through sales of its common stock and/or debt.   The financial statements
do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continuing as
a going concern.
F-7
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make complex and subjective estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts in the Company’s financial statements and notes thereto for items such as potential
impairment of investments available for sale, mineral data held for sale, and long-lived assets; the
valuation of stock based compensation; and determination of deferred income taxes. On a regular basis,
management evaluates these estimates and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from these
estimates.
The Company believes the estimates used are reasonable and appropriate based on current facts and
circumstances. It is possible, however, that other parties applying reasonable judgment to the same facts
and circumstances could develop different estimates. Additionally, changes in actual experience or
changes in other qualitative factors could cause estimates to fluctuate.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For the purposes of the statements of cash flows and balance sheets, the Company considers any highly
liquid investments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of shares
outstanding during the year.  The weighted average number of shares is calculated by taking the number
of shares outstanding and weighting them by the amount of time they were outstanding.   The following
options, warrants and convertible debt equivalent shares were excluded from the computation of diluted
earnings per share for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 because they were anti-dilutive:
Options
Warrants
Convertible Debt  208,780
3,372,812
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2015
  
 
 
  3,164,032
 
  —
2014
   
   2,780,368
   1,554,030
   199,335
   4,533,733
Investments in Debt and Equity Securities
At acquisition, the Company classifies debt securities and equity securities into one of the following three
categories:
Held to Maturity – the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity. Amounts are reported at amortized
cost, adjusted for amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts.
Trading Securities – bought principally for purpose of selling them in the near term. Amounts are
reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses included in earnings.
F-8
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Available for Sale – not classified in one of the above categories. Amounts are reported at fair value, with
unrealized gains and losses excluded from earnings and reported separately as a component of
stockholders’ equity.
The Company periodically reviews its investments for indications of other than temporary impairment
considering many factors, including the extent and duration to which a security's fair value has been less
than its cost, overall economic and market conditions, and the financial condition and specific prospects
for the issuer. Impairment of investment securities results in a charge to income when a market decline
below cost is other than temporary.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company discloses the following information for each class of assets and liabilities that are
measured at fair value:
1.
the fair value measurement;
2.
the level within the fair value hierarchy in which the fair value measurements in their entirety fall,
segregating fair value measurements using quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities (Level 1), significant other observable inputs (Level 2), and significant unobservable inputs
(Level 3);
for fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3), a reconciliation of the
beginning and ending balances, separately presenting changes during the period attributable to the
following:
total gains or losses for the period (realized and unrealized), segregating those gains or losses
included in earnings, and a description of where those gains or losses included in earnings  are
reported in the statement of operations;
the amount of these gains or losses attributable to the change in unrealized gains or losses relating to
those assets or liabilities still held at the reporting period date and a description of where those
unrealized gains or losses are reported;
3.
a.
b.
c. purchases, sales, issuances, and settlements (net); and
d.
transfers into and/or out of Level 3.
the amount of the total gains or losses for the period included in earnings  that are attributable to the
change in unrealized gains or losses relating to those assets and liabilities still held at the reporting
date and a description of where those unrealized gains or losses are reported in the statement of
operations; and
in annual periods only, the valuation technique(s) used to measure fair value and a discussion of
changes in valuation techniques, if any, during the period.
4.
5.
At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company’s financial instruments include cash and cash
equivalents and investments – available for sale which approximate fair value. At December 31, 2015
and 2014, the fair value of convertible debt and related accrued interest was approximately $27,000 and
$12,000, respectively, based upon the trading price and the equivalent number of shares of Company’s
stock into which the debt is convertible.
F-9
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Mineral Exploration and Development Costs
All exploration expenditures are expensed as incurred. Expenditures to develop new mines, to define
further mineralization in existing ore bodies, and to expand the capacity of operating mines, are
capitalized and amortized on a unit of production basis over proven and probable reserves.
Mineral Properties and Interests
Significant payments related to the acquisition of mineral properties, mineral rights, and mineral leases
are capitalized (see Note 4). Costs to maintain the mineral rights and leases are expensed as incurred.
When a property reaches the production stage, the related capitalized costs will be amortized using the
units of production method on the basis of periodic estimates of ore reserves.
Should an interest be abandoned, its capitalized costs are charged to operations. When mineral interests
are sold, the capitalized costs are eliminated from the accounts and any resulting gain or loss is reflected
in operations. If a part of the mineral interest is sold, the amount received is treated as a recovery of
capitalized cost. Management reviews and evaluates the net carrying value of mineral properties for
impairment upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the related
carrying amounts may not be recoverable.
Stock Based Compensation
For issuance of shares of the Company’s common stock for services or other consideration, the shares
are valued at the market price of the Company’s common stock or the fair value of the services or
consideration received, whichever is more readily determinable.
For issuances of options to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock, stock based
compensation is recognized in the financial statements based on the grant date fair value of the award.
The fair value is determined by the Binomial Lattice option pricing model. The Company believes that
this model provides the best estimate of fair value due to its ability to incorporate inputs that change over
time, such as volatility and interest rates, and to allow for the actual exercise behavior of option holders.
The compensation cost is recognized over the requisite service period which is equal to the vesting
period.
Provision for Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of
events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Accordingly, deferred tax
liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax
bases of assets and liabilities using enacted rules in effect for the year in which differences are expected
to reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in
income in the period that includes the enactment date.
A valuation allowance is established to reduce the deferred tax assets when the Company determines it
is more likely than not that the related tax benefits will not be realized. The Company periodically
reviews the valuation of deferred tax assets in light of expected future operating results.
F-10
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Asset Retirement Obligations and Remediation Costs
Mineral properties are subject to standards for mine reclamation that have been established by various
governmental agencies. Asset retirement obligations are related to the retirement of the mine, if a
reasonable estimate of fair value can be determined. These obligations are initially measured at fair
value with the resulting cost capitalized at the present value of estimated reclamation costs. An asset
and a related liability are recorded for the present value of these costs. The liability is accreted and the
asset amortized over the life of the related asset. Adjustments are made for changes resulting from either
the timing or amount of the original present value estimate underlying the obligation. If there is an
impairment to an asset’s carrying value and a decision is made to permanently close the property,
changes to the liability are recognized and charged to the provision for closed operations and
environmental matters. The Company had no asset retirement obligations as of December 31, 2015 and
at December 31, 2014.
Foreign currency translation
The Company’s functional currency is the United States dollar. Transactions and account balances
originally stated in currencies other than the United States dollar have been translated into United States
dollars as follows:
·Revenue and expense items at the rate of exchange in effect on the dates they occur.
·Non-monetary assets and liabilities at historical exchange rates.
·Monetary assets and liabilities at the exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date.
Transaction gains and losses are recorded in the statement of operations in the period in which they
occur.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting standards that have been issued or proposed that do not require adoption until a future date
are not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
NOTE 3 - INVESTMENTS – AVAILABLE FOR SALE
The following summarizes the equity securities available for sale at December 31, 2015.
Unrealized
  
Gain 
(Loss)
Teras Resources, Inc.
  $ —
Strategic Resources International Inc.  100,000     15,000    15,000     —
  $15,000  $ 15,000   $ —
Fair Value
  
(Level 1
Inputs)
  $ —
Number of 
 
Shares
—
Basis
$—
F-11
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
During the year ending December 31, 2015, the Company had the following transactions relating to its
investment in Teras:
Sold 13,612,500 shares for net cash proceeds of $785,944. A loss on investment available for sale of
·$1,529,490 was recognized as a result of these transactions.
Exchanged 100,000 shares for an interest in the Fisher Canyon mineral claims (see Note 4). The value
·
of the shares on the transaction date was $9,655. A loss on mineral properties of $8,757 was recognized
as a result of this transaction.
On December 31, 2015, the Company determined that decline in value of its investment in Strategic
Resources, Inc. was other than temporary. An impairment loss of $38,000 was recognized for the year
ending December 31, 2015 bringing the investment balance to its fair value of $15,000 which was
determined using the trading price of this security.
The following summarizes the equity securities available for sale at December 31, 2014.
Number of
 
Shares
Basis
Fair Value
  
(Level 1
Inputs)
Unrealized
  
Gain (Loss)
Teras Resources, Inc.
Strategic Resources International Inc.  100,000
13,712,500  $2,333,846  $1,061,210  $(1,272,636)
    53,000
 
  $2,386,846  $1,114,210  $(1,272,636)
53,000
-
During the year ending December 31, 2014, the Company had the following transactions relating to its
investment in Teras:
Received 15,300,000 shares of Teras Resources, Inc. (“Teras”) common stock in accordance with the
·
Cahuilla Earn in Agreement (see Note 4). A gain on mineral properties and interests of $2,626,076 was
recognized on this transaction.
Sold 4,890,556 shares for net cash proceeds of $650,124. A loss on investment available for sale of
·
$1,134,136 was recognized as a result of these transactions.
Distributed 150,000 shares to a director in consideration of a performance bonus granted in 2013. The
amount was accrued as a payable to related parties at December 31, 2013. The value of the shares on
·
the transaction date was $73,319. A gain on investment available for sale of $929 was recognized
during 2014 as a result of this transaction.
F-12
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Exchanged 50,000 shares for an interest in the Fisher Canyon mineral claims (see Note 4). The value of
·
the shares on the transaction date was $17,128. A gain on mineral properties of $7,793 was recognized
as a result of this transaction.
Exchanged with two shareholders a total of 2,425,000 shares of Teras stock for 1,591,809 shares of the
Company’s common stock. The carrying basis of the Teras shares on the transaction date was
·
$996,618. A loss of $334,055 was recognized as a result of this transaction. The transaction is further
explained in Note 8.
NOTE 4 – MINERAL PROPERTIES AND INTERESTS
Mineral properties at December 31, 2015 and 2014 are as follows:
McLelland  Alberta   Washow   
Frac Sand Properties
 
 Property   Property   Property   Total
Balance - December 31, 2013
 
 $-
Cash
   17,959    17,186    7,819
 
Accrued acquisition costs
   80,765    77,287    35,165     193,217  
Common stock issued
   589,679    563,999   256,322    1,410,000 
Balance - December 31, 2014 and 2015 $688,403    658,472   299,306  $1,646,181
$-
    42,964
-
-
-
5,000
25,000
$ 44,000
165,044
Mineral Properties Pyramid Mine  Fisher Canyon  Rose Gulch  Klondike Pass  King Solomon  Total
 
Balance -
December 31,
2013
Cash
Shares in
Investment-
available for sale
Common stock
issued
Abandonment
Balance -
December 31,
2014
182,172
(25,000
$ 44,000
11,000
17,128
5,500
5,000
-
-
-
-
-
)   -
6,000
500
-
500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(25,000 )
$242,672
$239,044
11,000
-
17,128
Cash
Shares in
Investment-
available for sale
Common stock
issued
Abandonment
Balance -
December 31,
2015
-
-
-
-
10,000
9,655
10,000
(211,827
$ 44,000
-
-
-
-
)  -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,000
9,655
10,000
(11,000
)   (5,500
)   (228,327)
-
-
$44,000
Frac Sand Properties
On December 17, 2014 the Company entered into an Agreement of Purchase and Sale with 1824455
Alberta Ltd. to purchase a 100% right, title and interest in three properties located in the Canadian
Provinces of Manitoba and Alberta. The McClelland project consists of 66,000 acres and the Alberta
project consists of 87,000 acres, both of which are situated in Alberta. The Washow project consists of
1,000 acres and is situated in Manitoba. The settlement of purchase price is outlined below:
F-13
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
·At closing, 7,833,334 shares of Company’s common stock were issued to 1824455 Alberta Ltd.
·On signing of the agreement $50,000 CAD ($42,964 USD, paid December 2014)
$50,000 CAD ($42,937 USD, this amount was accrued at December 2014 and paid April 2015) to be
·
paid within forty-five days of closing
$175,000 CAD ($126,156 USD, this amount was accrued at December 2015) to be paid upon
·
completion of financing
At closing, an additional 7,833,334 shares of Company’s common stock were issued to 1824455 Alberta
Ltd to be held in escrow until applicable terms and conditions are met as outlined below. Management
has determined that it is probable that these milestones will be met in 2016.
2,350,000 of the escrowed shares will be released upon the completion of a NI 43-101 resource report
that identifies a resource deposit which is sufficient to move forward with a project. The Company has
·
engaged Morton Jagodich to begin the NI 43-101 and anticipates completion of the reports during the
third quarter of 2016. As of December 31, 2015, the shares have not been released from escrow.
2,350,000 of the escrowed shares will be release upon the completion of a Preliminary Economic
Assessment which demonstrates a financial return which is sufficient to move forward with a project.
·
The Company has engaged Morton Jagodich to the Preliminary Economic Assessment process and
anticipated completion during the third quarter of 2016. As of December 31, 2015, the shares have not
been released from escrow.
3,133,334 of the escrowed shares will be released upon the award of all necessary permits that will
·
allow for the mining of product. As of December 31, 2015, the shares have not been released from
escrow.
The fair value of the total 15,666,668 shares of common stock issued was $1,410,000 on the date of the
agreement based upon the trading price of the Company’s stock.
Feisal Somji, a director of the Company, is a consultant to 1824455 Alberta Ltd.
In addition, the Company entered into a Production Royalty Agreement on the Canadian properties. The
Company will pay a two (2%) percent production royalty of actual proceeds from the sale or other
disposition of the product commencing on the date on which commercial production is achieved. The
Company has agreed to an advance minimum royalty (“AMR”) to begin on the one year anniversary of
the closing date and continuing yearly up to the date of commercial production in the amount of $225,000
CAD annually. The annual AMR will be paid on a quarterly basis in four equal installments. AMR’s paid
prior to commercial production for each property will be credited against future production royalties on
each property on a dollar for dollar basis up to the maximum rate per quarter. The AMR’s paid is non-
refundable. On March 30, 2016, 1824455 Alberta Ltd has agreed to extend the AMR payments which
were due on December 17, 2015 and March 17, 2016 until the Company has raised additional funds or
obtained financing.
F-14
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Total exploration expenses for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 were $611,542 and $0,
respectively.
King Solomon
On November 4, 2014 and December 3, 2014, the Company entered into an Exploration and Mining
Lease with Option to Purchase Agreement on the King Solomon project with Mountain Gold Claims LLC
Series 9, which is owned by a former director and officer of the Company and a private individual,
respectively. The property consists of two adjoining claim blocks for a total of 66 unpatented mining
claims situated in Nye County Nevada.
Total exploration expenses for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 were $11,393 and $0,
respectively.
As of November 22, 2015, the Company has abandoned its interest in the King Solomon property. A loss
of $5,500 was recorded as a loss on mineral properties and interest during the year ended December 31,
2015.
Pyramid Mine
The Pyramid Mine project consists of five unpatented claims encompassing 100 acres located in
Churchill County, Nevada which are 100% owned by the Company. No proven or probable reserves
have been identified on the property.
See Note 11 – Subsequent Events for a transaction impacting this property after year end.
Koegel Hills
The Koegel Hills project consists of 71 unpatented claims encompassing 1,420 acres located in Mineral
County, Nevada which are 100% owned by the Company. The project is an extensive copper-gold
bearing porphyry system manifested by intense surface alteration that extends for more than six square
miles.
Total exploration expenses for the Koegel Hills project for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014
were $11,755 and $12,463, respectively.
Four Mile Basin
The Four Mile Basin property is located in Nye County, Nevada. The Company owns a 100% interest in
two unpatented claims that are surrounded by another mining company that controls an extensive land
position throughout the district.
On February 26, 2013 the Company, as Lessor, entered into an Exploration and Option to Purchase
Agreement with Wolfpack Gold (Nevada) Corporation for the two unpatented Four Mile Basin claims.
The term of the Agreement was for a period of twenty years. The Four Mile Basin Agreement may be
cancelable at the option of either the Company or the lessee at any time by giving thirty days advanced
notice. Cash payments received under the agreement were $12,000 during the year ended December
31, 2014.
F-15
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
During February 2015, the Company received notice that the lease holder was abandoning the Four Mile
Basin project.
Total exploration expenses for the Four Mile project for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014
were $450 and $20, respectively.
Gold Star
In June 2015, the Company signed a Letter of Intent to enter into an Earn-In and Option to Purchase
Agreement with Multiple Metals Resources Ltd. (“MMRL”) whereby MMRL could earn an 80% interest in
the Gold Star Property. The general terms for this earn-in and option to purchase will be incorporated into
a formal earn-in and option to purchase agreement as outlined below:
·Upon signing: $5,000 cash payment for a 20% ownership (payment received July 2015)
·1st anniversary: $15,000 cash payment for a 40% ownership
·2nd anniversary: $20,000 cash payment for a 60% ownership
·3rd anniversary: $25,000 cash payment for a 80% ownership
The agreement also requires minimum work commitments of $5,000 to be completed on the property per
year during the earn-in.
In addition, after earning 80% interest, MMRL would have a Second Option to acquire the remaining 20%
interest for a cash payment of $250,000 for a period of 24 months after completion of the initial option
period of five years from the effective date of the agreement.
The Company would retain a 2% Net Smelter Return “NSR” and MMRL shall have the right to purchase
1% for $500,000 and the remaining 1% for $1,000,000 for a period of 5 years after the initial or Second
Option period.
Klondike Pass
On September 19, 2013, the Company entered into Exploration and Option to Purchase Agreement on
the Klondike Pass project with a private individual. The property consists of 160 acres of private land
located in Pershing County, Nevada.
Total exploration expenses for the Klondike Pass project for the years ended December 31, 2015 and
2014 were $17 and $13,480, respectively.
On August 19, 2015 the Company abandoned its interest in the Klondike Pass property. The Company
recognized a loss on abandonment of $11,000 during the year ended December 31, 2015.
F-16
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Kibby Flats Project
On May 8, 2015 the Company, as seller, entered into a Stock-for-Property Exchange Agreement with
High Desert Holding Corp., a Nevada corporation (“HDHC”), High Desert Mines LLC, a Nevada limited
liability company and wholly-owned subsidiary of HDHC (“HDML,” and together with HDHC, the “HD
Parties”) to purchase the Kibby Flats project, located in Esmeralda County, Nevada which consisted of
twelve unpatented mining claims in exchange for 400,000 shares of High Desert Holding Corp. common
stock, these shares are not currently trading on the open market. As a result, management determined
the shares had no value. The mining claims had no carrying value at the time of the transaction.
Fisher Canyon
On January 26, 2011, the Company entered into an Exploration and Mining Lease Agreement and
Option to Purchase Royalty Agreement for the Fisher Canyon Project with Mountain Gold Claims Series
7 (“Mountain Gold”), which is owned by a former officer and director of the Company and a current
director and former officer of the Company, who each hold a 50% interest in the property. The property
consists of 87 unpatented mining claims situated in Pershing County Nevada. The Company previously
held 123 unpatented mining claims and after further review the Company has decided to drop the
additional 36 claims which were staked in February 2012.
Total exploration expenses for the Fisher Canyon project for the years ended December 31, 2015 and
2014 were $2,761 and $20,816, respectively.
On May 1, 2015 the Company abandoned its interest in the Fisher Canyon property. The Company
recognized a loss on abandonment of $211,827 during the year ended December 31, 2015.
Rose Gulch
On August 27, 2012, the Company entered into an Exploration and Mining Lease and Option to
Purchase Agreement on the Rose Gulch Property with a private individual. The property consists of 460
acres of private land located in Pershing County, Nevada.
As of September 10, 2014, the Company has abandoned its interest in the Rose Gulch property. A loss
of $25,000 was recorded as a loss on mineral properties and interest during the year ended December
31, 2014.
Cahuilla Gold Project
On February 10, 2010 Consolidated entered into an Earn-In Agreement with Teras Resources, Inc.
(“Teras”) whereby Teras could earn 65% undivided interest in the Cahuilla property. The agreement was
subsequently amended in 2011 to allow Teras to earn 100% interest in the property. Pursuant to the
terms of the Earn-in Agreement, the Company received cash from Teras for the exclusive use of
exploration, development and maintenance expenditures on the property and shares of Teras’ common
stock as follows:
·$800,000 and 4,000,000 Teras common shares (received in 2010)
F-17
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
·$1,000,000 and 5,000,000 Teras common shares (received in 2011)
· 5,300,000 Teras common shares (received in 2014)
· 10,000,000 Teras common shares (received in 2014)
As of December 31, 2014 the Company had transferred all of its interest over to Teras in accordance with
the agreement. Because the Company did not have majority control nor significant influence over the
venture, it accounted for the Earn-In Agreement using the cost method.
NOTE 5 – MINERAL DATA HELD FOR SALE - MUSKOX DATA
The Company has acquired the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining Corporation (“Prize”). The
Company’s director, Mr. Somji, is currently CEO/director and 3% shareholder of Prize Mining
Corporation. The Data consists of documentation of work on the Muskox Intrusion in Nunavut, Canada.
The Company is actively attempting to sell the data to interested parties. The Company does not own the
mineral rights associated with the data.
The purchase price for the Data from Prize was $1 million paid by the issuance of 3,703,334 shares of
the Company’s common stock. The fair value of shares of common stock issued was based on the
trading price of the Company’s shares on the date of the agreement. In addition, as provided by Mr.
Somji’s incentive package, the Chairman was granted 333,334 shares of common stock with a value of
$350,000 in January 2014 for generating a project that the Board voted to accept and acquire. The fair
value of the shares of common stock issued to the chairman was based on the grant date fair value on
the date of the incentive package. The total cost of acquiring the Data was $1,350,000.
Management determined that as of December 31, 2014, the estimated fair value of the Data had
decreased. The Company determined the estimated fair value of $250,000 after considering a report
from a third party who performed an evaluation of the Muskox Data in early 2015. An impairment loss of
$1,100,000 was recognized for the year ending December 31, 2014 bringing the investment balance to
its fair value of $250,000. The fair value was based on Level 3 input variables under the fair value
measurement accounting principles.
During 2015, management identified no occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that indicated
that the current carrying value data was impaired.
NOTE 6 – RELATED PARTY CONVERTIBLE NOTES
At December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, the Company has two convertible notes payable to
Thomas Mancuso, former president and current director, totaling $50,000. The notes bear interest of 20%
and mature on July 21, 2016 and August 4, 2016. The notes are convertible at the note holder’s option
into shares of the Company’s common stock. The number of shares that the note can be converted into
will be determined as follows:
F-18
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Prior to the Maturity Date – The balance of the unpaid principal plus all accrued interest divided by 90%
of the offering price of the Company’s most recent equity offering or $0.45 if there have been no recent
equity offerings. The conversion rate was $0.45 at December 31, 2015 and 2014.
At the Maturity Date – The balance of the unpaid principal plus all accrued interest divided by $0.45.
The fair value of the related conversion option at December 31, 2015, and 2014, was nil due to the
relatively short term to maturity date and the effective ‘prior to maturity date’ conversion rate
approximating the fair value of the Company’s common share at each year end.
Accrued interest
Accrued interest payable related to the outstanding notes was $43,951 and $39,701 for the years ended
December 31, 2015, and 2014, respectively. Interest expense recognized on the outstanding notes was
$10,140 and $10,140 for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
NOTE 7 – STOCKHOLDERS EQUITY
Preferred Stock
The Company has 15,000,000 authorized and unissued shares of preferred stock with a par value of
$0.10 per share, with rights and preferences to be determined by the Company’s board of directors.
Common Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2014, the board of directors and shareholders approved an
increase in the number of authorized shares of common stock from 100,000,000 shares with a par value
of $0.001 per share, to 200,000,000 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.001 per share. Each
holder of common stock is entitled to one vote for each share of common stock held on all matters which
holders of common stock are entitled to vote.
On January 12, 2015, our board of directors and stockholders approved a one-for-three reverse stock
split of the Company’s common stock. After the reverse stock split, effective March 16, 2015, each holder
of record held one share of common stock for every 3 shares held immediately prior to the effective date.
As a result of the reverse stock split, the number of shares underlying outstanding stock options and
warrants and the related exercise prices were adjusted to reflect the change in the share price and
outstanding shares on the date of the reverse stock split.
Following the effective date of the reverse stock split, the par value of the common stock remained at
$0.001 per share. As a result, the Company has reduced the common stock in these financial statements
on a retroactive basis for all periods presented with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in-
capital.
F-19
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
During the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company issued the following shares of its common
stock:
95,238 shares valued at $.105 per share (total of $10,000) to a director in lieu of a cash payment in
·
connection with the Fisher Canyon agreement – see Note 4.
·80,000 shares valued at $.17 per share (total of $13,600) in connection with a private placement.
500,000 shares with a fair value of $.17 per share (total of $85,000) in connection with investor relation
·
services.
During the year ended December 31, 2014, the Company issued the following shares of its common
stock:
200,000 shares valued at $.93 per share (total of $185,999) to a former director in accordance with the
·
2013 performance bonus program. This amount was accrued at December 31, 2013.
·69,834 shares valued at $.45 per share (total of $31,425) for legal services rendered.
·50,000 shares valued at $1.05 per share (total of $52,501) to Mr. Somji as an incentive for joining the
Company’s Board of Directors as Chairman.
100,000 shares valued at $1.05 per share (total of $105,000) to a director in accordance with the terms
·
of the consulting services agreement.
3,703,334 shares valued at $.27 per share (total of $1,000,000) in connection with the purchase of the
·
Muskox Data – see Note 5.
333,334 shares valued at $1.05 per share (total of $350,000) to a director in accordance with the
·
purchase of the Muskox Data – see Note 5.
7,833,334 shares valued at $.09 per share (total of $705,000) issued to 1824455 Alberta Ltd in
·
connection with acquisition of frac sand properties– see Note 4.
7,833,334 shares valued at $.09 per share (total of $705,000) issued to 1824455 Alberta Ltd in
·
connection with acquisition of frac sand properties to be held in escrow until certain milestones are met
– see Note 4.
8,334 shares valued at $.06 per share (total of $500) in connection with the King Solomon Exploration
·
and Mining Lease with Option to Purchase Agreement – see Note 4.
1,591,809 shares were cancelled in accordance with an agreement entered into with two shareholders –
·
see Note 8.
Warrants
The Company had 1,554,030 warrants with an average exercise price of $0.75 that expired in December
2015.
F-20
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Stock options
The Company approved an Amended 2013 Stock Option and Stock Bonus Plan at its Annual Meeting
on March 31, 2014. Stock options are issued for compensation and services as determined by the board
of directors. Following is a summary of stock option activity for the years ended December 31, 2015 and
December 31, 2014:
Outstanding at December 31, 2013
Granted
Number of
 
Shares
Weighted
Average
  
Exercise 
Price
  2,313,698  $ 0.49
  466,670     0.09
-
Exercised
  -
Expired
  2,780,368  $ 0.43
Outstanding at December 31, 2014
  600,000     0.17
Granted
  -
Exercised
Expired
  (216,336 )   0.45
Outstanding and exercisable December 31, 2015  3,164,032  $ 0.36
-
-
-
The weighted average contractual term of the options granted during the years ended December 31,
2015 and 2014 was 4.13 years and 4.69 years, respectively. As of the year ended December 31, 2015,
all of the options were fully vested. At December 31, 2015, the stock options had an intrinsic value of
$18,667 based upon the market price of the Company’s stock on that date.
Expenses related to the granting and vesting of stock options were $28,017 and $19,479 for the years
ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
The Company estimated the fair value of options granted by using the Binomial Lattice option pricing
model with the following assumptions used for grants:
Dividend yield
Expected volatility
Risk-free interest rate  1.33%
Expected life (years)   4.75
2015
 
  -
 
  69.13% - 100%   75.81% - 100% 
   0.84% - 2.17%  
   4.25 – 7.67
2014
   -
The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of comparable companies for a period
approximating the expected life, due to the limited trading history of the Company’s common stock. The
risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues over
equivalent lives of the options.
The expected life of employee stock options represents the weighted-average period the stock options
are expected to remain outstanding and is a derived output of the Binomial Lattice model. The expected
life of employee stock options is impacted by all of the underlying assumptions and calibration of the
Company’s model. The Binomial Lattice model estimates the probability of exercise as a function of
these two variables based on the entire history of exercises and cancellations on all past option grants
made by the Company.
F-21
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 8 – AGREEMENT TO EXCHANGE SHARES
In early 2014, the Company entered into agreements with two shareholders of the Company to acquire
1,591,809 shares of Company’s common stock held by the shareholders in exchange for 2,425,000
common shares of Teras that were owned by the Company. The agreements contained provisions
relating to the voting of any remaining shares of the Company’s common stock owned or controlled by
the shareholders in accordance with the recommendations of the Company’s board of directors at the
Annual Meeting and releases related to disagreements between the Company and the shareholders
over the strategic direction and management of the Company.
The Company retired the shares of common stock that were acquired under these agreements. The fair
value of these shares on the date of the agreements was $662,563 which was deducted from common
stock and additional paid in capital during 2014. The cost basis of the Teras shares exchanged in
connection with the agreements was $996,618. The difference of $334,055 was recognized in the
statement of operations as a loss for the year ended December 31, 2014.
NOTE 9 – INCOME TAXES
A reconciliation of the tax benefit that would have been recognized using the Company’s statutory
income tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 is as follows:
2015
Federal income tax benefit at statutory rate $1,167,100    35 %  $273,200    35 %
   1 %
Effect of state income taxes
Effect of non-deductible items
)   
 
Change in valuation allowance
33,300
   (400
   (1,200,000)  (36)%   (279,900)  (36)%
   -
1 %    7,800
)   
   (1,100
-
2014
-
-
The Company did not record federal or state tax provisions for the years ended December 31, 2015 or
2014, due to the Company’s continued net operating losses. No deferred tax provision (benefit) has been
recorded at December 31, 2015 or 2014 due to a full valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets.
Realization of the Company’s deferred tax assets depends on generating sufficient taxable income in
future years in appropriate tax jurisdictions to obtain benefit from net operating loss carryforwards. Due to
the uncertainty of the timing and the amount of such realization, management concluded that a full
valuation allowance was required.
Significant components of the deferred tax assets for the years ended December 31, 2015 and
December 31, 2014 are as follows:
F-22
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
2015
2014
Deferred tax asset:
Net operating loss carryforward $1,780,300   $950,400
    201,500
Stock based compensation
Exploration costs
    137,800
Other
    -
Total deferred tax asset
Deferred tax liability
Investment basis difference
Net deferred tax asset
Valuation allowance
185,600
 
   261,500
   20,000
 
   2,247,400     1,289,700  
    
 
     
   -
    (242,300 )
   2,247,400     1,047,400  
   (2,247,400)   (1,047,400)
   -
-
At December 31, 2015, the Company has net operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax
purposes of approximately $4,900,000 to offset future taxable income which expire from 2027 to 2035.
As of December 31, 2015, state net operating losses were immaterial.
The Company has no uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2015 or 2014.  If interest and penalties
were to be assessed, interest would be charged to interest expense, and penalties to other operating
expense.  It is not anticipated that unrecognized tax benefits would significantly increase or decrease
within 12 months of the reporting date.  Fiscal years 2013 through 2015 remain subject to examination by
state and federal tax authorities.
NOTE 10 – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In addition to related party transactions disclosed in Notes 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, the following transactions
have occurred:
Consulting Agreements
The Company elected a Chairman of the Board on March 8, 2013, which included an incentive package
for joining the Board. The incentives are as follows; 116,667 share of common stock for joining of the
Board; 66,667 shares of common stock after successful completion of 6 months as a Board member;
50,000 shares of common stock after successful completion of 12 months as a Board member; and
333,334 shares of common stock if the Chairman generates a property that the Board votes to accept
and acquire. For the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company incurred $0 and $52,500,
respectively, of expense for the incentive package. On January 7, 2014 the Company accepted the
purchase of a property the Chairman presented (see Note 5). As a result the Chairman was granted
333,334 shares of common stock with a grant date value of $350,000 in January 2014.
F-23
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The Company entered into a consulting agreement with the Chairman of the Board to provide assistance
in corporate affairs effective March 14, 2013. For services rendered, the Company will issue to the
consultant 25,000 common shares in the Company each month, payable at the end of each quarter. The
term of this agreement is effective for one year and will be automatically renewed for further terms of one
year until terminated in accordance with the agreement. On January 1, 2015 the Company entered into a
new consulting agreement with the Chairman of the Board to provide assistance in corporate affairs. This
agreement supersedes and replaces all existing agreements between the Company and consultant. For
services rendered, the Company will pay a base monthly fee of $5,000 plus taxes where applicable,
provide full participation in any benefit, stock options, or annual bonus programs, as well as reimburse all
out of pocket expenses incurred while providing consulting services. During the year ended December
31, 2015 and 2014, the Company recognized expense of $74,663 and $112,425, respectively. Accrued
related party payable associated with these services were $20,000 and $4,523 at December 31, 2015
and 2014, respectively.
On February 1, 2015 the Company entered into a consulting agreement with Robin Somji, wife of Feisal
Somji, to provide Administrative Services in Canada. For services rendered, the Company will pay a
base monthly fee of $5,000 plus taxes where applicable, provide full participation in any benefit, stock
options, or annual bonus programs, as well as reimburse all out of pocket expenses incurred while
providing consulting services. During the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company recognized
expense of $50,000. Accrued related party payable associated with these services were $20,000 at
December 31, 2015.
Employment Agreements
The Company has employment agreements with three executive employees that require certain
termination benefits and payments in defined circumstances.
Additional Accrued Payables to Related Parties
During the year ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company recognized expenses of $5,882 and
$86,033 for consulting and out of pocket expenses to an officer of the Company. Payables associated
with these services were $17,762 and $69,813 at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
At the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company had $126,156 and $193,217,
respectively, due to 1824455 Alberta Ltd., for the purchase of the frac sand properties.
During the year ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company recognized expenses of $82,736 to
1824455 Alberta Ltd for sampling and consulting services. Payables associated with these services
were $42,874 at December 31, 2015.
Receivable from Related Parties
In 2013 and 2014, the Company loaned Rokmaster Resources Corporation a total of $165,000. The
Company’s Chairman of the Board was a Director of Rokmaster.
On April 24, 2014 Rokmaster Resources Corporation has fulfilled its obligations under the terms of the
loan agreements by paying, in full, the principal amount due plus all accrued interest to the Company.
F-24
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
At the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company had $36,252 due from an officer and
director for payroll taxes owed due to the granting of shares of the Company’s common stock and the
issuance of shares of Teras Resources, Inc. common stock during the February 2013 and September
2013 performance bonus program.
At the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company had $2,902 due from a former
shareholder for repayment of shares issued in error.
NOTE 11 – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 20, 2016 the Company, as Lessor, entered into an Exploration and Mining Lease with
Options to Purchase Agreement with Premium Bonanza Gold Mines, LLC for the five unpatented
Pyramid Mine claims. The term of the Agreement is for a period of twenty (20) years. The Pyramid Mine
Agreement may be cancelable at the option of either the Company or the lessee at any time by giving
thirty (30) days advanced notice.
Lease payments for the property are outlined below:
·On signing of the agreement $20,000 – (payment received January 2016)
· On or prior to each anniversary date:
o
o
o
o
o
1st: waived
2nd: $25,000
3rd: $30,000
4th: $40,000
5th and thereafter $50,000
The lease also requires minimum work commitments on or prior to each anniversary date as follows:
1st: $10,000
2nd: $25,000
3rd: $30,000
4th: $40,000
5th and thereafter $50,000
o
o
o
o
o
All work expenditures made by Lessee during any Lease Year in excess of the work commitment
expenditures required for such Lease Year shall be credited against work commitment requirements for
any subsequent Lease Year.
F-25
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Prepaid expenses and deposits
Related party receivable
Mineral data held for sale (Note 5)
Total Current Assets
 
MINERAL PROPERTIES AND INTERESTS
 
OTHER ASSETS
Investment - available for sale
Reclamation bond
Total Other Assets
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Accrued payroll liabilities
Accrued interest - related party
Convertible debt, related party
Payables to related parties
Total Current Liabilities
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
 
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES (Note 4)
 
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Preferred stock, $.10 par value, 15,000,000 authorized; no shares issued
and outstanding
Common stock, $0.001 par value, 200,000,000 shares authorized;
30,336,283 and 30,336,283 shares issued and outstanding, respectively
Additional paid in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total Stockholders' Equity
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
$8,773
    8,853
    39,154
    250,000
    306,780
March 31,
 2016
 (unaudited)   (audited)
    
    
 $1,879
   5,277
   39,154
   250,000
   296,310
    
   1,670,181     1,690,181
    
    
   15,000
   13,191
   28,191
    
 $1,994,682   $2,025,152
    
    
    
 $523,142
   341,151
   46,479
   50,000
   258,321
   1,219,093     1,086,711
    
   1,219,093     1,086,711
December 31, 
 
  2015
15,000
    13,191
    28,191
$504,478
    261,490
    43,951
    50,000
    226,792
-
-
30,336
30,336
6,976,019     6,976,019
 
   (6,230,766)   (6,067,914 )
 
   775,589
 $1,994,682   $2,025,152
938,441
F-26
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS) (UNAUDITED)
OPERATING EXPENSES (INCOME)
Exploration expense
Payroll and related `
Professional fees and consulting
General and administrative
Loss (gain) on mineral properties and interests
TOTAL OPERATING EXPENSES (INCOME)
 
INCOME (LOSS) FROM OPERATIONS
 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest and other miscellaneous expenses
Gain (loss) on investments available for sale
TOTAL OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
 
NET INCOME (LOSS)
 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Change in unrealized loss on investments available for sale
Reclassification of realized loss on investments available for sale
 
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
NET INCOME (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE, BASIC AND DILUTED
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF COMMON STOCK SHARES
OUTSTANDING, BASIC AND DILUTED
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
For the three months ended 
 
 March 31,
 
 2016
  2015
  
 
   
 
    
     
 
 $10,739
  $30,068
 
   79,661
    43,621
   47,474
 
    56,083
 
   22,300
    95,872
 
   -
    8,757
   160,174
 
    234,401
 
    
     
)
   (160,174
)   (234,401
    
 
     
 
    
     
)
   (2,678
)   (2,703
)
   -
    (494,283
   (2,678
)
)   (496,986
 
    
     
)
 $(162,852
) $(731,387
    
 
     
 
    
     
)
   -
    (959,389
   -
 
    494,283
     
    
 
) $(1,196,493 )
 $(162,852
 
     
    
   (0.01
)   (0.02
)
30,336,283     29,727,731
F-27
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (UNAUDITED)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
Net Income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used by operating activities:    
(Gain) Loss on investments available for sale
   -
   -
(Gain) Loss on mineral property and interests
    
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Decrease (increase) in:
    
   3,576
Prepaid expenses and deposits
Increase (decrease) in:
Three Months Ended  
 March 31,  March 31, 
 2016
 
    
 
 $(162,852) $(731,387)
     
 
    494,283  
 
    8,757
 
     
     
 
 
    2,856
2015
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Accrued payroll liabilities
Accrued interest - related party
Payable to related parties
Net cash used by operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
Purchase of mineral properties and interest
Proceeds from sale of mining property
Proceeds from sale of investments - available for sale
Net cash provided by investing activities
 
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
Noncash investing and financing activities:
Investment - available for sale exchanged for mineral interest
Common stock issued for mineral property
See accompanying notes to the financial statements.
-
18,664     (14,768 )
   79,661     (27,145 )
   2,528
 
   31,529     (27,023 )
   (26,894 )   (294,427)
     
    
 
   -
    (10,000 )
   20,000     -
 
   -
    283,895  
   20,000     273,895  
     
    
 
)   (20,532 )
   (6,894
    59,677  
   8,773
    
     
 
  $39,145  
 $1,879
 
     
    
 $-
  $9,655
 
    10,000  
   -
F-28
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
NOTE 1 - ORGANIZATION AND DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Brilliant Sands Incorporated (hereinafter “BRSD” or “the Company”) was incorporated as Helena Silver
Mines in May 1888 under the laws of the State of Montana.  In July 2006, Helena Silver Mines Inc.
completed a share acquisition agreement with Dome Copper, Inc. The acquisition was accounted for as
a reverse merger with Helena Silver Mines, Inc. being the accounting acquirer and Dome Copper, Inc.
surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary. At the time of the acquisition, the name of the Company was
changed to Consolidated Goldfields Corporation. On January 12, 2015 the Company held a Special
Meeting of Stockholders to change the name of the Company to Brilliant Sands Incorporated which
became effective on March 16, 2015.
The Company is a company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of frac sand and
mining properties. The Company’s year-end is December 31.
As disclosed in Note 7, the Company’s board of directors and stockholders approved a one-for-
three reverse stock split of the Company's common stock effective March 16, 2015.  Following the
effective date of the reverse stock split, the par value of the common stock remained at $0.001 per share.
Unless otherwise indicated, all references herein to shares outstanding and share issuances have been
adjusted to give effect to the aforementioned stock split.
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying unaudited financial statements have been prepared by the Company in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America for interim financial
information. Accordingly, the financial statements do not include all of the information and footnotes
required by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America for complete
financial statements and should be read in conjunction with the annual audited financial statements
included in the Company’s Form S-1 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In the opinion
of management, all adjustments (consisting of only normal recurring accruals) considered necessary for
a fair presentation of the interim financial statements have been included. Operating results for the three
month period ended March 31, 2016 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for
the full year ending December 31, 2016.  All amounts presented are in U.S. dollars.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared under the assumption that the Company
will continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred losses since its inception and does not
have sufficient cash to fund normal operations and meet obligations for the next 12 months without
deferring payment on certain current liabilities and/or raising additional funds. The Company currently
has no historical recurring source of revenue and its ability to continue as a going concern is dependent
on the Company’s ability to raise capital to fund its future exploration and working capital requirements or
its ability to profitably execute its business plan. The Company’s plans for the long-term return to and
continuation as a going concern include the profitable exploitation of its properties and financing the
Company’s future operations through sales of its common stock and/or debt.   The financial statements
do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continuing as
a going concern.
F-29
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make complex and subjective estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts in the Company’s financial statements and notes thereto for items such as potential
impairment of investments available for sale, mineral data held for sale, and long-lived assets; the
valuation of stock based compensation; and determination of deferred income taxes. On a regular basis,
management evaluates these estimates and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from these
estimates.
The Company believes the estimates used are reasonable and appropriate based on current facts and
circumstances. It is possible, however, that other parties applying reasonable judgment to the same facts
and circumstances could develop different estimates. Additionally, changes in actual experience or
changes in other qualitative factors could cause estimates to fluctuate.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of shares
outstanding during the year.  The weighted average number of shares is calculated by taking the number
of shares outstanding and weighting them by the amount of time they were outstanding.   The following
options, warrants and convertible debt equivalent shares were excluded from the computation of diluted
earnings per share for the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 because they were anti-
dilutive:
March 31,   March 31,
2016
2015
Options
  3,164,032   2,780,368 
Warrants
  —
   1,554,030 
Convertible Debt  214,397    199,335  
 
  3,378,429   4,533,733
Fair Value Measurements
At March 31, 2016, the Company has an investment available for sale of $15,000 that is measured at fair
value on a recurring basis using Level 1 inputs.
F-30
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
Financial Instrument
At March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, the Company’s financial instruments include cash and cash
equivalents which approximate fair value and convertible debt and related accrued interest with
approximate fair value of $19,000 and $27,000, respectively, based upon the trading price and the
equivalent number of shares of Company’s stock into which the debt is convertible.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting standards that have been issued or proposed that do not require adoption until a future date
are not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements upon adoption.
NOTE 3 - INVESTMENTS – AVAILABLE FOR SALE
At March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, investments – available for sale consisted of 100,000 shares
of Strategic Resources International, Inc.’s common stock with a fair value of $15,000. There were no
transactions in investments – available for sale for the three months ended March 31, 2016.
During the year ending December 31, 2015, the Company had the following transactions relating to its
investment in Teras Resources, Inc.:
Sold 13,612,500 shares for net cash proceeds of $785,944. A loss on investment available for sale of
·
$1,529,490 was recognized as a result of these transactions.
Exchanged 100,000 shares for an interest in the Fisher Canyon mineral claims (see Note 4). The value
·
of the shares on the transaction date was $9,655. A loss on mineral properties of $8,757 was recognized
as a result of this transaction.
On December 31, 2015, the Company determined that decline in value of its investment in Strategic
Resources International, Inc. was other than temporary. An impairment loss of $38,000 was recognized
for the year ending December 31, 2015 bringing the investment balance to its fair value of $15,000 which
was determined using the trading price of this security.
F-31
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
NOTE 4 – MINERAL PROPERTIES AND INTERESTS
Mineral properties and interests are as follows:
Frac Sand:
McLelland
March 31,
 
2016
    
 $1,780,300  $ 950,400
December 31,
  
 
2015
185,600     201,500
   299,306     299,306
Alberta
Washow
Total frac sand   1,646,181    1,646,181
Pyramid Mine    24,000
$1,670,181  $ 1,690,181
44,000
Frac Sand Properties
On December 17, 2014 the Company entered into an Agreement of Purchase and Sale with 1824455
Alberta Ltd. to purchase a 100% right, title and interest in three properties located in the Canadian
Provinces of Manitoba and Alberta. The McClelland project consists of 66,000 acres and the Alberta
project consists of 87,000 acres, both of which are situated in Alberta. The Washow project consists of
1,000 acres and is situated in Manitoba. The settlement of purchase price is outlined below:
·At closing, 7,833,334 shares of Company’s common stock were issued to 1824455 Alberta Ltd.
·On signing of the agreement $50,000 CAD ($42,964 USD, paid December 2014)
$50,000 CAD ($42,937 USD, this amount was accrued at December 2014 and paid April 2015) to be
·
paid within forty-five days of closing
$175,000 CAD ($126,156 USD, this amount was accrued at March 31, 2016) to be paid upon
·
completion of financing
At closing, an additional 7,833,334 shares of Company’s common stock were issued to 1824455 Alberta
Ltd to be held in escrow until applicable terms and conditions are met as outlined below. Management
has determined that it is probable that these milestones will be met in 2016.
2,350,000 of the escrowed shares will be released upon the completion of a NI 43-101 resource report
that identifies a resource deposit which is sufficient to move forward with a project. The Company has
·
engaged an engineering firm to begin the NI 43-101 and anticipates completion of the reports during the
third quarter of 2016. As of March 31, 2016, the shares have not been released from escrow.
2,350,000 of the escrowed shares will be release upon the completion of a Preliminary Economic
Assessment which demonstrates a financial return which is sufficient to move forward with a project.
·
The Company has engaged an engineering firm to the Preliminary Economic Assessment process and
anticipated completion during the third quarter of 2016. As of March 31, 2016, the shares have not been
released from escrow.
F-32
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
3,133,334 of the escrowed shares will be released upon the award of all necessary permits that will
·
allow for the mining of product. As of March 31, 2016, the shares have not been released from escrow.
The fair value of the total 15,666,668 shares of common stock issued was $1,410,000 on the date of the
agreement based upon the trading price of the Company’s stock.
Feisal Somji, chairman of the Company, is a consultant to 1824455 Alberta Ltd.
In addition, the Company entered into a Production Royalty Agreement on the frac sand properties. The
Company will pay a two (2%) percent production royalty of actual proceeds from the sale or other
disposition of the product commencing on the date on which commercial production is achieved. The
Company has agreed to an advance minimum royalty (“AMR”) to begin on the one year anniversary of
the closing date and continuing yearly up to the date of commercial production in the amount of $225,000
CAD annually. The annual AMR will be paid on a quarterly basis in four equal installments. AMR’s paid
prior to commercial production for each property will be credited against future production royalties on
each property on a dollar for dollar basis up to the maximum rate per quarter. The AMR’s paid is non-
refundable. On March 30, 2016, 1824455 Alberta Ltd has agreed to extend the AMR payments which
were due on December 17, 2015 and March 17, 2016 until the Company has raised additional funds or
obtained financing.
Total exploration expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 were $10,421 and
$15,663, respectively.
Pyramid Mine
The Pyramid Mine project consists of five unpatented claims encompassing 100 acres located in
Churchill County, Nevada which are 100% owned by the Company. No proven or probable reserves
have been identified on the property.
On January 20, 2016 the Company, as Lessor, entered into an Exploration and Mining Lease with
Options to Purchase Agreement with Premium Bonanza Gold Mines, LLC for the five unpatented
Pyramid Mine claims. The term of the Agreement is for a period of twenty (20) years. The Pyramid Mine
Agreement may be cancelable at the option of either the Company or the lessee at any time by giving
thirty (30) days advanced notice.
F-33
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
Lease payments for the property are outlined below:
·On signing of the agreement $20,000 – (received January 2016)
· On or prior to each anniversary date:
o
o
o
o
o
1st: waived
2nd: $25,000
3rd: $30,000
4th: $40,000
5th and thereafter $50,000
The lease also requires minimum work commitments on or prior to each anniversary date as follows:
1st: $10,000
2nd: $25,000
3rd: $30,000
4th: $40,000
5th and thereafter $50,000
o
o
o
o
o
All work expenditures made by Lessee during any Lease Year in excess of the work commitment
expenditures required for such Lease Year shall be credited against work commitment requirements for
any subsequent Lease Year.
NOTE 5 – MINERAL DATA HELD FOR SALE - MUSKOX DATA
The Company has acquired the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining Corporation (“Prize”). The
Company’s director, Mr. Somji, is currently CEO/director and 3% shareholder of Prize Mining
Corporation. The Data consists of documentation of work on the Muskox Intrusion in Nunavut, Canada.
The Company is actively attempting to sell the data to interested parties. The Company does not own the
mineral rights associated with the data.
The purchase price for the Data from Prize was $1 million paid by the issuance of 3,703,334 shares of
the Company’s common stock. The fair value of shares of common stock issued was based on the
trading price of the Company’s shares on the date of the agreement. In addition, as provided by Mr.
Somji’s incentive package, the Chairman was granted 333,334 shares of common stock with a value of
$350,000 in January 2014 for generating a project that the Board voted to accept and acquire. The fair
value of the shares of common stock issued to the chairman was based on the grant date fair value on
the date of the incentive package. The total cost of acquiring the Data was $1,350,000.
Management determined that as of December 31, 2014, the estimated fair value of the Data had
decreased. The Company determined the estimated fair value of $250,000 after considering a report
from a third party who performed an evaluation of the Muskox Data in early 2015. An impairment loss of
$1,100,000 was recognized for the year ending December 31, 2014 bringing the investment balance to
its fair value of $250,000. The fair value was based on Level 3 input variables under the fair value
measurement accounting principles.
F-34
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
During 2015 and the first quarter 2016, management identified no occurrence of events or changes in
circumstances that indicated that the carrying value of the data was further impaired.
NOTE 6 – RELATED PARTY CONVERTIBLE NOTES
As of March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, the Company has two convertible notes payable to
Thomas Mancuso, former president and current director, totaling $50,000. The notes bear interest of 20%
and mature on July 21, 2016 and August 4, 2016. The notes are convertible at the note holder’s option
into shares of the Company’s common stock. The number of shares that the note can be converted into
will be determined as follows:
Prior to the Maturity Date – The balance of the unpaid principal plus all accrued interest divided by 90%
of the offering price of the Company’s most recent equity offering or $0.45 if there have been no recent
equity offerings. The conversion rate was $0.45 at March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015.
At the Maturity Date – The balance of the unpaid principal plus all accrued interest divided by $0.45.
The fair value of the related conversion option at March 31, 2016, and December 31, 2015, was nil due
to the relatively short term to maturity date and the effective ‘prior to maturity date’ conversion rate
approximating the fair value of the Company’s common share at each period end.
Accrued interest
Accrued interest payable related to the outstanding notes was $46,479 and $43,951 as of March 31,
2016, and December 31, 2015, respectively. Interest expense recognized on the outstanding notes was
$2,528 and $2,500 for the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
NOTE 7 – STOCKHOLDERS EQUITY
Preferred Stock
The Company has 15,000,000 authorized and unissued shares of preferred stock with a par value of
$0.10 per share, with rights and preferences to be determined by the Company’s board of directors.
Common Stock
On January 12, 2015, our board of directors and stockholders approved a one-for-three reverse stock
split of the Company’s common stock. After the reverse stock split, effective March 16, 2015, each holder
of record held one share of common stock for every 3 shares held immediately prior to the effective date.
As a result of the reverse stock split, the number of shares underlying outstanding stock options and
warrants and the related exercise prices were adjusted to reflect the change in the share price and
outstanding shares on the date of the reverse stock split.
F-35
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
Following the effective date of the reverse stock split, the par value of the common stock remained at
$0.001 per share. As a result, the Company has reduced the common stock in these financial statements
on a retroactive basis for all periods presented with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in-
capital.
During the three months ended March 31, 2016, the Company did not issue any shares of its common
stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company issued the following shares of its common
stock:
95,238 shares valued at $.105 per share (total of $10,000) to a director in lieu of a cash payment in
·
connection with the Fisher Canyon agreement – see Note 4.
·80,000 shares valued at $.17 per share (total of $13,600) in connection with a private placement.
500,000 shares with a fair value of $.17 per share (total of $85,000) in connection with investor relation
·
services.
NOTE 8 – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In addition to related party transactions disclosed in Notes 4, 5, and 6, the following transactions have
occurred:
Consulting Agreements
On January 1, 2015 the Company entered into a new consulting agreement with the Chairman of the
Board to provide assistance in corporate affairs. This agreement supersedes and replaces all existing
agreements between the Company and consultant. For services rendered, the Company will pay a base
monthly fee of $5,000 plus taxes where applicable, provide full participation in any benefit, stock options,
or annual bonus programs, as well as reimburse all out of pocket expenses incurred while providing
consulting services. During the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company recognized
expense of $15,790 and $16,864, respectively. Accrued related party payable associated with these
services were $40,790 and $20,000 at March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, respectively.
On February 1, 2015 the Company entered into a consulting agreement with Robin Somji, wife of Feisal
Somji, to provide Administrative Services in Canada. For services rendered, the Company will pay a
base monthly fee of $5,000 plus taxes where applicable, provide full participation in any benefit, stock
options, or annual bonus programs, as well as reimburse all out of pocket expenses incurred while
providing consulting services. During the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company
recognized expense of $5,000 and $15,000, respectively. Accrued related party payable associated with
these services were $25,000 and $20,000 at March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, respectively.
F-36
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
(Formerly known as Consolidated Goldfields Corporation)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
Employment Agreements
The Company has employment agreements with three executive employees that require certain
termination benefits and payments in defined circumstances.
Additional Accrued Payables to Related Parties
During the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company recognized expenses of $318
and $2,698 for consulting and out of pocket expenses to an officer of the Company. Payables associated
with these services were $18,080 and $17,762 at March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, respectively.
As of March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, the Company had $126,156 due to 1824455 Alberta Ltd.,
for the purchase of the frac sand properties. See Note 4.
For the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company recognized expenses of $10,421
and $19,657, respectively, due to 1824455 Alberta Ltd for sampling and consulting services. Payables
associated with these services were $53,295 and $42,874 at March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015,
respectively.
Receivable from Related Parties
As of March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, the Company had $36,252 due from an officer and
director for payroll taxes owed due to the granting of shares of the Company’s common stock and the
issuance of shares of Teras Resources, Inc. common stock during the February 2013 and September
2013 performance bonus program.
As of March 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, the Company had $2,902 due from a former shareholder
for repayment of shares issued in error.
F-37
16,903,645 Shares of Common Stock
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
Prospectus
Until             , 2016, all dealers that buy, sell or trade the common stock may be required to deliver a
prospectus, regardless of whether they are participating in this offering. This is in addition to the
dealers’ obligation to deliver a prospectus when acting as underwriters and with respect to their
unsold allotments or subscriptions.
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 13. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution
The following table presents the costs and expenses in connection with the issuance and distribution of
the securities to be registered, other than underwriting discounts and commissions, payable by us in
connection with the sale of securities being registered. Except as otherwise noted, we will pay all of
these amounts. All amounts are estimates except the Securities and Exchange Commission registration
fee.
$236
 
SEC registration fee
 $28,000 
Accounting fees and expenses
Legal fees and expenses
 $20,000 
Miscellaneous fees and expenses $25,000 
Total
 $73,236
Item 14. Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Sections 35-1-451 through 35-1-459 of the Montana Business Corporation Act, or “MBCA,” provide that a
corporation may indemnify its directors and officers. In general, the MBCA provides that a corporation
must indemnify a director or officer who is wholly successful in his defense of a proceeding to which he
is a party because of his status as a director or officer, unless limited by the articles of incorporation.
Pursuant to the MBCA, a corporation may indemnify a director or officer, if it is determined that the
individual engaged in good faith conduct; the individual reasonably believed, in the case of conduct in
an official capacity with the corporation, that the individual's conduct was in the corporation's best
interests, and in all other cases, that the individual's conduct was at least not opposed to the
corporation's best interests; and in the case of any criminal proceeding, the individual did not have
reasonable cause to believe the conduct was unlawful. A corporation may not indemnify a director or
officer under the MBCA in connection with a proceeding by or in the right of the corporation in which the
individual was adjudged liable to the corporation; or in connection with any other proceeding charging
improper personal benefit to the individual, whether or not involving action in the individual's official
capacity, in which the individual was adjudged liable on the basis that personal benefit was improperly
received by the individual. The MBCA also permits a director or officer of a corporation, who is a party to
a proceeding, to apply to the courts for indemnification or advancement of expenses, unless the articles
of incorporation provide otherwise, and the court may order indemnification or advancement of expenses
under certain circumstances.
Our articles of incorporation provide for the indemnification to the fullest extent permitted by applicable
law against all liability and expense (including attorneys’ fees) incurred by reason of the fact the person
is or was our director or officer or, while serving at our request as a director, officer partner, trustee,
employee, fiduciary or agent of, or in any similar managerial or fiduciary position of, another domestic or
foreign corporation or other individual or entity or of an employee benefit plan. We have also obtained
officers’ and directors’ liability insurance which insures against liabilities that officers and directors may,
in such capacities, incur.
Item 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Since January 1, 2012, we have issued the following securities that were not registered under the
Securities Act of 1933:
II-1
1.
Common Stock
In January and February 2012, we issued an aggregate of 66,668 shares of our common stock, valued at
approximately $42,000, to Thomas K. Mancuso, a director and executive officer of ours, in connection
with the extension of convertible notes.
In January and February 2012, we issued an aggregate of 56,668 shares of our common stock, valued at
approximately $33,000, to Thomas Callicrate in connection with the extension of convertible notes.
In April 2012, we issued 116,670 shares of our common stock upon exercise of outstanding warrants for
aggregate proceeds to us of $87,500.
In July and August 2012, we issued an aggregate of 66,668 shares of our common stock, valued at
approximately $64,000, to Thomas K. Mancuso in connection with the extension of convertible notes.
In January 2013, we issued 37,779 shares of our common stock, valued at $35,667, to Mr. Callicrate in
connection with a release and settlement agreement.
In March and September 2013, we issued 116,667 and 66,667 shares of our common stock,
respectively, valued at $122,500 and $70,000, respectively, to Feisal Somji, our Chairman of the Board,
pursuant to our incentive package for joining our board of directors.
During June to December 2013, we issued 75,000 shares of our common stock, valued at $78,750, to
Somji Consulting in connection with our consulting agreement.
In each of September and December 2013, we issued 50,000 shares of our common stock, valued at
$52,500 and $40,500 respectively, to Marc J. Andrews, our director President and Chief Executive
Officer, pursuant to our 2013 performance bonus program.
In January 2014, we issued 200,000 shares of our common stock, valued at $186,599, to Peter Leger, a
former officer, pursuant to our 2013 performance bonus program.
In January 2014, we issued 333,334 shares of our common stock, valued at $350,000, to Mr. Somji for
introducing the Muskox transaction to us pursuant to our incentive package for joining our board of
directors.
In January 2014, we issued 3,703,334 shares of our common stock, valued at $1 million, to Prize Mining
in connection with our acquisition of the Muskox Data Inventory from Prize Mining.
In January 2014, we issued 69,834 shares of our common stock to Douglas M. Berman in consideration
of legal services valued at $31,425.
In March 2014, we issued 50,000 shares of our common stock to Mr. Somji pursuant to his incentive
package for joining our board of directors valued at $52,501.
During March to September 2014, we issued 75,000 shares of our common stock, in each case valued at
$78,750, to Somji Consulting in connection with our consulting agreement.
In December 2014, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to Somji Consulting in connection
with our consulting agreement with Somji Consulting valued at $26,250.
In December 2014, we issued 8,334 shares of our common stock, valued at approximately $500, to King
Solomon Gold LLC (“KSG”) pursuant to our Exploration and Mining Lease with Option to Purchase
Agreement with KSG.
In December 2014, we issued 15,666,668 shares of our common stock, valued at $1.41 million, to
1824455 Alberta Ltd. (“182”) pursuant to our Agreement of Purchase and Sale with 182.
II-2
In January 2015, we issued 95,238 shares of our common stock, valued at $10,000, to Mr. Mancuso in
consideration of payments due under an Exploration and Mining Lease and Option to Purchase Royalty
Agreement.
In June 2015, we issued 80,000 shares of our common stock for aggregate proceeds of $13,600 to two
accredited investors.
In August 2015, we issued 500,000 shares of our common stock, valued at $85,000 to Investor Relation
Partners in relation to an amended contract.
2.
Option Grants
In May 2012, we granted to certain directors, executive officers, employees and consultants options to
purchase 280,008 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.05 per share.
In November 2012, we granted to Mr. Andrews options to purchase 83,334 shares of our common stock
at an exercise price of $0.66 per share.
In February 2013, we granted to certain directors, executive officers, employees and consultants options
to purchase 166,672 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.05 per share.
In September 2013, we granted to Mr. Somji options to purchase 16,668 shares of our common stock at
an exercise price of $0.45 per share.
In December 2014, we granted to certain directors, executive officers, employees and consultants
options to purchase 466,670 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.09 per share.
In August 2015, we granted to Street Smart options to purchase 600,000 shares of our common stock at
an exercise price of $0.17 per share.
Except as otherwise described above, none of the foregoing transactions involved any underwriters,
underwriting discounts or commissions, or any public offering, and the registrant believes the
transactions were exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 in reliance on
Section 4(2) thereof, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, or Rule 701 thereunder, as
transactions by an issuer not involving a public offering or transactions pursuant to compensatory benefit
plans and contracts relating to compensation as provided under such Rule 701. The recipients of
securities in such transactions represented their intention to acquire the securities for investment only
and not with a view to or for sale in connection with any distribution thereof, and appropriate legends
were affixed to the share certificates and instruments issued in such transactions.
Item 16. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a)         Exhibits. The exhibits are incorporated by reference to the Exhibit Index attached hereto and a
part hereof by reference.
(b)        Financial Statements. See page F-1 for an index of the financial statements and financial
statement schedules included in the Registration Statement.
Item 17. Undertakings
(a)         The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)         To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to
this registration statement:
(i)                 To include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
II-3
(ii)                To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the
registration statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration statement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar
value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or
high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with
the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent
no more than 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of
Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement.
(iii)               To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration
statement;
(2)                That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such
post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide
offering thereof.
(3)                 To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)                 That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any
purchaser, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an
offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in
reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the
date it is first used after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or
deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the
registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use,
supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was
part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first
use.
(b)                Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be
permitted to directors, officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing
provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and
Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Act and is,
therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than
the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of
the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director,
officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless
in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as
expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this
amendment no.2 to registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, in the City of Reno, State of Nevada, on  August 3, 2016.
BRILLIANT SANDS INCORPORATED
  
 /s/ Marc J. Andrews
 Marc J. Andrews
 President and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this amendment no.2 to
registration statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
Title
Signature
 
/s/ Marc J. Andrews  Director, President and Chief
Marc J. Andrews
Executive Officer
 (Principal Executive Officer)
Date
  
 August 3, 2016
/s/ Kim Neal
Kim Neal
August 3, 2016
Vice President of Finance
(Principal Financial Officer
 
  
and Principal Accounting Officer)
  
  
 August 3, 2016
 Director
  
  
 August 3, 2016
*
Thomas K. Mancuso  
  
 
 Director
*
Feisal Somji
*By:/s/ Marc J.Andrews 
 
  Marc J.Andrews
 
Attorney-in-fact
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Description
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation
Exhibit
No.
3.1†
3.1.1†  Certificate of Amendment to the Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation
3.2†
3.2.1†  Amendment No. 1 to Bylaws
5.1*
Bylaws
Opinion of Counsel
Mutual Release and Settlement Agreement, dated November 30, 2012, by and between
Consolidated Goldfields Corporation and Thomas Callicrate, Thomas Callicrate, Trustee of the
Barber-Callicrate 2006 Revocable Living Trust, Mountain Gold Exploration, LLC, Mountain Gold
Exploration Inc., Mountain Gold Claims, LLC, Mountain Gold Holdings, LLC
Agreement of Purchase and Sale, dated as of December 17, 2014, between 1824455 Alberta
Ltd. and Consolidated Goldfields Corporation
Production Royalty Agreement, dated as of December 17, 2014, between Consolidated
Goldfields Corporation and 1824455 Alberta Ltd.
Escrow Agreement, dated December 17, 2014, among 1824455 Alberta Ltd., Consolidated
Goldfields Corporation and Davis LLP
King Solomon Property Exploration and Mining Lease with Option to Purchase Agreement,
dated as of November 4, 2014, by and between Mountain Gold Claims, LLC Series 9 and
Consolidated Goldfields Corporation
10.1†
10.2†
10.3†
10.4†
10.5†
10.6†  Consolidated Goldfields Corporation Amended 2013 Stock Option and Stock Bonus Plan
10.7†
10.8†
Employment Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2011, between Consolidated Goldfields
Corporation and Marc J. Andrews
Employment Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2011, between Consolidated Goldfields
Corporation and Thomas K. Mancuso
10.9†
10.10†
Employment Agreement, dated as of September 24, 2012, between Consolidated Goldfields
Corporation and Kimberly F. Neal
Consulting Agreement, dated as of January 1, 2015, between Consolidated Goldfields
Corporation and Somji Consulting Ltd
Consultant Service Agreement, dated as of April 23, 2007, between Consolidated Goldfields
Corporation and Lane Griffin
Bridge Loan Convertible Note, dated July 21, 2009, by Consolidated Goldfields Corporation in
favor of Thomas K. Mancuso
Bridge Loan Convertible Note, dated August 4, 2009, by Consolidated Goldfields Corporation in
favor of Thomas K. Mancuso
Pyramid Property Exploration and Mining Lease with Options to Purchase Agreement, dated
January 20, 2016, by and between Brilliant Sands Incorporated and Premium Bonanza Gold
Mines, LLC
10.11†
10.12†
10.13†
10.14
21.1† List of Subsidiaries
23.1*  Consent of Counsel (included in Exhibit 5.1)
23.2  Consent of DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S.
24.1† Power of Attorney (included in signature page to registration statement)
99.1† List of Properties
* To be filed by amendment.
 †Previously filed.