
Sterling Resources Announces Senior Management Change
CALGARY, Aug. 31, 2016 /CNW/ - Sterling Resources Ltd. (TSX-V:SLG) ("Sterling" or the "Company") announces that the Chief Financial Officer, David Blewden,
will be departing the company at the end of August 2016. This change is part of a broader corporate reorganization detailed in the recent second quarter report. 
Mr. Blewden was instrumental in successfully completing the recent recapitalization process and we thank him for his significant contribution to Sterling over
several very difficult years for Sterling.
The Company is pleased to announce the appointment of Christine Shinnie to the role of Chief Financial Officer.  Ms. Shinnie has worked with the Company for 10
years and is currently Financial Controller of Sterling Resources (UK) Ltd. and a Director of Sterling Resources (UK) Ltd.  She is a CIMA (UK) qualified accountant
with over 20 years of experience in the upstream oil and gas sector in a broad spectrum of financial management.
Sterling Resources Ltd. is a Canadian-listed international oil and gas company whose registered office is in Calgary, Alberta with assets in the United Kingdom
and the Netherlands.  The shares are listed and posted for trading on the TSX Venture Exchange under the symbol "SLG".
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in policies of the TSX Venture Exchange) accepts
responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.
Filer Profile No. 00002072
Forward-Looking Statements
All statements included in this news release that address activities, events or developments that Sterling expects, believes or anticipates will or may occur in the
future are forward-looking statements.  In particular, this news release contains forward-looking statements with respect to expected future development activity,
hydrocarbon production, seismic interpretation, capital expenditures, availability of finance, and reductions in staff numbers and in general and administrative
costs.
These forward-looking statements involve numerous assumptions made by Sterling based on its experience, perception of historical trends, current conditions,
expected future developments and other factors it believes are appropriate in the circumstances.  In addition, these statements involve substantial known and
unknown risks and uncertainties that contribute to the possibility that the predictions, forecasts, projections and other-forward looking statements will prove
inaccurate, certain of which are beyond Sterling's control, including: the impact of general economic conditions in the areas in which Sterling operates, civil
unrest, industry conditions, changes in laws and regulations including the adoption of new environmental laws and regulations and changes in how they are
interpreted and enforced, increased competition, the lack of availability of qualified personnel or management, fluctuations in commodity prices, foreign exchange
or interest rates, stock market volatility and obtaining required approvals of regulatory authorities. In addition, there are risks and uncertainties associated with oil
and gas operations.  Readers should also carefully consider the matters discussed under the heading "Risk Factors" in the Company's Annual Information Form.
Undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking statements, as there can be no assurance that the plans, intentions or expectations upon which
they are based will occur.  Sterling's actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-
looking statements.  These statements speak only as of the date of the news release. Sterling does not intend and does not assume any obligation to update
these forward-looking statements except as required by law.
Financial outlook information contained in this news release about prospective results of operations, financial position or cash flows is based on assumptions
about future events, including economic conditions and proposed courses of action, based on management's assessment of the relevant information currently
available.  Readers are cautioned that such financial outlook information contained in this news release should not be used for purposes other than for which it is
disclosed herein.
SOURCE Sterling Resources Ltd.
%SEDAR: 00002072E
For further information: visit www.sterling-resources.com or contact: Jake Ulrich, Chair of the Board, Phone: +44 1224 806610, jake.ulrich@sterling-
resources.com; John Rapach, Chief Executive Officer, Phone: +44 1224 806617, john.rapach@sterling-resources.com; Tracy Lessard, Corporate
Secretary, Phone: +1 (403) 237-9256, tracy.lessard@sterling-resources.com
CO: Sterling Resources Ltd.
CNW 17:00e 31-AUG-16