
TUDOR GOLD CORP.
Security Class
Holder Account Number
Form of Proxy - Annual General Meeting to be held on September 16, 2016
This Form of Proxy is solicited by and on behalf of Management.
Notes to proxy
1. Every holder has the right to appoint some other person or company of their choice, who need not be a holder, to attend and act on their behalf at the meeting or any
adjournment or postponement thereof.  If you wish to appoint a person or company other than the persons whose names are printed herein, please insert the name of your
chosen proxyholder in the space provided (see reverse).
If the securities are registered in the name of more than one owner (for example, joint ownership, trustees, executors, etc.), then all those registered should sign this proxy.  If you are voting
on behalf of a corporation or another individual you must sign this proxy with signing capacity stated, and you may be required to provide documentation evidencing your power to sign this
proxy.
2.
3. This proxy should be signed in the exact manner as the name(s) appear(s) on the proxy.
4.
5. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted as directed by the holder, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, this proxy will be voted as
If this proxy is not dated, it will be deemed to bear the date on which it is mailed by Management to the holder.
recommended by Management.
6. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted in favour or withheld from voting or voted against each of the matters described herein, as applicable, in accordance with the instructions
of the holder, on any ballot that may be called for and, if the holder has specified a choice with respect to any matter to be acted on, the securities will be voted accordingly.
7. This proxy confers discretionary authority in respect of amendments or variations to matters identified in the Notice of Meeting or other matters that may properly come before the meeting or
any adjournment or postponement thereof.
8. This proxy should be read in conjunction with the accompanying documentation provided by Management.
Proxies submitted must be received by 10:00 AM, Pacific Time, on Wednesday, September 14, 2016.
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
• Call the number listed BELOW from a touch tone
telephone.
1-866-732-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
• Go to the following web site:
www.investorvote.com
• Smartphone?
Scan the QR code to vote now.
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this proxy.
Voting by mail  may be the only method for securities held in the name of a corporation or securities being voted on behalf of another individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet  are the only methods by which a holder may appoint a person as proxyholder other than the Management nominees named on the reverse of this proxy. Instead of
mailing this proxy, you may choose one of the two voting methods outlined above to vote this proxy.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER
-------
Fold
-------
Fold
Appointment of Proxyholder
I/We being holder(s) of Tudor Gold Corp. hereby appoint: WALTER
STORM, or failing him, ARIS MORFOPOULOS,
OR
Print the name of the person you are
appointing if this person is someone
other than the Chairman of the
Meeting.
as my/our proxyholder with full power of substitution and to attend, act and to vote for and on behalf of the shareholder in accordance with the following direction (or if no directions have been
given, as the proxyholder sees fit) and all other matters that may properly come before the Annual General Meeting of shareholders of Tudor Gold Corp. to be held at 10th Floor, 595 Howe
Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, on Friday, September 16, 2016, at 10:00 AM, Pacific Time, and at any adjournment or postponement thereof.
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
For
Against
1. Number of Directors
To set the number of Directors at four (4).
2. Election of Directors
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
-------
Fold
01. WALTER STORM
02. HELMUT FINGER
03. ROBERT QUINN
04. RAYMOND MARKS
3. Appointment of Auditors
Appointment of DAVIDSON & COMPANY LLP as Auditors of the Corporation for the ensuing year and authorizing the Directors to fix their
remuneration.
4. Adoption of Stock Option Plan
To consider and, if thought fit, adopt a stock option plan, as more particularly described in the accompanying Information Circular.
5. Minority Approval of Warrants Issued to Related Parties in June 2016 Private Placement
To consider and, if thought fit, approve the issuance of the Restricted Warrants (as defined herein), as more particularly described in the
accompanying Information Circular.
For
Withhold
For
Against
For
Against
-------
Fold
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be completed for your
instructions to be executed.
I/We authorize you to act in accordance with my/our instructions set out above. I/We hereby
revoke any proxy previously given with respect to the Meeting. If no voting instructions are
indicated above, this Proxy will be voted as recommended by Management.
Signature(s)
Date
Interim Financial Statements - Mark this box if you would
like to receive Interim Financial Statements and
accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis by
mail.
If you are not mailing back your proxy, you may register online to receive the above financial report(s) by mail at www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
Annual Financial Statements - Mark this box if you would
like to receive the Annual Financial Statements and
accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis by
mail.
K  A  I  Q
2  3  6  2  2  0
A  R  1