
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISION
Washington, D.C. 20549
UNITED STATES
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
[X]
[   ]
Annual Report Under Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
                                                                 For the fiscal year ended:  June 30, 2011. 
Transition report under Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934  
                                                                 For the transition period from ______ to _______.
Commission file number: 333-119823
DYNAMIC GOLD CORP.
(Name of small business issuer in its charter)
Nevada
Applied For
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
organization)
(IRS Employer Identification Number)
506 – 675 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6B 1N2
(Address of principal executive offices)
Issuer’s telephone number
(604) 681-3131
Securities registered under Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act:
Title of each class
None
Name of each exchange on which registered
None
Securities registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act: 
Common Stock 
(Title of class)
Check whether the issuer is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange 
Act:  [ ] 
Check whether the issuer (1) filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange 
Act  during  the  past  12  months  (or  for  such  shorter  period  that  the  registrant  was  required  to  file  such 
reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
Yes   [X]  No   [ ]
Check if there is no disclosure of delinquent filers in response to Item 405 of Regulation S-B contained in 
this form, and no disclosure will be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or 
information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this 
Form 10-K.  [ ]
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  shell  company  (as  defined  in  Rule  12b-2  of  the
Exchange Act.)
Yes   [X]  No   [ ]
State issuer’s revenues for its most recent fiscal year:    $Nil 
State  the  aggregate  market  value  of  the  voting  and  non-voting  common  equity  held  by  non-affiliates 
computed by reference to the price at which the common equity was sold, or the average bid and asked 
price of such common equity, as of a specified date within the past 60 days.  (See definition of affiliate in 
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.)
State the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer’s classes of common equity, as of the latest 
practicable date.
$9,515 as at September 23, 2011
9,515,000 as at September 23, 2011
Transitional Small Business Disclosure Format (Check One):  Yes   [X]     No [  ]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4 
ITEM 1 – DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS .......................................................................................................................... 4 
ITEM 2 – DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY ..................................................................................................................... 11 
ITEM 3 – LEGAL PROCEEDINGS .................................................................................................................................. 15 
ITEM 4 – SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS .................................................... 15 
PART II .................................................................................................................................................................................... 15
ITEM 5 – MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND SMALL 
BUSINESS ISUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES ...................................................................................... 15 
ITEM 7 – CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA ................................ 22 
ITEM 8 – CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE ............................................................................................................................................. 41 
ITEM 8A – CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES ............................................................................................................... 41 
ITEM 8A(T) – CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES ......................................................................................................... 42 
ITEM 8B – OTHER INFORMATION .............................................................................................................................. 42 
PART III ................................................................................................................................................................................... 42
ITEM 9 – DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS, CONTROL PERSONS AND CORPORATE 
GOVERNANCE; COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 16(A) OF THE EXCHANGE ACT ........................................... 42 
ITEM 11 – SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND 
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS ....................................................................................................................... 47 
ITEM 12 – CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR 
INDEPENDENCE ............................................................................................................................................................... 48 
ITEM 13 – EXHIBITS ........................................................................................................................................................ 49 
ITEM 14 – PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES ............................................................................... 51
3
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Statements made in this annual report on Form 10-K and the exhibits attached hereto that are not historical or current facts 
are “forward-looking statements” made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1993 
(the “Act”) and section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  These statements often can be identified by the use of 
terms such as “may”, “will”, “expect”, “believe”, “anticipate”, “estimate”, “approximate” or “continue”, or the negative 
thereof.  We intend that such forward-looking statements by subject to the safe harbors for such statements.  We wish to 
caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made.  
Any forward-looking statements represent management’s best judgments as to what may occur in the future; however, 
forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and important factors beyond our control that could cause actual 
results and events to differ materially from historical results of operations and events and those presently anticipated or 
projected.  We disclaim any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or 
circumstances after the date of such statement or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.  Such 
forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, both known and unknown, and assumptions, 
including, without limitation, risks related to:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

our failure to obtain additional financing; 
our inability to continue as a going concern; 
the unique difficulties and  uncertainties inherent in the mineral exploration business; 
the inherent dangers involved in mineral exploration; 
our President’s and Secretary/Treasurer’s inability to devote a significant amount of time to our business operations; 
environmental, health and safety laws in British Columbia; 
local and multi-national economic and political conditions; 
natural hazards on the Coast of British Columbia, Canada; and 
our common stock.
The preceding bullets outline some of the risks and uncertainties that may affect our forward-looking statements.  For a full 
description of risks and uncertainties, see the sections elsewhere in this Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors”, “Description of 
Business” and “Management Discussion and Analysis”.  Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or 
should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those anticipated, believed, estimated 
or expected. 
 
Our Management has included projections and estimates in this annual report, which are based primarily on management’s 
experience in the industry, assessments of our results of operations, discussions and negotiations with third parties and a 
review of information filed by our competitors with the Securities and Exchange Commission or otherwise publicly 
available.  We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of 
the date made.  We disclaim any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or 
circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
PART I
ITEM 1 – DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS 
 
 
Business Development 
 
Dynamic Gold Corp. (“Dynamic”) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January 21, 2004. Our principal offices are 
located at Suite 506, 675 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, V6B 1N2. Our telephone number is 
(604) 681-3131.  
 
Dynamic has not had any bankruptcy, receivership or similar proceeding since incorporation.  
 
There  have  been  no  material  reclassifications,  mergers,  consolidations  or  purchases  or  sales  of  any  significant  amount  of 
assets not in the ordinary course of business since the date of incorporation. 
Please note that throughout this Annual Report, and unless otherwise noted, the words “we”, “our”, “us”, the “Company” or 
“Dynamic”, refer to Dynamic Gold Corp.
4
Business of Issuer 
 
We are an exploration stage company and have not yet generated or realized any revenues from our business operations.   
 
On January 20, 2008, the Company allowed its interest in the Sobeski Lake Gold Property Claims to expire.  The Sobeski 
Lake Gold property consisted of three mineral claims located in the Red Lake Mining District, in the province of Ontario, 
Canada.  We had originally acquired our interest in the property by making a cash payment of $3,500 on June 16, 2004 to 
Dan Patrie Exploration Ltd. the registered owners of the property.   
 
On January 8, 2008, we acquired, through our wholly owned subsidiary, Dynamic Gravel Holdings Ltd., a 100% interest in 
two gravel claims called the Northern Gravel Claims and Super Mammoth Gravel Claims (together the “Super Mammoth 
Gravel Project”) situated on tidewater for $25,000.  The Super Mammoth Gravel Project was acquired by way of a purchase 
agreement.  Mr. Farshad Shirvani has been paid CDN$25,000.  Mr. Farshad Shirvani will receive no further payments from 
the Company.  
 
The Super Mammoth Gravel Project consists of two mineral claim tenures that are approximately 124.1 hectares (“ha”) each 
in size (total 248.2 ha).  A detailed report used in obtaining aggregate samples has been filed and accepted by the British 
Columbia’s Gold Commissioner’s office in September 2007.  The claims are currently in good standing until their respective 
anniversary dates which are November 6, 2014 (Northern Gravel Claims) and January 19, 2015 (Super Mammoth Claim).  
The  acquisition  cost  of  $25,000  was  initially  capitalized  as  a  tangible  asset.    During  the  year  ended  June  30,  2008,  the 
Company  recorded  a  write-down  of  mineral  property  acquisition  costs  of  $25,000  related  to  the  Super  Mammoth  Gravel 
Project. 
 
The Super Mammoth Gravel Project is located at Lloyd Point on the east arm of Toba Inlet situated 50 kilometers east of 
Campbell  River,  British  Columbia,  Canada  and  28  kilometers  north  of  Powell  River,  British  Columbia,  on  the  British 
Columbia mainland.  The existence of the Super Mammoth gravel deposit has been identified by Lands and Water British 
Columbia Inc. and has been the subject of numerous preliminary investigations over the years, with the potential to host year-
round  future  sand  and  gravel  aggregate  operations  with  tidewater  access.    The  potential  operation  could  supply  growing 
demand for a range of raw materials to British Columbia, Washington State, California and other United States and Pacific 
Rim  coastal  construction  markets.    The  Super  Mammoth  Gravel  Project  is  situated  from  sea  level  to  approximately  300 
meters in elevation that comprises a sorted accumulation of sand and gravel. 
 
On  June  5,  2008,  a  comprehensive  National  Instrument  43-101  compliant  report  (the  “report”)  on  the  Super  Mammoth 
Gravel Project was completed.  The report was prepared in accordance with the guidelines of National Instrument 43-101 
“Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects” and is based on data and geological information gathered from public sources, 
assessment files, historical information, British Columbia provincial government maps and reports.  The source information 
of  data  presented  in  the  report  discusses  the  geology  and  mineral  potential  of  the  Super  Mammoth  Gravel  project  and  is 
believed to be reliable and accurate.   
 
To date we have not performed any other work on our property.  There is no assurance that a commercially viable mineral 
deposit  exists  on  our  property  until  further  exploration  is  done  and  a  comprehensive  evaluation  concludes  economic 
feasibility. 
 
Because Dynamic is an exploration stage company, in the event mineral deposits are confirmed as discovered on the Super 
Mammoth Gravel Project, we will not have the capability to remove and supply construction aggregate.  When exploration 
stage companies discover mineral deposits, which are a rare occurrence, they typically sell their interest in the property to 
larger exploration, development or production stage mining companies, or they enter into a joint venture arrangement.  The 
larger companies are then responsible for operating the property as a sand and gravel quarry or a mine.  If a mineral deposit is 
discovered on the Super Mammoth Gravel Project, management anticipates entering into a similar arrangement with a more 
senior mining company. 
 
 
 
 
Management’s  plan  of  operation  is  to  review  the  current  market  conditions  and  determine  whether  the  Super  Mammoth 
Gravel  Project  contains  targets  for  future  mineral  exploration  and  development.    The  recoverability  of  amounts  from  the
5
property will be dependent upon discovering economically recoverable reserves with specifications which are suitable for 
commercial products as defined by ASTM and CSA.  Considerable further investigation will be required to establish the size 
of the deposit towards understanding its economic viability, the environmental concerns of the area and the social impact on 
various stakeholders. 
 
Management anticipates the Company will be engaged in the acquisition, and exploration of additional mineral properties 
with a view to the exploitation of any mineral deposits discovered that demonstrate economic feasibility.  Exploitation of a 
mineral deposit occurs when the company overseeing production processes rock or minerals from the property in order to 
remove and sell the contained resource in the deposit. 
 
As an exploration stage company, we are engaged in the search for mineral deposits (reserves).  We are not a development 
stage company involved in the preparation of an established commercially minable deposit for its extraction or a production 
stage company engaged in the exploitation of a mineral deposit. 
 
Compliance with Government Regulation
Our mineral exploration program is subject to the Mineral Tenure Act (British Columbia) and Regulations. This act sets forth 
rules for:
 
 
 

locating claims;  
posting claims;  
working claims; and  
reporting work performed.
The Mineral Tenure Act (British Columbia) and Regulations also govern the work requirements for a claim including the 
minimum annual work requirements necessary to maintain a claim. The holder of a mineral claim must perform exploration 
and development work on the claim of $4.40 including filing fees, per hectare (“ha”) per year.  We have two tenures totaling 
248.2 ha. The Company is required to perform a minimum of $1,092 per year.
We  are  also  subject  to  the British  Columbia  Mineral Exploration  Code  (the  "Code")  that  tells  us  how  and where  we  can 
explore for minerals. We must comply with these laws to operate our business. The purpose of the Code is to assist persons 
who wish to explore for minerals in British Columbia to understand the process whereby exploration activities are permitted 
and regulated. The Code establishes Province-wide standards for mineral exploration and development activities. The Code 
also  manages  and  administers  exploration  and  development  activities  to  ensure  maximum  extraction  with  a  minimum  of 
environmental disturbance. The Code does not apply to certain exploration work we will be conducting. Specifically, work 
that does not involve mechanical disturbance of the surface including:
 
 
 
 

prospecting using hand-held tools;  
geological and geochemical surveying;  
airborne geophysical surveying;  
hand-trenching without the use of explosives; and  
the establishment of gridlines that do not require the felling of trees.
Subject to the results of Phase I, exploration activities that we may carry out in subsequent phases which are subject to the 
provisions of the Code are as follows:
 

drilling, trenching and excavating using machinery; and  
disturbance of the ground by mechanical means (blasting).
Prior to proceeding with any exploration work subject to the Code we must apply for a notice of work permit. In this notice 
we will be required to set out the location, nature, extent and duration of the proposed exploration activities. The notice is
6
submitted to the regional office of the Mines Branch, Energy Division.   We have not applied for this permit yet. We intend 
to  do  so,  once  we  have  secured  the  required  funding  to  carry  out  the  proposed  program.    We  must  raise  a  minimum  of 
$100,000  before  we  will  commence  Phase  I  of  our  exploration  program.    Once  applied  for,  this  work  permit  is  usually 
received within 60 days of the application date as it is granted as a matter of right.
The  exploration  permit  that  may  be  required  for  activities  in  phases  subsequent  to  Phase  I  of  our  proposed  exploration 
program is the only permit or license we will need to explore for minerals on our property.  It will take approximately two 
weeks to obtain the exploration permit. The permit is free and is usually granted as a matter of right, when applied for.
Environmental Laws   
 
We will also have to sustain the cost of reclamation and environmental remediation for all work undertaken which causes 
sufficient  surface  disturbance  to  necessitate  reclamation  work.  Both  reclamation  and  environmental  remediation  refer  to 
putting disturbed ground back as close to its original state as possible. Other potential pollution or damage must be cleaned-
up and renewed along standard guidelines outlined in the usual permits. Reclamation is the process of bringing the land back 
to a natural state after completion of exploration activities. Environmental remediation refers to the physical activity of taking 
steps to remediate, or remedy, any environmental damage caused, i.e. refilling trenches after sampling or cleaning up fuel 
spills. Our Phase I and II programs do not require any reclamation or remediation other than minor clean up and removal of 
supplies because of minimal disturbance to the ground. The amount of these costs is not known at this time as we do not 
know the extent of the exploration program we will undertake, beyond completion of the recommended two phases described 
above. Because there is presently no information on the size, tenure, or quality of any resource or reserve at this time, it is 
impossible to assess the impact of any capital expenditures on our earnings or competitive position in the event a potentially 
economic deposit is discovered. 
 
Employees 
 
General.  At present, there are no employees, other than the current officers and directors, who devote their time as required 
to  the  business  operations.    We  intend  to  hire  independent  geologists,  engineers  and  excavation  subcontractors  on  an  as 
needed basis. We have not entered into any negotiations or contracts with any of them other than Mr. Eric Ostensoe and Mr. 
Gary  Payie  who  were  independently  employed  to  conduct  field  investigations  and  complete  a  comprehensive  geological 
report on the Sobeski Lake Gold property and Super Mammoth Gravel Project respectively.  Mr. Ostensoe and Mr. Payie are 
both independent geologists and would not be considered employees of Dynamic. 
 
Research and Development Expenditures 
 
To date a total of $1,000 has been incurred in connection with Mr. Ostensoe’s preparation of a geological report concerning 
the Sobeski Lake Gold property.  The Company allowed the claims to expire on January 20, 2008. 
 
An  additional  $11,500  (June  30,  2008)  has  been  incurred  in  connection  with  the  preparation  and  completion  of  the 
Comprehensive National Instrument 43-101 compliant report on the Super Mammoth Gravel Project.    
 
There have been no other research and development expenditures incurred since our incorporation. 
 
Competition 
 
While the mineral property exploration business is competitive, management does not anticipate having difficulties retaining 
qualified personnel to conduct exploration on the Super Mammoth Gravel Project. 
 
There are a large number of mineral exploration companies such as Dynamic that look to acquire interests in properties and 
conduct exploration on them.  Given the large number of unexplored or under explored mineral properties that are currently 
available for acquisition, management does not expect competition to have a material impact on business operations. 
 
 
 
In  the  mineral  exploration  sector,  our  competitive  position  is  insignificant.    There  are  numerous  mineral  exploration 
companies with substantially more capital and resources that are capable of securing ownership of mineral properties with a
7
greater potential to host economic mineralization.  We are not able to compete with such companies.  Instead, management 
has  determined  that  the  Company  will  attempt  to  acquire  properties  without  proven  mineral  deposits  that  may  have  the 
potential to contain mineral deposits. 
 
Subsidiaries  
 
We  have  one  subsidiary  company  “Dynamic  Gravel  Holdings  Ltd.”    Dynamic  Gold  (Canada)  Corp.  was  formed  on 
November  21,  2007  in  the  Province  of  Alberta,  Canada  to  hold  our  interest  in  the  Super  Mammoth  Gravel  Project.    On 
November 22, 2007 Dynamic Gold (Canada) Corp. changed its corporate name to Dynamic Gravel Holdings Ltd.    
 
Patents and Trademarks 
 
We do not own, either legally or beneficially, any patents or trademarks. 
 
Risk Factors 
 
An investment in the common stock of the Company involves a high degree of risk.  You should carefully consider the risks 
described  below  and  the  other  information  in  this  annual  report  before  investing  in  our  common  stock.    If  any  of  the 
following risks occur, our business, operating results and financial condition could be seriously harmed.  The trading price of 
our common stock could decline due to any of these risks, and you may lose all or part of your investment. 
 
Risks Relating to the Company 
 
If we do not obtain additional financing, our business will fail. 
 
Our cash reserves are not sufficient to meet our obligations for the next-twelve month’s period.  As a result, we will need to 
seek additional funding in the near future.  We currently do not have a specific plan of how we will obtain such funding.  
However, we anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock.  
As well, our management is prepared to provide us with short-term loans; during the twelve month period ended June 30, 
2011,  the  Company  borrowed  $11,500  (June  30,    2010  -  $15,000)  for  a  total  of  $151,500  from  an  officer,  director  and 
shareholder of the Company.  This promissory note payable bears interest at 10% per annum, $45,440 (June 2011 - $14,591) 
interest has been accrued and is secured by a general assignment over all the assets of the Company and is due on January 8, 
2012. 
 
Our business plan calls for significant outlays of expense in connection with the exploration of the Super Mammoth Gravel 
Project. We do not have sufficient working capital to conduct an initial phase of exploration on the property estimated to cost 
$100,000.    We  will  require  funding  of  $300,000  to  complete  the  recommended  stage  one  and  two  work  programs  and 
significant additional funding in order to determine whether the property contains material which is suitable for commercial 
products.  We will also require additional financing if the costs of the exploration of the Super Mammoth Gravel Project are 
greater than anticipated. 
 
We will require additional financing to sustain our business operations if we are not successful in earning revenues once 
exploration  is  complete.    We  do  not  currently  have  any  arrangements  for  financing  and  we  can  provide  no  assurance  to 
investors that we will be able to find such financing if required.  Obtaining additional financing would be subject to a number 
of factors, including the domestic and export market prices for sand and gravel aggregate, investor acceptance of our property 
and  general  market  conditions.    These  factors  may  make  the  timing,  amount,  terms  or  conditions  of  additional  financing 
unavailable to us. 
 
The  most  likely  source  of  future  funds  presently  available  to  us  is  through  the  sale  of  equity  capital  or  loans  from  our 
directors.  Any sale of share capital will result in dilution to existing shareholders.  The only other anticipated alternative for 
the financing of further exploration would be our sale of a partial interest in the Super Mammoth Gravel Project to a third 
party in exchange for cash or exploration expenditures, which is not presently contemplated. 
 
 
 
Because we have not commenced business operations, we face a high risk of business failure.
8
We have not yet commenced exploration on the property.  Accordingly, we have no way to evaluate the likelihood that our 
business will be successful.  To date, we have been involved primarily in organizational activities and the acquisition of our 
mineral property.  We have not earned any revenues as of the date of this annual report. 
 
Potential investors should be aware of the difficulties normally encountered by new mineral exploration companies and the 
high  rate of  failure  of  such  enterprises.    These  potential  problems  include,  but  are  not limited  to, unanticipated problems 
relating to exploration, and additional costs and expenses that may exceed current estimates. 
 
Prior to completion of our exploration stage, we anticipate that we will incur increased operating expenses without realizing 
any  revenues.    If  our  exploration  programs  are  successful  in  establishing  materials  of  commercial  grade,  we  will  require 
additional funds in order to further develop the property. 
 
We expect to incur significant losses into the foreseeable future.  We recognize that if we are unable to generate significant 
revenues from development of the Super Mammoth Gravel Project and the production of minerals from the claims, we will 
not be able to earn profits or continue operations. 
 
There is no history upon which to base any assumption as to the likelihood that we will prove successful, and we can provide 
investors with no assurance that we will generate any operating revenues or ever achieve profitable operations.  If we are 
unsuccessful in addressing these risks, our business will most likely fail. 
 
Because of the inherent dangers involved in mineral exploration, there is a risk that we may incur liability or damages 
which could hurt our financial position and possibly result in the failure of our business. 
 
The  search  for  valuable  minerals  involves  numerous  hazards.    As  a  result,  we  may  become  subject  to  liability  for  such 
hazards, including pollution, cave-ins and other hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to 
insure.  The payment of such liabilities may have a material adverse effect on our financial position. 
 
Even if we discover commercial reserves of economic sand and gravel on the Super Mammoth Gravel Project property we 
may not be able to successfully commence commercial production unless we receive additional funds, of which there are 
no guarantees. 
 
Even  if  our  exploration  programs  are  successful  in  establishing  that  the  physical  and  chemical  properties  as  defined  by 
ASTM  or  CSA  specifications  of  the  sand  and  gravel  present  on  the  Super  Mammoth  Gravel  Project  is  suitable  for 
commercial  products;  considerable  further  investigation  will  be  required  to  establish  the  size  of  the  deposit  towards 
understanding its economic viability, the environmental concerns of the area and the social impact on various stakeholders.  
We will also require additional funds in order to place the Super Mammoth Gravel Project into commercial production.  We 
may not be able to obtain such funding. 
 
Our  independent  auditor  believes  there  is  substantial  doubt  that  we  will  continue  as  a  going  concern.    If  we  do  not 
continue as a going concern, you will lose your investment. 
 
The Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year 
ended June 30, 2011, indicates that there are a number of factors that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a 
going concern.  Such factors identified in the report are our net loss position, our failure to attain profitable operations and 
our dependence upon obtaining adequate financing.  If we are not able to continue as a going concern, it is likely investors 
will lose their investments. 
 
Because our directors own 53.60% of our outstanding common stock, they could make and control corporate decisions 
that may be disadvantageous to other minority shareholders. 
 
Our directors own approximately 53.60% of the outstanding shares of our common stock.  Accordingly, they will have a 
significant  influence  in  determining  the  outcome  of  all  corporate  transactions  or  other  matters,  including  mergers, 
consolidations, and the sale of all or substantially all of our assets.  They will also have the power to prevent or cause a 
change in control.  The interests of our directors may differ from the interests of the other stockholders and thus result in 
corporate decisions that are disadvantageous to other shareholders. 
Because our directors have other business interests, they may not be able or willing to devote a sufficient amount of time 
to our business operations, causing our business to fail.
9
Our President will be devoting only 10% of his time to our business upon commencement of business operations.  Currently 
our President, Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary devote approximately 10% of their time to our affairs.  It is 
possible that the demands on our officers and directors from their other obligations could cause them to be unable to devote 
sufficient time to the management of our business. In addition, they may not possess sufficient time for our business if the 
demands of managing our business increased substantially beyond current levels.  
 
Risks Relating to Our Common Stock 
The trading price of our common stock on the Over-The-Counter Bulletin Board will fluctuate significantly and 
stockholders may have difficulty reselling their shares. 
 
As of the date of this Annual Report, our common stock trades on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board under the symbol 
“DYGO”.  To date none of our shares have traded on this market. Also, there is a volatility associated with Bulletin Board 
securities in general and the value of your investment could decline due to the impact of any of the following factors upon the 
market price of our common stock: (i) disappointing results from our discovery or development efforts; (ii) failure to meet 
our revenue or profit goals or operating budget; (iii) decline in demand for our common stock; (iv) lack of funding generated 
for operations; (v) investor perception of our industry or our prospects; and (vi) general economic trends. 
 
In addition, stock markets have experienced price and volume fluctuations and the market prices of securities have been 
highly volatile. These fluctuations are often unrelated to operating performance and may adversely affect the market price of 
our common stock. As a result, investors may be unable to sell their shares at a fair price and you may lose all or part of your 
investment. 
 
Our  common  stock  is  considered  a  penny  stock.    Trading  of  our  stock  is  restricted  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission’s penny stock regulations which may limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock. 
 
Our stock is considered a penny stock. The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted Rule 15g-9 which generally 
defines "penny stock" to be any equity security that has a market price (as defined) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise 
price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Our securities are covered by the penny stock rules, which 
impose  additional  sales  practice  requirements  on broker-dealers who  sell  to  persons other  than  established  customers  and 
"accredited investors". The term "accredited investor" refers generally to institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000 or 
individuals with a net worth in excess of $1,000,000 or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their 
spouse. The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from the 
rules, to deliver a standardized risk disclosure document in a form prepared by the Securities and Exchange Commission 
which provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market. The broker-dealer 
also must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation of the broker-
dealer and its salesperson in the transaction and monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock 
held  in  the  customer's  account.  The  bid  and  offer  quotations,  and  the  broker-dealer  and  salesperson  compensation 
information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting the transaction and must be given to the 
customer  in  writing  before  or  with  the  customer's  confirmation.  In  addition,  the  penny  stock  rules  require  that  prior  to  a 
transaction  in  a  penny  stock  not  otherwise  exempt  from  these  rules,  the  broker-dealer  must  make  a  special  written 
determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser's written agreement to 
the transaction. These disclosure requirements may have the effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary 
market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock rules. Consequently, these penny stock rules may affect the ability of 
broker-dealers  to  trade  our  securities.  We  believe  that  the  penny  stock  rules  discourage  investor  interest  in  and  limit  the 
marketability of our common stock. 
 
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, has adopted sales practice requirements which may also limit a 
stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock. 
 
 
In  addition  to  the  "penny  stock"  rules  described  above,  FINRA  has  adopted  rules  that  require  that  in  recommending  an 
investment to a customer, a broker-dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing that the investment is suitable for that 
customer. Prior to recommending speculative low priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must
10
make  reasonable  efforts  to  obtain  information  about  the  customer's  financial  status,  tax  status,  investment  objectives  and 
other information. Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high probability that speculative low 
priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA requirements make it  more difficult for broker-
dealers to recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our stock and 
have an adverse effect on the market for our shares. 
 
Reports to Securities Holders 
 
We are required to file annual reports on Form 10-K and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission on a regular basis, and will be required to timely disclose certain material events (e.g., changes in corporate 
control;  acquisitions  or  dispositions  of  a  significant  amount  of  assets  other  than  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business;  and 
bankruptcy) in a current report on Form 8-K. 
 
You may read and copy any materials we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission at their Public Reference Room 
Office, 100 F Street, NE, Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549-0102.  You may obtain information on the operation of the 
Public Reference Room by calling the Securities and Exchange Commission at 1-800-SEC-0330. Additionally, the Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission  maintains  an  Internet  site  (http://www.sec.gov)  that  contains  reports,  proxy  and  information 
statements and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
 
 
ITEM 2 – DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
 
Corporate Headquarters, Vancouver, British Columbia 
 
Our corporate headquarters are located at Suite 506, 675 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6B 1N2.  Our 
President, Mr. Tim Coupland, provides this office space to us free of charge.  We do not own nor lease office space.  Our 
President Mr. Tim Coupland makes contributions to capital for rent of the offices in Vancouver, British Columbia.  This 
arrangement is expected to continue until such time as our activities necessitate we relocate, as to which no assurance can be 
given.  We have no agreements with respect to the maintenance or further acquisition of an office.  Our current premises are 
adequate for our existing operations. 
 
Mining Properties – General  
 
We hold a 100% interest in and to two mineral tenures in an area known as the Super Mammoth Sand and Gravel Property, 
along Homfray Channel at Lloyd Point on the south coast of British Columbia.  Titles to the properties are held in trust by 
Mr. Farshad Shirvani under provisions of the British Columbia Mineral Act.  This property comprises five (5) claims with an 
approximate area of 248 hectares.  Our property interest in the claims is limited to mineral exploration and extraction rights.  
We do not have any real property interest in the claims. 
 
We do not own or lease any property other than the Super Mammoth Sand and Gravel property.   
 
Super Mammoth Sand and Gravel Property 
 
We acquired the mineral claims located at Super Mammoth along the Homfray Channel at Lloyd Point on the south coast of 
British Columbia, Canada from Mr. Farshad Shirvani.  We paid the owner $25,000 in order to acquire a 100% interest in the 
mineral claims.  Mr. Farshad Shirvani is at arm’s length to us.  There are no other underlying agreements or interests in the 
mineral claims. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title to the Super Mammoth Sand and Gravel Property
11
The Super Mammoth Sand and Gravel Project consists of two mineral claim tenures that are approximately 124.1 hectares 
(“ha”) each in size (total 248.2 ha).  A detailed report used in obtaining aggregate samples was filed and accepted by the 
British Columbia’s Gold commissioner’s office in September, 2007.  The claims are currently in good standing until their 
respective anniversary dates which are November 6, 2014 (Northern Gravel Claim) and January 19, 2015 (Super Mammoth 
Claim).  Our President, Mr. Tim Coupland, holds title to each property in trust on behalf of the Company under prospector 
license  #144149,  registered  in  the  province  of  British  Columbia.    We  do  not  own  any  real  property  interest  in  the  land 
covered by the claims.  In order to retain title the properties we are required to spend $4.40 per ha per annum in accordance 
with the Mineral Tenure Act (British Columbia).  There are no other conditions required.   
 
A summary of the two tenures can be found below:
Name 
 
NORTHERN GRAVEL 
SUPER MAMMOTH 5
Tenure Number
544952 
549843
Area (ha)
124.118 
124.118
Date of Expiry 
 
 
  November 6, 2014 
 
January 19, 2015
Location and Means of Access to the Property 
 
The Super Mammoth aggregate site at Lloyd Point lies on the mainland of British Columbia, 50 kilometers east of Campbell 
River.  Campbell River is located on Vancouver Island and is a town with a population of 31,000 that provides services and 
accommodations for a mixed population of fishermen, forest workers, miners, government employees and retirees.  In season 
it supports a busy tourist scene that caters to, among others, sports fishermen, whale watchers, recreational divers and the 
boating fraternity.  Smaller cruise ships en route to Alaska frequently have called to enable passengers to explore the native 
culture  and  the  natural  beauty  of  the  area  and  the  docking  facilities  have  been  enlarged  to  accommodate  larger  ships.  
Scheduled airlines services and a recently upgraded provincial highway provide easy access to the area. 
 
A second point of access to the Super Mammoth site is by a 45 minute water taxi trip from Lund, a small community on the 
mainland coast, 28 kilometers north of the city of Powell River. 
 
The Super Mammoth aggregate site is accessed exclusively from the shore: float-equipped aircraft and water taxis can land 
passengers  on  the  beach.    Heavily  overgrown  logging  roads  and  logging  debris  are  testimony  to  logging  operations  that 
removed merchantable timbers many decades ago.  The mineral tenures extend from sea level at the mouth of Lloyd Creek 
easterly upstream to about 800 meters elevation. 
 
The Lloyd Point area experiences a moderate coastal marine climate: annual precipitation is substantial, largely rain in the 
winter months and amounting to about 400 millimeters with occasional episodes of snowfalls.  Maximum snowfall seldom 
exceeds one meter.  Temperatures vary seasonally in the range of -15c in winter to 25c in summer.  Foggy conditions occur 
in all seasons and may interfere with water travel and aircraft. 
 
The  Super  Mammoth  property  is  close  to  Toba  Inlet,  one  of  the  many  coastal  fiords  of  the  Coast  Mountains  of  British 
Columbia.   
 
Exploration History   
 
On  June  5,  2008,  a  comprehensive  Canadian  National  Instrument  43-101  compliant  report  (the  “report”)  on  the  Super 
Mammoth Gravel Project was completed.  The 43-101 report was prepared in accordance with the guidelines of National 
Instrument 43-101 “Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects” and is based on data and geological information gathered 
from public sources, assessment files, historical information, British Columbia provincial government maps and reports.  The 
source information of data presented in the report discusses the geology and mineral potential of the Super Mammoth Gravel 
project and is believed to be reliable and accurate. 
 
The Super Mammoth Gravel Project is without known reserves and the proposed program based on the recommendations of 
the report is exploratory in nature. 
 
From review of historical records, the Super Mammoth gravel deposit was first discovered several decades ago by employees 
of an unnamed major mining company during a prospecting exploration program in search of metallic ores.
12
In 1971,  work  was  completed  on  fourteen samples  by  Coast  Eldridge Professional  Services Division of Warnock  Hersey 
International Limited for Copper Range Exploration Company which included grading analyses, organic impurities tests and 
a visual examination.  The report does not indicate where the samples were taken or even where the property was located.  
Few details are available concerning the size and quality of the samples, methods of acquiring the samples, transportation of 
the samples, laboratory procedures and equipment employed and treatment of data obtained. 
 
The British Columbia Geological Surveys, as part of a coastal resource review, identified the Lloyd Point/Lloyd Creek area 
as having primary aggregate potential and outlined the area of interest. 
 
In 2002, geological reporting was done by Mr. Alex Burton for title holders Mr. Alex Burton and Mr. Tim Coupland.  Mr. 
Alex  Burton,  a  former  employee  of  the  original  operator  from  the  1970’s  and  a  registered  professional  engineer  and 
geologist, visited the property in 2002 and carried out some mapping of the surficial deposit.   
 
Levelton Engineering Ltd. was engaged in 2002 to undertake a “desk top” review of the aggregate site, to make a site visit, to 
consult with government agencies, and to process a small number of samples.   
 
In 2007, Mr. Farshad Shirvani was the owner of the Northern Gravel and Super Mammoth 5 mineral tenures.  He assembled 
details of previous work on the properties and under his direction work on the aggregate deposit, known as the Northern One 
deposit, resumed in September 2007.  The purpose of the work was to confirm and update previous analyses of aggregate 
material from the property.  Mr. Eric Ostensoe, in a geological consulting capacity, on September 11, 2007, obtained samples 
of representative materials from four sites on the property. 
 
Rock Formation and Mineralization.   
 
Geological Setting   
 
The Super Mammoth aggregate deposit is located near the estuary of Lloyd Creek, a small coastal stream that flows westerly 
from Mount Crawshay in the Unwin Range, a minor part of the Coast Mountains of southwestern British Columbia.  The 
Coast Mountains comprise the largest mountain mass in Canada and extend the entire length of the Cordillera.  They are 
dissected by large, deep, U-shaped valleys, and glacier and ice fields are present throughout the various ranges.  Granitic 
batholiths  underlie  the  greatest  part  of  the  Coast  Mountains  and  are  the  source  of  most  of  the  components  of  nearby 
occurrences  of  alluvial,  glaciofluvial,  morainal  and  till  deposits  that  have  been  derived  by  glacial  and  other  erosional 
processes.   
 
The Super Mammoth claims are underlain by Later Jurassic to Early Cretaceous quartz diorite and grandodiorite of the Coast 
Plutonic Complex.  The sand and gravel deposit is situated between sea level and about 300 meters elevation and comprises a 
weakly stratified, poorly sorted accumulation of sand and gravel with cobble and boulder-sized clasts.  Very small amounts 
of clay and silt-sized components act as weak cementing agents that give sufficient competency to support shallow cutbanks.  
The deposit was likely formed by periglacial processes that prevailed at the time of waning glacial activity, when meltwaters 
attacked till accumulations that were deposited by valley glaciers.  Much of the deposition occurred in a marine environment 
– the area may have been submerged as a result of crustal compression from ice loading.  However, the continental scale 
accumulation of huge quantities of ice also lowered seal levels and the subsequent rising seal level occurred in step with post-
glacial rebound. 
 
Deposit Types  
 
The  term  sand  and  gravel  refers  to  natural  deposits  or  unprocessed  material.    The  term  aggregate,  refers  to  the  product 
processed for industrial use by crushing or washing and screening.  Hora (2007) defines sand and gravel deposits as those 
that are deposited by high-energy streams draining continental areas, mainly during deglaciation.  The main source of the 
granular material is melting glacier ice containing large quantities of eroded bedrock and sediment.  This outwash material is 
transported by flowing water and deposited in a variety of landforms with granular material as a main component. 
 
 
 
Mineralization
13
Burton (2002) is the main historical source of the Super Mammoth sand and gravel deposit description.  The deposit is a 
raised or perched delta-type sand and gravel deposit.  It forms low bench-like accumulations of glaciofluvial deposits near 
and  upstream  from  the  mouth  of  Lloyd  Creek  in  Homfray  Channel  and  is  reported  to  continue  upstream  for  over  1.6 
kilometers, as indicated by exposures along the creek and the old logging road.  Perched delta landforms occur intermittently 
to  the  east  up  to  365  meter  elevation  where  they  are  replaced  by  glacialfluvial  morainal  outwash  material.    Most  of  the 
exposures  of  the  main  gravels  are  reported  to  be  part  of  the  deltaic  topset  beds  and  in  one  exposure  is  seen  to  have  a 
minimum of 30 meters thickness.  The beds exposed are mainly flat lying and composed of gravels with the maximum size 
boulders up to 60 centimeters in diameter, but these were uncommon.  Geological composition was of mixed rock types that 
were  dominated  by  granites,  grandodiorite  and  diorite  with  lesser  volcanic  rocks.    Particle  shares  were  characterized  as 
subround  or  aubangular.    Shrimer  reports  that  the  “course  aggregate  would  be  equivalent  in  physical  quality  to  typical 
commercial supplies of aggregate in use in many areas of British Columbia and Washington.” 
 
Geological Report: Super Mammoth Gravel Project  
 
The  Company  commissioned  and  obtained  a  National  Instrument  43-101  technical  report  by  Mr.  Gary  Payie,  P.Geo,  a 
professional geologist from Victoria, British Columbia, dated April 10, 2008, to provide an up to date summary of previous 
exploration work on the property and to make recommendations for further exploration work (the “report”).  Based on the 
report, we intend to implement an exploration program and intend to proceed in the following two phases all of which will be 
supervised by Mr. Brian Game, our director who is a professional geologist. 
 
Phase 1.  Phase 1 consist of a mapping and sampling exercise by quaternary geologist, followed by a 5 kilometer seismic 
geophysical program towards obtaining a model of the 3 dimensional shape of the deposit. Phase 1 consists of the following 
three stages:
  Stage 1 - Mapping and sampling by a qualified quaternary geologist specialized in fluvial and glaciofluvial surficial 
sediments and their landform characteristics including: raised deltas, floodplains, fans and deltas, kames, eskers and 
outwash plains.  The purpose of the proposed mapping is primarily to determine more accurately the extent of the 
deposit  and  secondarily  to  gather  more  information  on  the  qualities  of  the  materials.    This  program  could  be 
conducted over the course of a week to two week period where weather conditions permit.
  Stage  2  -  Clearing  of  the  old  road  and  north-south  line  cutting  to  facilitate  further  geological  work  and  future 
surveys.    Line  density  and  length  will  be  determined  by  the  mapping  study  and  the  requirements  of  a  proposed 
seismic survey.
  Stage 3 - Seismic survey of up to 5 km total length is recommended in order to establish the three dimensional shape 
of the deposit.  The extent and location of the seismic lines will depend on the mapping done earlier in the field 
season.    The  survey  will  follow  the  cutlines  created  earlier  in  the  season  that  were  located  according  to  the 
predetermined needs of the seismic surveyor.
Phase 1 will take approximately one month and cost up to $100,000. 
 
Phase 2.  Subject to the results of the report provided by the results obtained in Phase I, we will continue to Phase 2. Phase 2 
will consists of 1200 meters of drilling, possibly with the use of a sonic drill to determine shape (volume) of the deposit and 
quality of the material.  Drill targets are dependent on the Phase 1 seismic survey. 
 
Phase 2 will take approximately one month and cost up to $200,000.  
 
General.  If the geologist's report based on the laboratory analysis advises that the results of each Phase are not successful, 
we will explore other mineral properties. 
 
The initial phase of exploration at the Super Mammoth Gravel Project has not yet begun.  Once each phase of exploration is 
complete,  management  will  make  a  decision  as  to  whether  or  not  to  proceed  with  each  successive  phase  based  upon  the 
analysis  of  the  results  of  that  program.    The  directors  of  the  Company  will  make  this  decision  based  upon  the 
recommendations  of  the  independent  geologist  who  oversees  the  program  and  records  the  results,  as  well  as  upon  the 
recommendations of Mr. Brian Game, our director who is a professional geologist.
14
Even if the currently recommended exploration programs are completed at the Super Mammoth Gravel Project and they are 
successful, the Company will need to spend substantial additional funds on further drilling and engineering studies before it 
will ever be known if there is a commercially viable mineral deposit (a reserve) on the property. 
 
Real Estate Investments 
 
We do not currently maintain any investments in real estate, real estate mortgages or securities of persons primarily engaged 
in real estate activities, nor do we expect to do so in the foreseeable future. 
 
ITEM 3 – LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
 
Dynamic is not a party to any pending legal proceeding.  Management is not aware of any threatened litigation, claims or 
assessments.   
 
Our address for service of process in Nevada is 1802 N. Carson Street, Suite 212, Carson City,  Nevada, 89701. 
 
ITEM 4 – SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS 
 
No matters were submitted during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year to a vote of security holders, through the solicitation of 
proxies or otherwise.
ITEM  5  –  MARKET  FOR  COMMON  EQUITY  AND  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER  MATTERS  AND  SMALL 
BUSINESS ISUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES 
 
Market Information 
 
Our shares of common stock are quoted on the National Association of Securities Dealers' OTC Bulletin Board under the 
symbol “DYGO”.  There have been no trades in the shares of the common stock. 
 
Holders of Common Stock 
 
As of September 23, 2011, we had 42 stockholders of record holding 9,515,000 shares of common stock.  
 
Dividend Policy 
 
There are no restrictions in our articles of incorporation or bylaws that prevent us from declaring dividends.  The Nevada 
Revised Statutes, however, do prohibit us from declaring dividends where, after giving effect to the distribution of the 
dividend: 
 
1.  we would not be able to pay our debts as they become due in the usual course of business; or 
 
2.  our total assets would be less than the sum of our total liabilities plus the amount that would be needed to satisfy the
rights of shareholders who have preferential rights superior to those receiving the distribution.
We have not declared any dividends, and we do not plan to declare any dividends in the foreseeable future. 
 
Equity Compensation Plan  
 
We do not have any securities authorized for issuance under any equity compensation plans. 
 
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities 
 
None.
PART II
15
ITEM 6 – MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF 
OPERATION OR PLAN OF OPERATION 
 
Selected Financial Data 
 
The  selected  financial  information  presented  below  as  of  and  for  the  periods  indicated  is  derived  from  our  consolidated 
financial statements contained elsewhere in this report and should be read in conjunction with those consolidated financial 
statements.  The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs.  Our 
actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.  Factors that could cause or 
contribute to such differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in the section 
entitled “Risk Factors” found elsewhere in this report. 
 
INCOME STATEMENT 
DATA
Year Ended 30 June 2010
Year Ended 30 June 2011
Accumulated from 21 
January 2004 (Date of 
Inception) to 30 June 2011 
$Nil
$(510,190)
$(510,190)
---
---
$Nil
$(82,294)
$(82,294)
$(0.009)
9,515,000
$Nil
$(92,183)
$(92,183)
$(0.010)
9,515,000
Revenue
Operating Expenses
Net Loss
Net Loss Per Share
Weighted Average Number 
of Common Shares 
Outstanding (basic and 
diluted) 
 
BALANCE SHEET DATA 
Working Capital Deficiency
As at 30 June 2011 
$(209,690)
As at 30 June 2010 
$(190,996)
Total Assets
$3,084
Accumulated Deficit
$(510,190)
$3,033
$(427,896)
$(190,996)
$(209,690)
Shareholders’ Deficiency 
 
Historical results of operations for Dynamic Gold Corp. may differ materially from future results. 
 
This  discussion  and  analysis  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  and 
related notes. The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated 
financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United 
States.  The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United 
States of America requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and 
liabilities,  disclosure  of  any  contingent  liabilities  at  the  financial  statement  date  and  reported  amounts  of  revenue  and 
expenses  during  the  reporting  period.  On  an  on-going  basis  the  Company  reviews  its  estimates  and  assumptions.  The 
estimates were based on historical experience and other assumptions that the Company believes to be reasonable under the 
circumstances.  Actual  results  are  likely  to  differ  from  those  estimates  under  different  assumptions  or  conditions,  but  the 
Company  does  not  believe  such  differences  will  materially  affect  our  financial  position  or  results  of  operations.  Critical 
accounting policies, the policies the Company believes are most important to the presentation of its financial statements and 
require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments are outlined below in ― ”Critical Accounting Policies”.
16
Explanatory Note on Consolidated Financial Statements 
 
The audited consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared pursuant to the rules and regulations 
of the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
 
Plan of Operations 
 
Our plan of operation for the twelve months following the date of this report is to complete the recommended phase one 
exploration program on the Super Mammoth Gravel Project.  According to his geology report, Mr. Payie estimates that the 
first phase, consisting of mapping, sampling and a five (5) kilometer seismic geophysical program towards obtaining a model 
of the three (3) dimensional shape of the deposit will cost approximately $100,000.  This phase of the program will involve 
the work of one geologist and assistant for ten (10) days and an additional four (4) man crew performing line cutting for 
approximately seven (7) days. 
 
We will then commence the second phase of exploration.  This phase will consist of a drilling program to determine the 
shape (volume) of the deposit and quality of the material and will take an additional month to complete.  It will entail at lease 
two (2) additional weeks of work for the six (6) man crew which includes a qualified geologist, one (1) assistant and four (4) 
crew members.  This phase has an estimated cost of $200,000. 
 
We do not have any arrangement with a qualified geologist to oversee these programs.  However, subject to availability, we 
intend to retain Mr. Payie.  He will be responsible for hiring any additional personnel needed for the exploration programs. 
 
As  well,  we  anticipate  spending  an  additional  $50,000  on  administrative  fees,  including  professional  fees  payable  in 
connection with the filing of this registration statement and complying with reporting obligations.  Total expenditures over 
the next twelve (12) months are therefore expected to be approximately $525,000. 
 
Limited Operating History; Need for Additional Capital 
 
In the notes to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements as of June 30, 2011, included elsewhere in this Form 
10-K, the Company’s auditors included an explanatory paragraph stating that, because the Company had a working capital 
deficiency of $(209,690) as of June 30, 2011, and had incurred accumulated losses of $(510,190) for the period from January 
21, 2004 (inception) to June 30, 2011, there was substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. 
 
There is limited historical financial information about the Company upon which to base an evaluation of its performance.  
The Company is an exploration stage enterprise and has not generated any revenues from operations.  The Company cannot 
guarantee  it  will  be  successful  in  its  business  operations.    The  Company’s  business  is  subject  to  risks  inherent  in  the 
establishment of a new resource exploration company, including limited capital resources, unanticipated problems relating to 
exploration and additional costs and expenses that may exceed current estimates.  To become profitable the Company will 
attempt to implement its plan of operation as detailed above. 
 
Our cash reserves are not sufficient to meet our obligations for the next twelve-month period.  As a result, we will need to 
seek additional funding in the near future.  We currently do not have a specific plan of how we will obtain such funding.  
However, we anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock.  
As well, our management is prepared to provide us with short-term loans.   
 
We cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our common 
stock  or  through  a  loan  from  our  directors  to  meet  our  obligations  over  the  next  twelve  months.    We  do  not  have  any 
arrangements in place for any future equity financing. 
 
If we do not secure additional funding for exploration expenditures, we may consider seeking an arrangement with a joint 
venture  partner  that  would  provide  the  required  funding  in  exchange  for  receiving  a  part  interest  in  the  Super  Mammoth 
Gravel Project.  We have not undertaken any efforts to locate a joint venture partner.  There is no guarantee that we will be 
able to locate a joint venture partner who will assist us in funding exploration expenditures upon acceptable terms. 
 
If we are unable to arrange additional financing or find a joint venture partner for the Super Mammoth Gravel Project, our 
business plan will fail and operations will cease.
17
Results of Operations for the Year Ending June 30, 2011 
 
We have not earned any revenues from our incorporation on January 21, 2004 to June 30, 2011.  We have not commenced 
the exploration stage of our business and can provide no assurance that we will discover economic mineralization on the 
property. 
 
The Company’s net loss for the year ended June 30, 2011 was $82,294 compared to a net loss of $92,183 for the year ended 
June  30,  2010.    Contributing  to  the  period  over  period  differences  were  bank  charges  and  interest  of  $15,564  (2010  - 
$14,223),  filing  and  financing  fees  of  $7,803  (2010  -  $7,068),  legal  and  accounting  fees  of  $7,141  (2010  -  $7,292), 
management fees of $60,000 (2010 - $60,000), rent of $3,600 (2010 - $3,600) and recovery of expense of $12,000 (2010 - 
$Nil). 
 
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to pursue exploration activities.  For 
these reasons our auditors believe that there is substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern. 
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources 
 
At June 30, 2011, we had cash on hand of $3,084 (2010 - $3,033) and liabilities of $212,774 (2010 - $194,029) consisting of 
accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $15,834 (2010 - $23,181) and loans from our president, Mr. Tim Coupland, for 
$196,940 (2010 - $170,848). 
 
We will require additional funding in order to cover all anticipated administration costs and to proceed with the phase one 
and two of stage one exploration program that is estimated to cost $100,000, as well as the stage two drilling program on the 
property, estimated to cost $200,000. 
 
Capital Expenditures 
 
The Company expended no amounts on capital expenditures for the period from inception to June 30, 2011.  At present there 
are  no  transactions  being  contemplated  by  management  or  the  board  that  would  affect  the  financial  condition,  results  of 
operations and cash flows of any asset of the Company. 
 
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements 
 
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that would require disclosure. 
 
Critical Accounting Policies 
 
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United 
States  of  America.    Preparing  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires 
management to make estimates and assumptions which affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure 
of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet dates, and the recognition of revenues and expenses for the reporting 
periods.  These estimates and assumptions are affected by management's application of accounting policies. 
 
Basis of presentation
The consolidated financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America applicable to exploration stage enterprises, and are expressed in U.S. dollars.  The 
Company’s fiscal year end is June 30. 
 
Principles of consolidation
These  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  the  Company  and  its  wholly-owned  subsidiary  Dynamic 
Gravel Holdings Ltd. (“Dynamic Gravel”), a company incorporated in the province of Alberta on November 21, 2007.  All 
significant inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated upon consolidation.
18
Cash and cash equivalents 
 
Cash and cash equivalents include highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. 
 
Mineral property costs 
 
The Company is primarily engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of mineral properties. 
 
Mineral  property  acquisition  costs  are  initially  capitalized  as  tangible  assets  when  purchased.    At  the  end  of  each  fiscal 
quarter end, the Company assesses the carrying costs for impairment.  If proven and probable reserves are established for a 
property and it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed, costs will be amortized using the 
units-of-production method over the estimated life of the probable reserve.
Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred. 
 
Estimated future removal and site restoration costs, when determinable are provided over the life of proven reserves on a 
units-of-production basis.  Costs, which include production equipment removal and environmental remediation, are estimated 
each period by management based on current regulations, actual expenses incurred, and technology and industry standards.  
Any charge is included in exploration expense or the provision for depletion and depreciation during the period and the actual 
restoration expenditures are charged to the accumulated provision amounts as incurred. 
 
As of the date of these consolidated financial statements, the Company has not established any proven or probable reserves 
on its mineral properties and incurred only acquisition and exploration costs. 
 
Although the Company has taken steps to verify title to mineral properties in which it has an interest, according to the usual 
industry standards for the stage of exploration of such properties, these procedures do not guarantee the Company’s title.  
Such properties may be subject to prior agreements or transfers and title may be affected by undetected defects.
Financial instruments 
 
The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, accounts payable and due to related party approximate fair value because 
of the short maturity of these items.  These fair value estimates are subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters 
of significant judgment, and, therefore, cannot be determined with precision.  Changes in assumptions could significantly 
affect these estimates.  The Company does not hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes, not does it utilize 
derivative instruments in the management of foreign exchange, commodity price or interest rate market risks. 
 
Unless otherwise noted, it is management’s opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest, currency or credit 
risk arising from these financial instruments. 
 
Derivative financial instruments 
 
The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the 
impact of foreign currency fluctuations. 
 
 
Environmental expenditures 
 
The  operations  of  the  Company  have  been,  and  may  in  the  future,  be  affected from  time  to  time,  in  varying  degrees,  by 
changes in environmental regulations, including those for future reclamation and site restoration costs.  Both the likelihood of 
new regulations and their overall effect upon the Company vary greatly and are not predictable.  The Company’s policy is to 
meet  or,  if  possible,  surpass  standards  set  by  relevant  legislation,  by  application  of  technically  proven  and  economically 
feasible measures. 
 
Environmental expenditures that relate to ongoing environmental and reclamation programs are charged against earnings as 
incurred or capitalized and amortized depending on their future economic benefits.  Estimated future reclamation and site
19
restoration  costs,  when  the  ultimate  liability  is  reasonably  determinable,  are  charged  against  earnings  over  the  estimated 
remaining life of the related business operation, net of expected recoveries. 
 
Income taxes 
 
Deferred income taxes are reported for timing difference between items of income or expense reported in the consolidated 
financial  statements  and  those  reported  for  income  tax  purposes  in  accordance  with  ASC  740,  “Income  Taxes”,  which 
requires the use of the asset/liability method of accounting for income taxes.  Deferred income taxes and tax benefits are 
recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of 
existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and for tax loss and credit carry-forwards.  Deferred tax assets 
and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary 
differences are expected to be recovered or settled.  The Company provides for deferred taxes for the estimated future tax 
effects attributable to temporary differences and carry-forwards when realization is more likely than not. 
 
Basic and diluted loss per share 
 
The  Company  computes  net  loss  per  share  in  accordance  with  ASC  260,  “Earnings  per  Share”.    ASC  260  requires 
presentation  of  both  basic  and  diluted  earnings  per  share  (“EPS”)  on  the  face  of  the  income  statement.    Basic  EPS  is 
computed  by  dividing  net  loss  available  to  common  shareholders  (numerator)  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares 
outstanding (denominator) during the period.  Diluted EPS gives effect to all potentially dilutive common shares outstanding 
during  the  period  using  the  treasury  stock  method  and  convertible  preferred  stock  using  the  if-converted  method.    In 
computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be 
purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants.  Diluted EPS excludes all potentially dilutive shares if their effect is 
anti-dilutive. 
 
Comprehensive loss 
 
ASC  220,  “Comprehensive  Income”,  establishes  standards  for  the  reporting  and  display  of  comprehensive  loss  and  its 
components  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements.    As  at  June  30,  2011,  the  Company  has  no  items  that  represent  a 
comprehensive  loss  and,  therefore,  has  not  included  a  schedule  of  comprehensive  loss  in  the  consolidated  financial 
statements. 
 
Segments of an enterprise and related information 
 
ASC 280, “Segment Reporting”,  establishes guidance for the way that public companies report information about operating 
segments in annual consolidated financial statements and requires reporting of selected information about operating segments 
in  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  issued  to  the  public.    It  also  establishes  standards  for  disclosures  regarding 
products  and  services,  geographic  areas  and  major  customers.    ASC  280  defines  operating  segments  as  components  of  a 
company about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision 
maker in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance.  The Company has evaluated this Codification and 
does not believe it is applicable at this time. 
 
Start-up expenses 
 
The Company has adopted ASC 720-15, “Start-Up Costs”, which requires that costs associated with start-up activities be 
expensed  as  incurred.    Accordingly,  start-up  costs  associated  with  the  Company’s  formation  have  been  included  in  the 
Company’s expenses for the period from the date of inception on January 21, 2004 to June 30, 2011. 
 
Foreign currency translation 
 
The Company’s functional and reporting currency is in U.S. dollars.  The consolidated financial statements of the Company 
are  translated  to  U.S.  dollars  in  accordance  with  ASC  830,  “Foreign  Currency  Matters”.    Monetary  assets  and  liabilities 
denominated  in  foreign  currencies  are  translated  using  the  exchange rate  prevailing  at  the  balance  sheet  date.    Gains and 
losses  arising  on  translation  or  settlement  of  foreign  currency  denominated  transactions  or  balances  are  included  in  the 
determination  of  income.    The  Company  has  not,  to  the  date  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements,  entered  into 
derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
20
Use of estimates 
 
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the 
United  States  of  America  requires  management  to  make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  amounts  of  assets  and 
liabilities  and  disclosures  of  contingent  assets  and  liabilities  at  the  date  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the 
reported amounts of revenues and expenditures during the reporting period.  Actual results could differ from these estimates. 
 
Concentration of credit risk 
 
The Company’s financial instruments that are exposed to concentrations of credit risk primarily consist of its cash and related 
party payables.  The Company places its cash and cash equivalents with financial institutions of high credit worthiness.  At 
times, its cash and cash equivalents with a particular financial institution may exceed any applicable government insurance 
limits.  The Company’s management also routinely assesses the financial strength and credit worthiness of any parties to 
which it extends funds and as such, it believes that any associated credit risk exposures are limited. 
Risks and uncertainties 
 
The Company operates in the resource exploration industry that is subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including 
financial, operational, technological, and other risks associated with operating a resource exploration business, including the 
potential risk of business failure. 
 
Comparative figures 
 
Certain comparative figures have been adjusted to conform to the current year’s presentation.   
 
Changes in accounting policies 
 
In April 2010, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2010-13, “Effect of Denominating the Exercise 
Price of a Share-Based Payment Award in the Currency of the Market in Which the Underlying Equity Security Trades”.  
This ASU provides amendments to Topic 718 to clarify that an employee share-based payment award with an exercise price 
denominated in the currency of a market in which a substantial portion of the entity’s equity securities trades should not be 
considered to contain a condition that is not a market, performance, or service condition. Therefore, an entity would not 
classify such an award as a liability if it otherwise qualifies as equity.  This ASU should not be considered to contain a 
condition that is not a market, performance, or service condition. Therefore, an entity would not classify such an award as a 
liability if it otherwise qualifies as equity.  The amendments in this ASU do not expand the recurring disclosures required by 
Topic 718. Disclosures currently required under Topic 718 are applicable to a share-based payment award, including the 
nature and terms of share-based payment arrangements.  ASU No. 2010-13 is effective for fiscal quarters beginning after 15 
December 2010.  The adoption of ASU No. 2010-13 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial 
statements. 
 
In February 2010, the FASB issued ASU No. 2010-09, “Amendments to Certain Recognition and Disclosure Requirements”, 
which eliminates the requirement for Securities and Exchange Commission filers to disclose the date through which an entity 
has evaluated subsequent events.  ASU No. 2010-09 is effective for fiscal quarters beginning after 15 December 2010.  The 
adoption of ASU No. 2010-09 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. 
 
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-06, “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements”. This update 
requires additional disclosure within the roll forward of activity for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring 
basis, including transfers of assets and liabilities between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy and the separate 
presentation of purchases, sales, issuances and settlements of assets and liabilities within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. 
In  addition,  the  update  requires  enhanced  disclosures  of  the  valuation  techniques  and  inputs  used  in  the  fair  value 
measurements within Levels 2 and 3. The new disclosure requirements are effective for interim and annual periods beginning 
after 15 December 2009, except for the disclosure of purchases, sales, issuances and settlements of Level 3 measurements. 
Those disclosures are effective for fiscal years beginning after 15 December 2010. The adoption of ASU 2010-06 did not 
have a material effect on its  consolidated financial statements.
21
Recent accounting pronouncements 
 
In June 2011, the FASB issued ASU No.  2011-05, “Comprehensive Income”, which gives an entity the option to present the 
total of comprehensive income, the components of net income, and the components of other comprehensive income either in 
a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in two separate but consecutive statements. In both choices, an 
entity  is  required  to  present  each  component  of  net  income  along  with  total  net  income,  each  component  of  other 
comprehensive income along with a total for other comprehensive income, and a total amount for comprehensive income. 
This ASU eliminates the option to present the components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of changes 
in stockholders' equity.  The amendments in this ASU do not change the items that must be reported in other comprehensive 
income or when an item of other comprehensive income must be reclassified to net income.  ASU No. 2011-05 is effective 
for fiscal quarters beginning after 15 December 2011.  The adoption of ASU No. 2011-05 is not expected to have a material 
impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk 
 
The Company does not issue or invest in financial instruments or their derivatives for trading or speculative purposes.  The 
limited  operations  of  the  Company  are  conducted  primarily  in  Canada,  and,  are  not  subject  to  material  foreign  currency 
exchange risk.  Although the Company has outstanding debt and related interest expense, market risk of interest rate exposure 
in the United States is currently not material. 
 
ITEM 7 – CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 
 
As used herein, the terms “Company,” “our,”, “we,” and “us” refer to Dynamic Gold Corp., a Nevada corporation, unless 
otherwise indicated.  In the opinion of management, the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements included in 
the Form 10-K reflect all adjustment (consisting only of normal recurring accruals) necessary for a fair presentation of the 
results of operations for the period presented.  The results of operation for the years presented are not necessarily indicative 
of the results to be expected for the future years.
22
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
23
JAMES STAFFORD
James Stafford, Inc. 
Chartered Accountants 
Suite 350 – 1111 Melville Street 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Canada V6E 3V6 
Telephone +1 604 669 0711 
Facsimile +1 604 669 0754 
www.jamesstafford.ca
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
 
 
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of 
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
 
 
 
We have audited the consolidated balance sheets of Dynamic Gold Corp. (the “Company”) as at 30 June 
2011 and 2010 and the related consolidated statements of operations and deficit, cash flows and changes in 
stockholders’  deficiency  for  each  of  the  years  in  the  three-year  period  ended  30  June  2011.  These 
consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management.  Our responsibility is 
to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.  
 
We  conducted  our  audits  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight 
Board  (United  States  of  America).    Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain 
reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  of  material  misstatement.    An  audit 
includes  examining,  on  a  test  basis,  evidence  supporting  the  amounts  and  disclosures  in  the  financial 
statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by 
management, as well as, evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe our audits provide 
a reasonable basis for our opinion. 
 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, 
the financial position of the Company as at 30 June 2011 and 2010 and the results of its operations and its 
cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended 30 June 2011 in conformity with accounting 
principles generally accepted in the United States of America. 
 
The  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  that  the  Company  will 
continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, conditions exist 
which raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern unless it is able to 
generate  sufficient  cash  flows  to  meet  its  obligations  and  sustain  its  operations.  Management’s  plans 
regarding those matters are also described in Note 1. The consolidated financial statements do not include any 
adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chartered Accountants 
Vancouver, Canada 
 
12 August 2011, except for Note 12, as to which the date is 15 September 2011
24
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Assets 
 
Current 
Cash and cash equivalents  
 
Liabilities 
 
Current 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 4) 
Due to related party (Note 5) 
 
 
 
Shareholders’ deficiency 
Capital stock (Note 6) 
Authorized 
75,000,000 shares, $0.001 par value 
Issued and outstanding
30 June 2011 – 9,515,000 common shares
30 June 2010 – 9,515,000 common shares
Additional paid-in capital 
Deficit, accumulated during the exploration stage
As at 
30 June 
2011 
$ 
 
 
 
 
3,084 
 
 
 
 
15,834 
196,940 
 
212,774 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9,515 
290,985 
(510,190) 
 
(209,690) 
 
3,084
As at
30 June
2010 
$ 
 
 
 
 
3,033 
 
 
 
 
23,181 
170,848 
 
194,029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9,515 
227,385 
(427,896) 
 
(190,996) 
 
3,033
Nature and Continuance of Operations (Note 1), Commitment and Congtingency (Note 9) and Subsequent Event 
(Note 12) 
 
On behalf of the Board: 
 
 
/ s / Tim Coupland
/ s / Robert Hall
Director
Director
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
25
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Deficit 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
For the 
period from 
the date of 
inception on 
21 January 
2004 
to 30 June 
2011
(Unaudited)
$
-
(510,190)
3,523
50,332
31,877
116,330
252,000
12,816
1,705
18,000
 
35,607
(12,000)
(510,190)
Expenses 
Advertising and promotion 
Bank charges and interest (Note 5) 
Filing and financing fees 
Legal and accounting  
Management fees (Notes 7 and 10) 
Mineral property exploration costs 
Office and miscellaneous 
Rent (Notes 7 and 10) 
Write-down of mineral property acquisition costs 
(Note 3) 
Recovery of expenses (Notes 4, 9 and 10) 
 
Net loss for the period 
 
Deficit, accumulated during the exploration 
stage, beginning of period 
 
Deficit, accumulated during the exploration 
stage, end of period 
 
Basic and diluted loss per common share (Note 2) 
 
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding
For the  
year ended  
30 June  
2011 
                $  
 
 
- 
15,564 
7,803 
7,141 
60,000 
- 
186 
3,600
- 
(12,000) 
 
(82,294)
(427,896)
(510,190) 
 
(0.009) 
 
9,515,000
For the 
year 
ended 
30 June 
2010
$
-
14,223
7,068
7,292
60,000
-
-
3,600
-
-
For the 
year ended 
30 June 
2009
$
620
12,252
5,085
17,998
60,000
-
-
3,600
-
-
(92,183)
(99,555)
(335,713)
(236,158)
(427,896)
(335,713)
(0.010)
(0.010)
9,515,000
9,515,000
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
26
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Cash flows used in operating activities 
Net loss for the period 
  Adjustments to reconcile loss to net cash used by 
  operating activities
Contributions to capital by related party – 
expenses (Notes 7 and 10) 
Accrued interest (Note 5) 
Write-down of mineral property acquisition 
costs (Note 3) 
Recovery of expenses (Notes  4, 9, and 10)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities 
   Decrease in amounts receivable  
   Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and
accrued  liabilities (Note 4)
Cash flows used in investing activity 
Mineral property acquisition costs (Note 3) 
 
Cash flows from financing activity 
Issuance of common shares for cash  
Increase in due to related party (Note 5)
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
Supplemental Disclosures with Respect to Cash Flows (Note 10)
27
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
For the period 
from the date of 
inception on 21 
January 2004 
to 30 June
2011
(Unaudited)
$
For the  
year 
ended  
30 June 
2011 
$ 
 
 
 
 
(82,294)
63,600 
14,592
- 
(12,000) 
 
-
4,653 
 
(11,449) 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
11,500 
 
11,500 
 
51 
 
3,033 
 
3,084
For the 
year
ended 
30 June
2010
$ 
 
 
 
 
(92,183)
63,600 
13,170
- 
- 
 
-
(6,034) 
 
(21,447) 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
15,000 
 
15,000 
 
(6,447) 
 
9,480 
 
3,033
For the 
year
ended 
30 June
2009
$ 
 
 
 
 
(99,555)
63,600 
11,167
- 
- 
 
1,968
(9,993) 
 
(32,813) 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
35,000 
 
35,000 
 
2,187 
 
7,293 
 
9,480
(510,190)
270,000 
45,440
35,607 
(12,000) 
 
-
27,834 
 
(143,309) 
 
 
(35,607) 
 
 
30,500 
151,500 
 
182,000 
 
3,084 
 
- 
 
3,084
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Deficiency 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
For the period from the date of inception on 21 January 2004 to 30 June 2008 (Unaudited) 
For the years ended 30 June 2009 to 2011
Balance at  21 January 2004 
(inception)
Common shares issued for 
cash ($0.001 per share) 
Common shares issued for 
cash ($0.01 per share) 
Common shares issued for 
cash ($0.20 per share) 
Net loss for the period
Balance at  30 June 2004 
(Unaudited)
Net loss for the year
Balance at  30 June 2005 
(Unaudited)
Net loss for the year
Balance at  30 June 2006 
(Unaudited)
Contributions to capital by 
related party – expenses 
(Notes 7 and 10) 
Net loss for the year
Balance at 30 June 2007
Contributions to capital by 
related party – expenses 
(Notes 7 and 10) 
Net loss for the year
Balance at 30 June 2008
Contributions to capital by 
related party – expenses 
(Notes 7 and 10) 
Net loss for the year
Balance at 30 June 2009
Number 
of shares 
issued
-
7,500,000
2,000,000
15,000 
-
9,515,000 
-
9,515,000 
-
9,515,000
- 
- 
 
9,515,000
- 
- 
 
9,515,000
- 
- 
 
9,515,000
Capital 
Stock 
$
-
7,500
2,000
15 
-
9,515 
-
9,515 
-
9,515
- 
- 
 
9,515
- 
- 
 
9,515
- 
- 
 
9,515
Additional 
paid-in 
capital 
$
-
-
18,000
2,985 
-
20,985 
-
20,985 
-
20,985
15,600 
- 
 
36,585
63,600 
- 
 
100,185
63,600 
- 
 
163,785
Deficit, 
accumulated 
during the 
exploration 
stage 
$
-
-
-
- 
(10,267)
(10,267) 
(26,040)
(36,307) 
(22,156)
(58,463)
- 
(33,845) 
 
(92,308)
- 
(143,850) 
 
(236,158)
- 
(99,555) 
 
(335,713)
Total 
stockholders’ 
deficiency 
$ 
 
 
-
7,500
20,000
3,000 
(10,267)
20,233 
(26,040)
(5,807) 
(22,156)
(27,963)
15,600 
(33,845) 
 
(46,208)
63,600 
(143,850) 
 
(126,458)
63,600 
(99,555) 
 
(162,413)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
28
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Deficiency 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars 
For the period from the date of inception on 21 January 2004 to 30 June 2008 (Unaudited) 
For the years ended 30 June 2009 to 2011
Number 
of shares 
issued
9,515,000
- 
- 
 
9,515,000
- 
- 
 
9,515,000
Capital 
Stock 
$ 
 
9,515
- 
- 
 
9,515
- 
- 
 
9,515
Additional 
paid-in 
capital 
$ 
 
163,785
63,600 
- 
 
227,385
63,600 
- 
 
290,985
Deficit, 
accumulated 
during the 
exploration 
stage 
$ 
 
(335,713)
- 
(92,183) 
 
(427,896)
- 
(82,294) 
 
(510,190)
Total 
shareholders’ 
deficiency 
$ 
 
(162,413)
63,600 
(92,183) 
 
(190,996)
63,600 
(82,294) 
 
(209,690)
Balance at 30 June 2009
Contributions to capital by 
related party – expenses 
(Notes 7 and 10) 
Net loss for the year
Balance at 30 June 2010
Contributions to capital by 
related party – expenses 
(Notes 7 and 10) 
Net loss for the year
Balance at 30 June 2011
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
29
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011 
 
1.
Nature and Continuance of Operations 
 
Dynamic Gold Corp. (the “Company”) was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on 21 January 
2004 and is in the exploration stage.   
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  and  related  notes  are  presented  in  accordance  with  accounting 
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).  The Company is an exploration 
stage  enterprise,  as  defined  in  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (the  “Codification”  or  “ASC”)  915-10, 
“Development  Stage  Entities”.  The  Company  is  devoting  all  of  its  present  efforts  in  establishing  a  new 
business, and its planned principle operations have not commenced, and, accordingly, no revenue has been 
derived during the organization period. 
 
The  Company  is  in  the  business  of  acquiring  and  exploring  mineral  properties.    The  recoverability  of  the 
amounts  expended  by  the  Company  on  acquiring  and  exploring  mineral  properties  is  dependent  upon  the 
existence of economically recoverable reserves, the ability of the Company to complete the acquisition and/or 
development of the properties and upon future profitable production. 
 
The Company’s consolidated financial statements as at 30 June 2011 and for the year then ended have been 
prepared  on  a  going  concern  basis,  which  contemplates  the  realization  of  assets  and  the  settlement  of 
liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business.  The Company has a loss of $82,294 for the 
year ended 30 June 2011 (30 June 2010 – $92,183, 30 June 2009 – $99,555, cumulative – $510,190) and has 
a working capital deficit of $209,690 at 30 June 2011 (30 June 2010 – $190,996). 
  
Management  cannot  provide  assurance  that  the  Company  will  ultimately  achieve  profitable  operations  or 
become  cash  flow  positive,  or  raise  additional  debt  and/or  equity  capital.    Management  believes  that  the 
Company’s capital resources should be adequate to continue operating and maintaining its business strategy 
during the fiscal year ending 30 June 2011.  However, if the Company is unable to raise additional capital in 
the near future, due to the Company’s liquidity problems, management expects that the Company will need to 
curtail  operations,  liquidate  assets,  seek  additional  capital  on  less  favourable  terms  and/or  pursue  other 
remedial  measures.    These  consolidated  financial  statements  do  not  include  any  adjustments  related  to  the 
recoverability  and  classification  of  assets  or  the  amounts  and  classification  of  liabilities  that  might  be 
necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
At 30 June 2011, the Company had suffered losses from exploration activities to date.  Although management 
is  currently  attempting  to  implement  its  business  plan,  and  is  seeking  additional  sources  of  equity  or  debt 
financing, there is no assurance these activities will be successful.  Accordingly, the Company must rely on its 
president to perform essential functions without compensation until a business operation can be commenced.  
These factors raise substantial doubt about the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern.  The 
consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this 
uncertainty. 
 
Significant Accounting Policies 
 
The following is a summary of significant accounting policies used in the preparation of these consolidated 
financial statements.
2.
30
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Basis of presentation 
 
The  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the  Company  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP 
applicable to exploration stage enterprises, and are expressed in U.S. dollars.  The Company’s fiscal year end 
is 30 June.
Principles of consolidation 
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  the  Company  and  its  wholly-owned 
subsidiary Dynamic Gravel Holdings Ltd. (“Dynamic Gravel”), a company incorporated in the province of 
Alberta on 21 November 2007.  All significant inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated 
upon consolidation. 
 
Cash and cash equivalents 
 
Cash and cash equivalents include highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. 
 
Derivative financial instruments 
 
The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to 
offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Mineral property costs
The Company is primarily engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of mineral properties. 
 
Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized as tangible assets when purchased.  At the end of 
each  fiscal  quarter  end,  the  Company  assesses  the  carrying  costs  for  impairment.    If  proven  and  probable 
reserves are established for a property and it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically 
developed,  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production  method  over  the  estimated  life  of  the 
probable reserve. 
 
Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred. 
 
Estimated future removal and site restoration costs, when determinable are provided over the life of proven 
reserves  on  a  units-of-production  basis.    Costs,  which  include  production  equipment  removal  and 
environmental  remediation,  are  estimated  each  period  by  management  based  on  current  regulations,  actual 
expenses incurred, and technology and industry standards.  Any charge is included in exploration expense or 
the  provision  for  depletion  and  depreciation  during  the  period  and  the  actual  restoration  expenditures  are 
charged to the accumulated provision amounts as incurred. 
 
As  of  the  date  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements,  the  Company  has  not  established  any  proven  or 
probable reserves on its mineral properties and incurred only acquisition and exploration costs (Note 3).
31
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Income taxes
Although  the  Company  has  taken  steps  to  verify  title  to  mineral  properties  in  which  it  has  an  interest, 
according to the usual industry standards for the stage of exploration of such properties, these procedures do 
not guarantee the Company’s title.  Such properties may be subject to prior agreements or transfers and title 
may be affected by undetected defects. 
 
Environmental expenditures 
 
The operations of the Company have been, and may in the future, be affected from time to time, in varying 
degrees, by changes in environmental regulations, including those for future reclamation and site restoration 
costs.  Both the likelihood of new regulations and their overall effect upon the Company vary greatly and are 
not predictable.  The Company’s policy is to meet or, if possible, surpass standards set by relevant legislation, 
by application of technically proven and economically feasible measures. 
 
Environmental  expenditures  that  relate  to  ongoing  environmental  and  reclamation  programs  are  charged 
against  earnings  as  incurred  or  capitalized  and  amortized  depending  on  their  future  economic  benefits.  
Estimated future reclamation and site restoration costs, when the ultimate liability is reasonably determinable, 
are  charged  against  earnings  over  the  estimated  remaining  life  of  the  related  business  operation,  net  of 
expected recoveries.
Deferred income taxes are reported for timing differences between items of income or expense reported in the 
consolidated financial statements and those reported for income tax purposes in accordance with ASC 740, 
“Income  Taxes”,  which  requires  the  use  of  the  asset/liability  method  of  accounting  for  income  taxes.  
Deferred  income  taxes  and  tax  benefits  are  recognized  for  the  future  tax  consequences  attributable  to 
differences  between  the  financial  statement  carrying  amounts  of  existing  assets  and  liabilities  and  their 
respective  tax  bases,  and  for  tax  losses  and  credit  carry-forwards.    Deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are 
measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary 
differences  are  expected  to  be  recovered  or  settled.    The  Company  provides  for  deferred  taxes  for  the 
estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carry-forwards when realization is more 
likely than not. 
 
Comprehensive loss
ASC 220, “Comprehensive Income”, establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive 
loss and its components in the consolidated financial statements.  As at 30 June 2011, the Company has no 
items that represent a comprehensive loss and, therefore, has not included a schedule of comprehensive loss 
in the consolidated financial statements.
32
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Basic and diluted net loss per share 
 
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”. 
ASC 260 requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income 
statement.    Basic  EPS  is  computed  by  dividing  net  income  (loss)  available  to  common  shareholders 
(numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period.  Diluted 
EPS  gives  effect  to  all  dilutive  potential  common  shares  outstanding  during  the  period  using  the  treasury 
stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method.  In computing diluted EPS, the 
average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from 
the exercise of stock options or warrants.  Diluted EPS excluded all dilutive potential shares if their effect is 
anti-dilutive. 
 
Segments of an enterprise and related information 
 
ASC 280, “Segment Reporting” establishes guidance for the way that public companies report information 
about  operating  segments  in  annual  consolidated  financial  statements  and  requires  reporting  of  selected 
information about operating segments in interim consolidated financial statements issued to the public.  It 
also  establishes  standards  for  disclosures  regarding  products  and  services,  geographic  areas  and  major 
customers.  ASC 280 defines operating segments as components of a company about which separate financial 
information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to 
allocate resources and in assessing performance.  The Company has evaluated this Codification and does not 
believe it is applicable at this time. 
 
Start-up expenses 
 
The Company has adopted ASC 720-15, “Start-Up Costs”, which requires that costs associated with start-up 
activities  be  expensed  as  incurred.    Accordingly,  start-up  costs  associated  with  the  Company’s  formation 
have been included in the Company’s expenses for the period from the date of inception on 21 January 2004 
to 30 June 2011. 
 
Foreign currency translation 
 
The Company’s functional and reporting currency is U.S. dollars.  The consolidated financial statements of 
the  Company  are  translated  to  U.S.  dollars  in  accordance  with  ASC  830,  “Foreign  Currency  Matters”.  
Monetary  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  foreign  currencies  are  translated  using  the  exchange  rate 
prevailing at the balance sheet date.  Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency 
denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of income.  The Company has not, to 
the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of 
foreign currency fluctuations.  
 
Risks and uncertainties 
 
The  Company  operates  in  the  resource  exploration  industry  that  is  subject  to  significant  risks  and 
uncertainties,  including  financial,  operational,  technological,  and  other  risks  associated  with  operating  a 
resource exploration business, including the potential risk of business failure.
33
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Use of estimates 
 
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make 
estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets 
and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and 
expenditures during the reporting period.  Actual results could differ from these estimates. 
 
Comparative figures 
 
Certain comparative figures have been adjusted to conform to the current year’s presentation.   
 
Changes in accounting policies 
 
In April 2010, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2010-13, “Effect of Denominating 
the Exercise Price of a Share-Based Payment Award in the Currency of the Market in Which the Underlying 
Equity Security Trades”.  This ASU provides amendments to Topic 718 to clarify that an employee share-
based payment award with an exercise price denominated in the currency of a market in which a substantial 
portion of the entity’s equity securities trades should not be considered to contain a condition that is not a 
market, performance, or service condition. Therefore, an entity would not classify such an award as a liability 
if it otherwise qualifies as equity.  This ASU should not be considered to contain a condition that is not a 
market, performance, or service condition. Therefore, an entity would not classify such an award as a liability 
if  it  otherwise  qualifies  as  equity.    The  amendments  in  this  ASU  do  not  expand  the  recurring  disclosures 
required  by  Topic  718.  Disclosures  currently  required  under  Topic  718  are  applicable  to  a  share-based 
payment award, including the nature and terms of share-based payment arrangements.  ASU No. 2010-13 is 
effective for fiscal quarters beginning after 15 December 2010.  The adoption of ASU No. 2010-13 did not 
have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In February 2010, the FASB issued ASU No. 2010-09, “Amendments to Certain Recognition and Disclosure 
Requirements”, which eliminates the requirement for Securities and Exchange Commission filers to disclose 
the date through which an entity has evaluated subsequent events.  ASU No. 2010-09 is effective for fiscal 
quarters  beginning  after  15  December  2010.   The  adoption  of  ASU  No.  2010-09  did  not  have  a  material 
impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. 
 
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-06, “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements”. 
This  update  requires  additional  disclosure  within  the  roll  forward  of  activity  for  assets  and  liabilities 
measured at fair value on a recurring basis, including transfers of assets and liabilities between Level 1 and 
Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy and the separate presentation of purchases, sales, issuances and settlements 
of assets and liabilities within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. In addition, the update requires enhanced 
disclosures of the valuation techniques and inputs used in the fair value measurements within Levels 2 and 3. 
The new disclosure requirements are effective for interim and annual periods beginning after 15 December 
2009,  except  for  the  disclosure  of  purchases,  sales,  issuances  and  settlements  of  Level  3  measurements. 
Those  disclosures  are  effective  for  fiscal  years  beginning  after  15  December  2010.  The  adoption  of  ASU 
2010-06 did not have a material effect on its consolidated financial statements.
34
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Recent Accounting Pronouncements 
 
In  June  2011,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  No.    2011-05,  “Comprehensive  Income”,  which  gives  an  entity  the 
option to present the total of comprehensive income, the components of net income, and the components of 
other  comprehensive  income  either  in  a  single  continuous  statement  of  comprehensive  income  or  in  two 
separate but consecutive statements. In both choices, an entity is required to present each component of net 
income along with total net income, each component of other comprehensive income along with a total for 
other comprehensive income, and a total amount for comprehensive income. This ASU eliminates the option 
to present the components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of changes in stockholders' 
equity.  
 
The amendments in this ASU do not change the items that must be reported in other comprehensive income 
or when an item of other comprehensive income must be reclassified to net income.  ASU No. 2011-05 is 
effective  for  fiscal quarters beginning after 15 December 2011.  The adoption of ASU  No. 2011-05 is not 
expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
3.  Unproven Mineral Property
During the year ended 30 June 2008, the Company acquired, through its wholly owned subsidiary, a 100% 
undivided rights, title and interest in and to two gravel claims called the Northern Gravel Claims and Super 
Mammoth  Gravel  Claims  (the  “Super  Mammoth  Gravel  Project”)  situated  along  the  Homfray  Channel  at 
Lloyd  Point  on  the  south  coast  of  British  Columbia,  Canada  for  $25,000.    The  Super  Mammoth  Gravel 
Project consists of two mineral claim tenures that are approximately 124.1 hectares (“ha”) each in size (total 
248.2  ha).    The  claims  are  currently  in  good  standing  until  their  respective  anniversary  dates  which  are  6 
November 2014 (Northern Gravel Claims) and 19 January 2015 (Super Mammoth Claim).  The acquisition 
cost  of  $25,000  was  initially  capitalized  as  a  tangible  asset.  During  the  year  ended  30  June  2008,  the 
Company  recorded  a  write-down  of  mineral  property  acquisition  costs  of  $25,000  related  to  the  Super 
Mammoth Gravel Project. 
 
During prior years, the Company acquired a 100% undivided right, title and interest in and to the 24 claim 
units located in the Red Lake Mining District in the province of Ontario, Canada (the “Sobeski Lake Gold 
Property”) for $10,607.  The Company allowed these claims to expire on 20 January 2008.  The Company 
recorded  a  write-down  of  mineral  property  acquisition  costs  of  $10,607  related  to  the  Sobeski  Lake  Gold 
Property.
The Company had no expenditures related to the Super Mammoth Gravel Project for the year ended 30 June 
2011 (30 June 2010 - $Nil, 30 June 2009 - $Nil, cumulative - $35,607).
4.  Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities are non-interest bearing, unsecured and have settlement dates within 
one year.
35
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
During  the year  ended  30  June  2011,  the  Company  wrote  off  accounts  payable  balances  in  the  amount  of 
$12,000 (30 June 2010 - $Nil, 30 June 2009 - $Nil, cumulative - $12,000) related to consulting fees that had 
remained  unpaid  for  several  years  without  any  claim  being  made  by  the  creditor  against  the  Company.  
Management does not consider these amounts are payable although there is no assurance that a formal claim 
will not be made against the Company for some or all of these balances in the future.  The write down has 
been recorded as a recovery of expenses and a decrease in accounts payable (Notes 9 and 10).
5.  Due to Related Party
On 29 October 2010, the Company received an advance of $6,500 from the officer, director and shareholder 
of the Company. 
 
On  8  January  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  a  loan  amending  agreement  with  an  officer,  director  and 
shareholder of the Company (the “Loan Amending Agreement”).  The Loan Amending Agreement extended 
the repayment date on the amount due from 8 January 2011 to 8 January 2012. 
 
On  12  March  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  a  loan  amending  agreement  with  an  officer,  director  and 
shareholder of the Company (the “Amending Agreement”).  The Amending Agreement extended the principal 
balance  of  the  loan  from  $146,500  to  $151,500.    The  Company  received  the  advance  of  $5,000  from  the 
officer, director and shareholder of the Company on 12 March 2011 (Note 10). 
 
The  amount  due  to  related  party  of  $196,940  as  at  30  June  2011  (30  June  2010  –  $170,848)  is  due  to  an 
officer, director and shareholder of the Company.  The loan bears interest at 10% per annum, is secured by a 
general agreement over all of the assets of the Company and is due and repayable on 8 January 2012.  During 
the year ended 30 June 2011, the Company accrued interest of $14,592 (30 June 2010 - $13,170, 30 June 
2009 - $11,167, cumulative - $45,440).  The balance of $196,940 consists of principal and accrued interest of 
$151,500 and $45,440, respectively (Notes 9 and 10).
Authorized 
 
The total authorized capital is 75,000,000 common shares with a par value of $0.001.  
 
Issued and outstanding 
 
The total issued and outstanding capital stock is 9,515,000 common shares with a par value of $0.001 per 
common share.
6.  Capital Stock
36
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
7.  Related Party Transactions
During the year ended 30 June 2011, an officer and director of the Company made contributions to capital for 
management fees in the amount of $60,000 (30 June 2010 – $60,000, 30 June 2009 – $60,000, cumulative – 
$252,000) and for rent in the amount of $3,600 (30 June 2010 – $3,600, 30 June 2009 – $3,600, cumulative – 
$18,000) (Note 10). 
 
Income Taxes
8.
The Company has losses carried forward for income tax purposes to 30 June 2011.  There are no current or 
deferred tax expenses for the year ended 30 June 2011 due to the Company’s loss position. The Company has 
fully reserved for any benefits of these losses.  The deferred tax consequences of temporary differences in 
reporting items for financial statement and income tax purposes are recognized, as appropriate.  Realization of 
the  future  tax  benefits  related  to  the  deferred  tax  assets  is  dependent  on  many  factors,  including  the 
Company’s  ability  to  generate  taxable  income  within  the  net  operating  loss  carryforward  period.  
Management has considered these factors in reaching its conclusion as to the valuation allowance for financial 
reporting purposes. 
 
The provision for refundable federal income tax consists of the following:
Deferred tax asset attributable to: 
Current operations 
Contributions to capital by related parties 
Less: Change in valuation allowance 
 
Net refundable amount
For the  
year 
ended  
30 June  
2010 
$ 
 
 
31,342 
(21,624) 
(9,718) 
 
-
For the 
year 
ended 
30 June 
2009
$
33,849
(21,624)
(12,225)
-
For the 
year 
ended 
30 June 
2011
$
27,980
(21,624)
(6,356)
-
37
The composition of the Company’s deferred tax assets as at 30 June 2011 and 30 June 2010 are as follows:
As at 30 June 
2011 
$ 
 
510,190 
 
34.00% 
-17.99% 
0% 
 
81,665 
(81,665) 
 
-
As at 30 June
 2010
$
427,896
34.00%
-16.40%
0%
75,309
(75,309)
-
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Net income tax operating loss carryforward 
 
Statutory federal income tax rate 
Contributed rent and services 
Effective income tax rate 
 
Deferred tax assets 
Less: Valuation allowance 
 
Net deferred tax asset
The potential income tax benefit of these losses has been offset by a full valuation allowance.
As at 30 June 2011, the Company has an unused net operating loss carry-forward balance of approximately 
$240,190  that  is  available  to  offset  future  taxable  income.    This  unused  net  operating  loss  carry-forward 
balance expires between 2024 and 2031.
9.  Commitment and Contingency
The Company is committed to future payments under its related party loan arrangement (Notes 5 and 10). 
 
During  the  year  ended  30  June  2011,  the  Company  wrote  off  accounts  payable  balances  in  the  amount  of 
$12,000  (30  June  2010  -  $Nil,  30  June  2009  -  $Nil,  cumulative  -  $12,000)  related  consulting  fees  that  had 
remained  unpaid  for  several  years  without  any  claim  being  made  by  the  creditor  against  the  Company.  
Management  does  not  consider  that  these  amounts  are  payable  although  there  is  no  assurance  that  a  formal 
claim will not be made against the Company for some or all of these balances in the future (Notes 4 and 10).
38
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
10.  Supplemental Disclosures with Respect to Cash Flows
For the period 
from the date 
of inception on 
21 January 
2004 
to 30 June 
2011
(Unaudited)
$
-
-
For the 
year 
ended 
30 June 
2011
$
-
-
For the  
year 
ended  
30 June  
2010 
$  
 
-
-
For the 
year 
ended 
30 June 
2009
$
-
-
Cash paid during the period for interest 
Cash paid during the period for income 
taxes
11.  Financial Instruments
During the year ended 30 June 2011, an officer and director of the Company made contributions to capital for 
management fees in the amount of $60,000 (30 June 2010 – $60,000, 30 June 2009 – $60,000, cumulative – 
$252,000) and for rent in the amount of $3,600 (30 June 2010 – $3,600, 30 June 2009 – $3,600, cumulative – 
$18,000) (Note 7). 
 
During the year ended 30 June 2011, the Company accrued interest of $14,592 (30 June 2010 - $13,170, 30 
June 2009 – $11,167, cumulative – $45,440) related to a loan payable to a related party (Notes 5 and 9). 
 
During  the year  ended  30  June  2011,  the  Company  wrote  off  accounts  payable  balances  in  the  amount  of 
$12,000 (30 June 2010 - $Nil, 30 June 2009 – $Nil, cumulative – $12,000) related to consulting fees that had 
remained  unpaid  for  several  years  without  any  claim  being  made  by  the  creditor  against  the  Company.  
Management does not consider that these amounts are payable although there is no assurance that a formal 
claim will not be made against the Company for some or all of these balances in the future (Notes 4 and 9).
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents, accounts payable and due to related party approximates fair 
value due to the short term maturity of these financial instruments. 
 
Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to credit risk consist of cash and cash equivalents. 
The Company deposits cash and cash equivalents with high credit quality financial institutions as determined 
by rating agencies.
39
Dynamic Gold Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
30 June 2011
Currency Risk 
 
The  Company’s  functional  and  reporting  currency  is  the  U.S.  dollar.  Foreign  currency  transactions  are 
primarily undertaken in Canadian dollars. The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial 
statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations. 
 
The  Canadian  dollar  had  weakened  (strengthened)  against  the  U.S.  dollar,  with  all  other  variables  held 
constant, by 100 basis points (1%) at year end, the impact on net loss and other comprehensive loss would 
have been $85 higher ($85 lower). 
 
Interest Rate Risk 
 
The Company has cash balances and an interest-bearing debt.  It is management’s opinion that the Company 
is not exposed to significant interest risk arising from these financial instruments.   
 
Liquidity Risk 
 
Liquidity  risk  is  the  risk  that  an  entity  will  encounter  difficulty  in  meeting  obligations  associated  with  its 
financial liabilities.  The Company is reliant upon a related party as its sole source of cash.  The Company has 
received financing from a related party in the past; however, there is no assurance that it will be able to do so 
in the future.
There  are  no  subsequent  events  from  the  date  of  the  year  ended  30  June  2011  to  the  date  the  consolidated 
financial statements were available to be issued on 15 September 2011.
12.  Subsequent Event
40
ITEM  8  –  CHANGES  IN  AND  DISAGREEMENTS  WITH  ACCOUNTANTS  ON  ACCOUNTING 
AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 
 
We did not have any disagreements on accounting and financial disclosures with our present accounting firm 
during the reporting period. 
 
ITEM 8A – CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
 
(a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures 
 
Based on the management’s evaluation (with the participation our President and Chief Financial Officer), our 
President  and Chief  Financial  Officer have  concluded  that  as  of  June 30, 2011,  the  Company’s disclosure 
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange of 1934 
(the  "Exchange  Act")  are  effective  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  the  information  required  to  be 
disclosed in this annual report on Form 10-K is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time 
period  specified  in  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  rules  and  forms  and  that  such  information  is 
accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer and 
Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate, to allow for timely decisions regarding required disclosure. 
 
(b) Internal Controls over Financial Reporting 
 
Management's annual report on internal control over financial reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting 
as  defined  in  Rules  13a-15(f)  and  15d-15(f)  under  the  Exchange  Act.  Our  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting is intended to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our internal control 
over  financial  reporting  should  include  those  policies  and  procedures  that  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of 
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of our assets; 
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial 
statements in accordance with applicable GAAP, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in 
accordance with authorizations of management and the Board of Directors; and provide reasonable assurance 
regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use  or  disposition  of  our  assets  that 
could have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements. 
 
Under  the  supervision  and  with  the  participation  of  our  management,  including  Mr.  Tim  Coupland,  our 
President and Chief Executive Officer, and Mr. Gord Steblin, our Chief Financial Officer, we have evaluated 
the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting and preparation of our quarterly consolidated 
financial statements as of June 30, 2011 and believe they are effective.
Based upon their evaluation of our controls, Mr. Tim Coupland, our President and Chief Executive Officer, 
and Mr. Gord Steblin, our Chief Financial Officer, has concluded that, there were no significant changes in 
our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  or  in  other  factors  during  our  last  fiscal  quarter  that  have 
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Attestation report of the registered public accounting firm
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company's registered public accounting firm 
regarding internal control over financial reporting. Management's report was not subject to attestation by the 
Company's  registered  public  accounting  firm  pursuant  to  temporary  rules  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission that permit the company to provide only management's report in this annual report.
Changes in internal control over financial reporting
There were no changes in our internal controls that occurred during the year covered by this report that have 
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal controls.
41
Changes in internal controls
Based on the evaluation as of June 30, 2011, Mr. Tim Coupland, our President and Chief Executive Officer, 
and Mr. Gord Steblin, our Chief Financial Officer have concluded that there were no significant changes in 
our internal controls over financial reporting or in any other areas that could significantly affect our internal 
controls  subsequent  to  the  date  of  his  most  recent  evaluation,  including  corrective  actions  with  regard  to 
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
ITEM 8A(T) – CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
 
See Item 8A – Controls and Procedures above. 
 
ITEM 8B – OTHER INFORMATION 
 
None.
PART III
Age 
52 
48 
34
Since 
01/24/2004 
01/24/2004 
04/26/2007
ITEM  9  –  DIRECTORS,  EXECUTIVE  OFFICERS,  PROMOTERS,  CONTROL  PERSONS  AND 
CORPORATE  GOVERNANCE;  COMPLIANCE  WITH  SECTION  16(A)  OF  THE  EXCHANGE 
ACT 
 
Our  executive  officers  and  directors  and  their  respective  ages  as  of  the  date  of  this  annual  report  are  as 
follows: 
 
Directors 
 
Name of Director 
Tim Coupland 
Brian Game 
Robert Hall 
 
Executive Officers and Management 
 
Name of Officer 
Tim Coupland 
Gord Steblin 
Tamiko Coupland 
 
The  following  describes  the  business  experience  of  our  directors  and  executive  officers,  including  other 
directorships held in reporting companies:  
 
Tim Coupland, President and Chief Executive Officer 
 
Mr.  Coupland has  acted  as  our  President, Chief  Executive Officer  and  director  since  our  incorporation on 
January 21,  2004.    Mr.  Coupland has held numerous officer  and directorship  positions  with  TSX-V  listed 
companies and OTCBB listed junior mining companies.  Since 2000, Mr. Coupland has acted as President, 
Director and Chief Executive Officer of Alberta Star Development Corp., (TSX-V-ASX) (OTCBB-ASXSF) 
an exploration company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of exploration properties.  
Since  1996,  he  has  acted  as  President,  Secretary  and  sole  director  of  T8X  Capital  Ltd.,  a  private  British 
Columbia  company  involved  in  public  company  structuring  and  reorganization,  preparing  business  plans, 
sourcing public and private financing and completing due diligence reviews of companies.  In 2006, he was 
appointed director of Max Resource Corp. (TSX-V-MXR) (OTCBB-MXROF).  Mr. Coupland has also acted 
as  director  of  Anglo-Sierra  Resources  Corp.,  a  non-reporting  junior  resource  company  whose  shares  were 
quoted on the OTCBB.  Mr. Coupland has over 20 years of business experience with both public and private 
companies and has been successfully involved in raising both debt and equity financings of over $60 million 
dollars.  He  brings  expertise  in  raising  equity  capital  and  then  assembling  highly  seasoned  teams  of
Office 
President, Chief Executive Officer 
Chief Financial Officer 
Corporate Secretary
Since 
01/24/2004 
02/09/2009 
04/26/2007
Age 
52 
51 
43
42
professionals,  consultants,  financial  consultants  and  mineral  exploration  advisors  who  have  proven  track 
records in financing, negotiation and promotion required to secure and develop successful mineral exploration 
projects.  Mr. Coupland brings a wealth of technical and financial experience as well as long-term business 
relationships  with  many  Canadian  First  Nations  and  Métis  groups  operating  in  Canada’s  Northwest 
Territories. Mr. Coupland has a Bachelor’s degree in Geography from Simon Fraser University.  
 
Gord Steblin, Chief Financial Officer 
 
Mr.  Steblin  joined  the  Company  as  Chief  Financial  Officer  for  the  Company  on  February  9,  2009.    Mr. 
Steblin obtained a Bachelor of Commerce degree in 1983 from the University of British Columbia and in 
1985 he became a Certified General Accountant. Mr. Steblin has over 20 years of financial experience in the 
junior  mining/exploration  sector.  Mr.  Steblin  was  previously  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  CanAlaska 
Uranium Ltd., El Nino Ventures Inc. and Pacific North West Capital Corp.  Mr. Steblin is currently the Chief 
Financial Officer of Alberta Star Development Corp, Arctic Hunter Uranium Inc, Freegold Ventures Limited, 
Next Gen Metals Inc. and CVC Cayman Ventures Corp. 
 
Tamiko Coupland, Corporate Secretary 
 
Mrs. Coupland joined us as Corporate Secretary for the Company on April 26, 2007.  Mrs. Coupland was the 
Corporate Secretary for Alberta Star Development Corp., (TSX-V-ASX) (OTCBB-ASXSF) from October 20, 
2004 to October 19, 2005.  Since 1996, she has acted as the secretary for T8X Capital Ltd., a private British 
Columbia  company  involved  in  public  company  structuring  and  reorganization,  preparing  business  plans, 
sourcing public and private financing and completing due diligence reviews of companies.   
 
Brian Game, Director 
 
Mr. Game has acted as a director for the Company since our incorporation on January 21, 2004 and as the 
Company’s  Corporate  Secretary  from  January  21, 2004  to April  26, 2007.    Mr. Game  has been  the  Vice-
President of Explorations for Westminster Resources Ltd. since January 26, 2006 and the Vice-President of 
Geology for Pacific Cascade Minerals Inc. (TSX-V-PCV) since January 24, 2006.  Mr. Game holds a B.Sc. 
(Geology)  degree  which  he  received  from  the  University  of  British  Columbia  in  1985.    He  also  has  a 
designation  of  P.Geo  from  the  Association  of  Professional  Engineers  and  Geoscientists  of  BC  which  was 
granted  in  1992.    Since  February  1995,  Mr.  Game  has  been  self-employed  and  President  of  BGame 
Associated Inc., a private company in the business of providing geological consulting services.  Mr. Game 
was a director of three public companies which traded on the Exchange; Takepoint Ventures Ltd. from April 
1993 to December 2001, Goldzone Explorations Inc. from April 1996 to November 2001 and Iciena Ventures 
Inc. from May 1998 to March 2002.  Mr. Game has over 15 years experience in the junior mineral exploration 
business in British Columbia and internationally. 
  
Robert Hall, Director 
 
Mr. Hall was appointed as a director of the Company on April 26, 2007.  Mr. Hall has also acted as a Director 
and Manager of Field Operations for Alberta Star Development Corp. (TSX-V-ASX).  Mr. Hall successfully 
completed  the  management  of  Phases  1,  2  and  3  drilling  and  general  field  operations,  at  Alberta  Star’s  
Eldorado & Contact Lake IOCG Projects from 2006 to 2009. Mr. Hall acts as a Director of Arctic Hunter 
Uranium Inc. which trades on the CNSX under the symbol AHU.  Mr. Hall holds a Bachelor's Degree in 
Education from the University of British Columbia. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
 
Each  of  our  directors  are  involved  in  non-company  business  ventures  that  involve  mineral  properties  and 
exploration.  As our present business plan is focused entirely on the Super Mammoth Gravel Project, there is 
no expectation of any conflict between our business interests and those of our directors.  However, possible 
conflicts may arise in the future if we seek to acquire interests in additional mineral properties. 
 
Our  bylaws  provide  that  each  officer  who  holds  another  office  or  possesses  property  whereby,  whether 
directly or indirectly, duties or interests might be created in conflict with his duties or interests as our officer
43
shall, in writing, disclose to the president the fact and the nature, character and extent of the conflict and be 
approved by a majority of the disinterested directors of our board of directors. 
 
Significant Employees 
 
The  Registrant  does  not  presently  employ  any  person  as  a  significant  employee  who  is  not  an  executive 
officer but who makes or is expected to make a significant contribution to the business of the Company. 
 
Family Relationships 
 
President and Chief Executive Officer Mr. Tim Coupland, and Corporate Secretary Mrs. Tamiko Coupland 
are married, though no other familial or marital relationships exist amongst our officers and directors. 
 
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings 
 
No event listed in Sub-paragraphs (1) through (4) of Subparagraph (d) of Item 401 of Regulation S-B, has 
occurred with respect to any present executive officer or director of the Registrant or any nominee for director 
during  the  past  five  years which  is  material  to  an  evaluation of  the  ability  or  integrity  of  such director or 
officer. 
 
Section 16(A) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance 
 
Section  16(A)  of  the  Exchange  Act  requires  our  executive  officers  and  directors,  and  persons  who 
beneficially  own  more  than  10%  of  our  equity  securities,  to  file  reports  of  ownership  and  changes  in 
ownership  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.    Officers,  directors  and  greater  than  10% 
shareholders are required by Securities and Exchange Commission regulation to furnish us with copies of all 
Section 16(A) forms they file.  Based on our review of the copies of such forms we received, we believe that 
during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 all such filing requirements applicable to our officers and directors 
were current in their filings. 
 
Code of Ethics 
 
We  have  not  adopted  a  written  Code  of  Ethics  at  this  time  that  applies  to  our  principal  executive  officer, 
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions. 
Our Board of Directors are reviewing the necessity of adopting such a document given we are still in the 
start-up exploration stage and have limited employees, officers and directors. 
 
Board Committees 
 
Nominating Committee 
 
We  do  not  have  a  Nominating  Committee.    Since  our  formation  we  have  relied  upon  the  personal 
relationships of our President to attract individuals to our Board of Directors.  
 
We do not have a policy regarding the consideration of any director candidates which may be recommended 
by  our  stockholders,  including  the  minimum  qualifications  for  director  candidates,  nor  has  our  Board  of 
Directors  established  a  process  for  identifying  and  evaluating  director  nominees.  We  have  not  adopted  a 
policy regarding the handling of any potential recommendation of director candidates by our stockholders, 
including the procedures to be followed. Our Board has not considered or adopted any of these policies as we 
have  never  received  a  recommendation  from  any  stockholder  for  any  candidate  to  serve  on  our  Board  of 
Directors. Given our relative size and lack of directors and officers insurance coverage, we do not anticipate 
that any of our stockholders will make such a recommendation in the near future. While there have been no 
nominations of additional directors proposed, in the event such a proposal is made, all members of our Board 
will participate in the consideration of director nominees. 
 
 
Compensation Committee
44
We  do  not  have  a  Compensation  Committee.    Our  entire  Board  of  Directors  review  and  recommend  the 
salaries, and benefits of all employees, consultants, directors and other individuals compensated by us. 
 
Audit Committee 
 
We do not have a standing Audit Committee. The functions of the Audit Committee are currently assumed by 
our Board of Directors.   
 
Our Board of Directors has determined that we have at least one financial expert, Mr. Tim Coupland. Since 
Mr. Tim Coupland is an officer of the Company, as well as a director, he is not considered independent. 
 
An audit committee financial expert means a person who has the following attributes:
(a)  An understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and financial statements;
(b)  The ability to assess the general application of such principles in connection with the accounting for
estimates, accruals and reserves;
(c)  Experience preparing, auditing, analyzing or evaluating financial statements that present a breadth 
and  level  of  complexity  of  accounting  issues  that  are  generally  comparable  to  the  breadth  and 
complexity  of  issues  that  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  raised  by  the  small  business  issuer's 
financial  statements,  or  experience  actively  supervising  one  or  more  persons  engaged  in  such 
activities;
(d)  An understanding of internal control over financial reporting; and
(e)  An understanding of audit committee functions.
ITEM 10 – EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
 
The table below summarizes all compensation awarded to, earned by, or paid to our executive officers by any 
person for all services rendered in all capacities to us for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
45
Summary Compensation Table
Name and Principal
Position
Tim Coupland  
President, Chief 
Executive Officer and 
Director 
Gord Steblin(1) 
Chief Financial Officer
Chantal Schutz(1) 
Former Chief Financial 
Officer and Director
Year
2011 
2010 
2009 
2011 
2010 
2009 
2011 
2010 
2009
Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
Stock 
Awards
($)
Option 
Awards
($)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
Tamiko Coupland 
Corporate Secretary
Brian Game 
Director  
 
Robert Hall 
Director
2011 
2010 
2009 
2011 
2010 
2009 
2011 
2010 
2009
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
1,641
1,641
Total 
($)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
Non-Equity 
Incentive
Plan
($)
Nonqualified
Deferred
($)
All 
Other
($)
Compensation
Compensation
Compensation
Note: (1) Mr. Gord Steblin was appointed to the office of CFO of Dynamic on February 9, 2009.  Ms. Chantal Schutz was appointed as a 
director and to the office of CFO of Dynamic on May 8, 2008 and resigned on February 9, 2009. 
 
Outstanding Equity Awards 
 
As of September 23, 2011, our directors and executive officers did not hold any unexercised options, stock 
that had not vested, or equity incentive plan awards. 
 
Compensation of Directors 
 
Our directors did not earn any compensation during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. 
 
Employment Contracts and Termination of Employment or Change of Control 
 
We  have  no  plans  or  arrangements  in  respect  of  remuneration  received  or  that  may  be  received  by  our 
executive  officers  to  compensate  such  officers  in  the  event  of  termination  of  employment  (as  a  result  of 
resignation or retirement) or change of control transaction. 
 
No retirement, pension, profit sharing, stock option or insurance programs or other similar programs have 
been adopted by us for the benefit of our employees.
46
Title of 
class 
(1) 
Common 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Name and address of beneficial owner (2)
Tim Coupland  
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director 
Suite 506 – 675 West Hastings Street 
Vancouver, BC  V6B 1N2 
Canada 
Brian Game  
Director 
Suite 300 – 675 West Hastings Street 
Vancouver, BC  V6B 1N2 
Canada 
Robert Fedun 
Suite 2901 – 193 Aquarius Mews 
Vancouver, BC  V6Z 2Z2 
Canada 
Dr. Douglas Coupland  
586 Barnham Place 
West Vancouver, BC  V7S 1T7 
Canada 
David Lorne  
Suite 101 – 1184 Denman Street 
Vancouver, BC  V6G 2M9 
Canada 
Mark Foreman  
2531 Borden Cres. 
Prince George, BC  V2L 2X4 
Canada 
Larry Ilich  
1635 53 A. Street 
Delta, BC  V4M 3G3 
Canada 
All Officers and Directors 
as a Group that Consists of Two People
3,500,000
Direct
36.78%
1,500,000
Direct
15.76%
500,000 
Direct
500,000 
Direct
500,000 
Direct
500,000 
Direct
500,000 
Direct
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
ITEM 11 – SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND 
MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 
 
The following table provides the names and addresses of each person known to us to own more than 5% of 
our  outstanding  common  stock  as  of  the  date  of  this  annual  report,  and  by  the  officers  and  directors, 
individually and as a group.  Except as otherwise indicated, all shares are owned directly.
Amount and nature of
beneficial owner
(3)
Percent of
class 
(4)
Common 
Stock  
 
The percent of class is based on 9,515,000 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of the date of 
this annual report.
5,000,000
52.55%
47
Changes in Control 
 
We know of no arrangements the operation of which may result in a change of our control. 
 
ITEM 12 – CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR 
INDEPENDENCE 
 
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions 
 
None of the following parties has, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, had any material interest, direct 
or  indirect,  in  any  transaction  with  us  or  in  any  presently  proposed  transaction  that  has  or  will  materially 
affect us:
 
 

 

Any of our directors or officers; 
Any person proposed as a nominee for election as a director; 
Any person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares carrying more than 10% of the 
voting rights attached to our outstanding shares of common stock; 
Any of our promoters; 
Any relative or spouse of any of the foregoing persons who has the same house as such person.
Director Independence 
 
We currently do not have any independent directors, as the term “independent” is defined by the rules of the 
Nasdaq Stock Market (Note: Our shares of common stock are not listed on NASDAQ or any other national 
securities exchange and this reference is used for definition purposes only).
48
ITEM 13 – EXHIBITS  
 
The following exhibits are furnished as required by Item 601 of Regulation S-B.
Exhibit No.
Exhibit Title
Articles of Incorporation* 
   Bylaws * 
  Mineral Property Bill of Sale*
Certificate of CEO as Required by Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14 
   Certificate of CFO as Required by Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14 
   Certificate of CEO and CFO as Required by Rule Rule 13a-14(b) and Rule 15d-14(b)
(17 CFR 240.15d-14(b)) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United 
States Code 
Claims location map*** 
Comprehensive National Instrument 43-101 Technical Report**** 
Included in our original SB-2 Registration Statement filed on December 9, 2004.
99.1 
99.2
*
49
3(i) 
3(ii) 
10.1 
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
10.20
21 
31.a 
31.b 
32.a
Loan Agreement dated January 8, 2008 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold 
Corp.** 
Promissory Note dated January 8, 2008 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold 
Corp.** 
General Security Agreement dated January 8, 2008 between Tim Coupland and 
Dynamic Gold Corp.** 
General Security Agreement dated January 8, 2008 between Tim Coupland and 
Dynamic Gravel Holdings Ltd.**
Material Subsidiary Guarantee dated January 8, 2008 between Tim Coupland and
Dynamic Gravel Holdings Ltd.** 
Purchase and Sale Agreement dated January 8, 2008 between Dynamic Gravel 
Holdings Ltd. and Farshad Shirvani** 
Loan Amending Agreement dated September 16, 2008 between Tim Coupland and 
Dynamic Gold Corp.***** 
Promissory Note dated May 24, 2008 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold 
Corp.***** 
Promissory Note dated August 14, 2008 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold 
Corp.***** 
Promissory Note dated September 16, 2008 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic 
Gold Corp.***** 
Trust Agreement dated September 16, 2008 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic 
Gold Corp.***** 
Loan Amending Agreement dated January 8, 2009 between Tim Coupland and 
Dynamic Gold Corp.****** 
Promissory Note dated June 8, 2009 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold 
Corp.****** 
Loan Amending Agreement dated June 8, 2009 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic 
Gold Corp.****** 
Promissory Notes dated September 14, 2009, December 29, 2009 and June 18, 2010 
between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold Corp.******* 
Loan Amending Agreements dated September 14, 2009, December 29, 2009, January 
8, 2010 and June 18, 2010 between Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold Corp.******* 
Promissory Notes dated October 29, 2010 and March 12, 2011 between Tim Coupland 
and Dynamic Gold Corp. 
Loan Amending Agreements dated October 29, 2010,  and March 12, 2011 between 
Tim Coupland and Dynamic Gold Corp. 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. 
 
 
Subsidiaries*****
** 
***    
**** 
***** 
******   Included in our 10-K filed on September 15, 2009. 
******* Included in our 10-K filed on September 15, 2010.
Included in our 10-QSB filed on February 14, 2008.   
 Included in our SB-2 Amended Registration Statement filed on October 19, 2005. 
 Included in our 8K filed on June 6, 2008. 
 Included in our 10-KSB filed on September 24, 2008.
50
ITEM 14 – PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES  
 
Fees and Services 
 
James Stafford Chartered Accountants audited our consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2010 and 2011. 
The  following  is  an  aggregate  of  fees  billed  for  each of the  last  two  fiscal  years  for professional  services 
rendered by our current and prior principal accountants: 
 
 
Audit fees* 
Audit-related fees** 
Tax fees 
All other fees 
Total fees paid or accrued to our principal accountants 
 
*     Audit fees consist of fees related to professional services rendered in connection with the audit of our 
annual consolidated financial statements. 
 
**   Audit related fees consist of fees related to professional services rendered in connection with the review 
of our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or 10-QSB. 
 
Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures 
 
Our  policy  is  to  pre-approve  all  audit  and  permissible  non-audit  services  performed  by  the  independent 
accountants.    These  services  may  include  audit  services,  audit-related  services,  tax  services  and  other 
services.  Under our audit committee's policy, pre-approval is generally provided for particular services or 
categories  of  services,  including  planned  services,  project  based  services  and  routine  consultations.    In 
addition, the audit committee may also pre-approve particular services on a case-by-case basis.  We approved 
all services that our independent accountants provided to us in the past two fiscal years.
2011 
$2,989 
3,798 
- 
- 
$6,787
2010 
$2,989 
3,010 
- 
- 
$5,999
51
SIGNATURE
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange 
Act”) the Registrant caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly 
authorized.
DYNAMIC GOLD CORP.
/ s / Tim Coupland  
Tim Coupland, President and Chief Executive Officer
BY:
BY:   
      
      
  DATE:
/ s / Gord Steblin   
Gord Steblin, Chief Financial Officer 
  
September 23, 2011
Pursuant to requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the 
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated:
/ s / Tim Coupland  
Tim Coupland, President and Chief Executive Officer  
 
September 23, 2011
BY:
Date:
BY:
/ s / Gord Steblin 
Gord Steblin, Chief Financial Officer
DATE:  September 23, 2011
52
PROMISSORY NOTE
$6,500 United States Dollars 
 
October 29, 2010 
 
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,  the  undersigned, DYNAMIC GOLD CORP. ("Company"), hereby  promises  to  pay  to 
Tim Coupland (herein referred to as the "Payee"), the principal amount of six thousand, five hundred ($6,500) dollars 
in United States currency in accordance with and subject to the terms, conditions and limitations as set forth in the loan 
agreement (the "Agreement") dated October 29, 2010, between Company and the Payee. Except as otherwise specified 
herein, interest under this promissory note ("Note") shall accrue on the unpaid principal balance hereof from time to 
time outstanding from and after the date of advance, default and judgment at the rate of ten (10%) percent per annum 
until the balance due plus accrued interest has been paid in full. Interest shall be computed on the daily principal balance 
on the basis of a 365 day calendar year for the actual number of days elapsed. Interest shall be payable after maturity, 
default and judgment, with interest payable on overdue interest at the same rate. All payments under this Note shall be 
paid to Payee at the address provided by Payee to Company in writing on the date hereof, until such time as Payee 
notifies Company in writing of a new address at which to make such payments. 
 
No delay or omission on the part of Payee or any holder thereof in exercising any right or portion herein given to such 
Payee or holder shall impair such right or option or be considered as a waiver thereof or acquiescence in any default 
hereunder. Company hereby waives presentment, demand, notice of dishonour and protest and consents to any and all 
extensions and renewals hereof without notice. 
 
Repayment  of  the  principal  amount  hereof  shall  be  limited  in  recourse  in  accordance  with  and  subject  to  the  terms, 
conditions and limitations as set forth in the Agreement. 
 
This Note shall enure to the benefit of the parties' heirs, executors, administrators and successors but is otherwise non-
transferable without the prior written consent of the Payee which consent shall not be umeasonably withheld. 
 
This  Note  shall  be  construed,  interpreted  and  governed  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  Province  of  Alberta  and 
Canada applicable therein. 
 
If anyone or more provisions of this Note are determined to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, for any reason, the 
remaining provisions of this Note shall remain in full force and effect. In the event of a default hereunder, Company 
agrees to pay all costs of collection including reasonable attorneys' fees. Irrespective of any remedy specifically granted 
to Payee by this Note, Payee shall be entitled to exercise all other remedies provided to it under applicable law. All 
rights of Payee shall be cumulative and may be exercised concurrently or consecutively at Payee's option. 
 
THIS  NOTE  HAS  BEEN  EXECUTED,  DELIVERED  AND  ACCEPTED  AT  CALGARY,  ALBERTA  AND 
SHALL  BE  INTERPRETED,  GOVERNED  BY  AND  CONSTRUED  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH,  THE 
INTERNAL  LAWS  (AS  OPPOSED  TO  CONFLICTS  OF  LAW  PROVISIONS)  OF  THE  PROVINCE  OF 
CALGARY, ALBERTA.
DYNAMIC  GOLD  CORP.
Per:
/ s / Gord Steblin   c/s 
Authorized signature
PROMISSORY NOTE
$5,000 United States Dollars 
 
March 12, 2011 
 
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,  the  undersigned, DYNAMIC GOLD CORP. ("Company"), hereby  promises  to  pay  to 
Tim Coupland (herein referred to as the "Payee"), the principal amount of five thousand ($5,000) dollars in United 
States currency in accordance with and subject to the terms, conditions and limitations as set forth in the loan agreement 
(the  "Agreement")  dated  March  12,  2011,  between  Company  and  the  Payee.  Except  as  otherwise  specified  herein, 
interest  under  this  promissory  note  ("Note")  shall  accrue  on  the  unpaid  principal  balance  hereof  from  time  to  time 
outstanding from and after the date of advance, default and judgment at the rate of ten (10%) percent per annum until 
the balance due plus accrued interest has been paid in full. Interest shall be computed on the daily principal balance on 
the  basis of  a 365 day  calendar  year  for  the  actual  number  of days  elapsed.  Interest  shall  be payable  after  maturity, 
default and judgment, with interest payable on overdue interest at the same rate. All payments under this Note shall be 
paid to Payee at the address provided by Payee to Company in writing on the date hereof, until such time as Payee 
notifies Company in writing of a new address at which to make such payments. 
 
No delay or omission on the part of Payee or any holder thereof in exercising any right or portion herein given to such 
Payee or holder shall impair such right or option or be considered as a waiver thereof or acquiescence in any default 
hereunder. Company hereby waives presentment, demand, notice of dishonour and protest and consents to any and all 
extensions and renewals hereof without notice. 
 
Repayment  of  the  principal  amount  hereof  shall  be  limited  in  recourse  in  accordance  with  and  subject  to  the  terms, 
conditions and limitations as set forth in the Agreement. 
 
This Note shall enure to the benefit of the parties' heirs, executors, administrators and successors but is otherwise non-
transferable without the prior written consent of the Payee which consent shall not be umeasonably withheld. 
 
This  Note  shall  be  construed,  interpreted  and  governed  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  Province  of  Alberta  and 
Canada applicable therein. 
 
If anyone or more provisions of this Note are determined to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, for any reason, the 
remaining provisions of this Note shall remain in full force and effect. In the event of a default hereunder, Company 
agrees to pay all costs of collection including reasonable attorneys' fees. Irrespective of any remedy specifically granted 
to Payee by this Note, Payee shall be entitled to exercise all other remedies provided to it under applicable law. All 
rights of Payee shall be cumulative and may be exercised concurrently or consecutively at Payee's option. 
 
THIS  NOTE  HAS  BEEN  EXECUTED,  DELIVERED  AND  ACCEPTED  AT  CALGARY,  ALBERTA  AND 
SHALL  BE  INTERPRETED,  GOVERNED  BY  AND  CONSTRUED  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH,  THE 
INTERNAL  LAWS  (AS  OPPOSED  TO  CONFLICTS  OF  LAW  PROVISIONS)  OF  THE  PROVINCE  OF 
CALGARY, ALBERTA.
DYNAMIC  GOLD  CORP.
Per:
/ s / Gord Steblin   c/s 
Authorized signature
This Agreement dated effective as of the 29th day of October, 2010.
LOAN AMENDING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN:
WHEREAS:
DYNAMIC  GOLD  CORP.,  a  company  organized  in  accordance  with 
the laws of the State of Nevada (hereinafter called the “Borrower”)
- and -
TIM  COUPLAND,  an  individual,  residing  in  the  Province  of  British 
Columbia (hereinafter called the “Lender”)
1.
2.
Borrower  and  Lender  are  parties  to  a  loan  agreement  dated  January  8,  2008  (the  “Loan 
Agreement”); and
Borrower and Lender wish to amend the Loan Agreement;
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of $10.00 now paid by each party to the other (the 
receipt  and  sufficiency  of  which  is  conclusively  acknowledged)  and  the  mutual  premises  contained 
herein, the parties hereby agree as follows:
Initially capitalized terms and expressions used herein not otherwise defined herein shall have the 
meanings  ascribed  thereto  in  the  Loan  Agreement,  and  in  addition  thereto  “Amending 
Agreement” means this agreement amending the Loan Agreement.
Recital  paragraph  1  of  the  Loan  Agreement  is  deleted  in  its  entirety  and  replaced  by  the 
following:
“The Lender has agreed to lend to the Borrower and the Borrower has 
agreed  to  borrow  from  the  Lender,  the  principal  amount  of  U.S. 
$146,500 on the terms and subject to the conditions contained herein.”
Paragraph  (m)  of  the  Definition  section  of  the  Loan  Agreement  is  deleted  in  its  entirety  and 
replaced by the following:
“ “Loan” means a loan from the Lender to the Borrower in the aggregate 
principal amount of U.S. $146,500, of which $10,000 was advanced by 
the Lender to the Borrower on December 8, 2006, $10,800 was advanced 
by  the  Lender  to  the  Borrower  on  March  31,  2007,  $10,000  was 
advanced by the Lender to the borrower on April 3, 2007, $19,200 was 
advanced by the Lender to the borrower on December 21, 2007, $25,000 
was  advanced  by  the  Lender  to  the  Borrower  on  January  8,  2008, 
$15,000 was advanced by the Lender to the Borrower on May 24, 2008, 
2008, $10,000  was advanced by the Lender to the Borrower on August 
14,  2008,  $15,000  was  advanced  by  the  Lender  to  the  Borrower  on 
September  16,  2008,  $10,000  was  advanced  by  the  Lender  to  the
1.
2.
3.
Borrower on June  8, 2009, $5,000 was advanced by the Lender to the 
Borrower on September 14, 2009, $5,000 was advanced by the Lender to 
the  Borrower  on  December  29,  2009,  $5,000  was  advanced  by  the 
Lender to the Borrower on June 18, 2010, and $6,500 was advanced by 
the Lender to the Borrower on October 29, 2010. The principal amount 
outstanding under the Loan from time to time shall be evidenced by the 
Promissory Note;”
4.
Section 2.1 of the Loan Agreement is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following:
“The Lender agrees to lend to the Borrower and the Borrower agrees to 
borrow  from  the  Lender  a  Loan  in  the  principal  amount  of  up  to  U.S. 
$140,000, which Loan shall be repayable in accordance with the terms of 
this Agreement. The outstanding principal amount due and payable from 
the Borrower to the Lender pursuant to the Loan from time to time shall 
be evidenced by a Promissory Note or Promissory Notes delivered by the 
Borrower to the Lender at the time of any advance or advanced from the 
Lender to the Borrower.  The Borrower hereby acknowledges receipt on: 
(i) December 8, 2006 of the principal amount of $10,000; (ii) March 31, 
2007  of  the  principal  amount  of  $10,800;  (iii)  April  3,  2007  of  the 
principal  amount  of  $10,000;  (iv)  December  21,  2007  of  the  principal 
amount  of  $19,200;  (v)  January  8,  2008  of  the  principal  amount  of 
$25,000;  (vi)  May  24,  2008  of  the  principal  amount  of  $15,000;  (vii) 
August 14, 2008 of the principal amount of $10,000; (viii) September 16, 
2008  of  the  principal  amount  of  $15,000;  (ix)  June  8,  2009  of  the 
principal  amount  of  $10,000;    (x)  September  14,  2009  of  the  principal 
amount of $5,000;  (xi) December 29, 2009 of the principal amount of 
$5,000;  (xii) June 18, 2010 of the principal amount of $5,000; and (xiii) 
October  29,  2010  of  the  principal  amount  of  $6,500;  advanced  by  the 
Lender and forming part of the Loan.”
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
The Loan Agreement shall continue in full force and effect in accordance with its terms save and 
except as expressly amended by this Amending Agreement.
The Loan Agreement, as amended by this Seventh Amending Agreement, is hereby ratified and 
confirmed.
This Amending Agreement shall enure to the benefit of and be binding upon the parties and their 
respective heirs, successors, administrators and permitted assigns.
Each  of  Borrower  and  Lender  agrees  to  make, do  and  execute  or  cause  to  be  made,  done  and 
executed all such further and other things, acts, deeds, documents, assignments and assurances as 
may  be  necessary  or  reasonably  required  to  carry  out  the  intent  and  purpose  of  the  Loan 
Agreement, as amended by this Amending Agreement, fully and effectually.
This Amending Agreement may be executed in one or more counterparts by the parties hereto, 
each  of  which  shall  be  deemed  an  original  but  all  of  which  together  shall  constitute  one 
agreement.
- 2 -
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF  this  Amending  Agreement  has  been  signed  by  a  duly  authorized
officer of each of the parties in that behalf.
/s/
Robert Hall
Witness to signature of Tim Coupland
Name:
Robert Hall
Address:  506-675 West Hastings Street
Vancouver, BC, V6B 1N2
/s/ Tim Coupland
TIM COUPLAND
DYNAMIC GOLD CORP.
Per:
/s/ Gord Steblin
Authorized Signature
- 3 -
This Agreement dated effective as of the 12th day of March, 2011.
LOAN AMENDING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN:
WHEREAS:
DYNAMIC  GOLD  CORP.,  a  company  organized  in  accordance  with 
the laws of the State of Nevada (hereinafter called the “Borrower”)
- and -
TIM  COUPLAND,  an  individual,  residing  in  the  Province  of  British 
Columbia (hereinafter called the “Lender”)
1.
2.
Borrower  and  Lender  are  parties  to  a  loan  agreement  dated  January  8,  2008  (the  “Loan 
Agreement”); and
Borrower and Lender wish to amend the Loan Agreement;
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of $10.00 now paid by each party to the other (the 
receipt  and  sufficiency  of  which  is  conclusively  acknowledged)  and  the  mutual  premises  contained 
herein, the parties hereby agree as follows:
Initially capitalized terms and expressions used herein not otherwise defined herein shall have the 
meanings  ascribed  thereto  in  the  Loan  Agreement,  and  in  addition  thereto  “Amending 
Agreement” means this agreement amending the Loan Agreement.
Recital  paragraph  1  of  the  Loan  Agreement  is  deleted  in  its  entirety  and  replaced  by  the 
following:
“The Lender has agreed to lend to the Borrower and the Borrower has 
agreed  to  borrow  from  the  Lender,  the  principal  amount  of  U.S. 
$151,500 on the terms and subject to the conditions contained herein.”
Paragraph  (m)  of  the  Definition  section  of  the  Loan  Agreement  is  deleted  in  its  entirety  and 
replaced by the following:
“ “Loan” means a loan from the Lender to the Borrower in the aggregate 
principal amount of U.S. $151,500, of which $10,000 was advanced by 
the Lender to the Borrower on December 8, 2006, $10,800 was advanced 
by  the  Lender  to  the  Borrower  on  March  31,  2007,  $10,000  was 
advanced by the Lender to the borrower on April 3, 2007, $19,200 was 
advanced by the Lender to the borrower on December 21, 2007, $25,000 
was  advanced  by  the  Lender  to  the  Borrower  on  January  8,  2008, 
$15,000 was advanced by the Lender to the Borrower on May 24, 2008, 
2008, $10,000  was advanced by the Lender to the Borrower on August 
14,  2008,  $15,000  was  advanced  by  the  Lender  to  the  Borrower  on 
September  16,  2008,  $10,000  was  advanced  by  the  Lender  to  the
1.
2.
3.
Borrower on June  8, 2009, $5,000 was advanced by the Lender to the 
Borrower on September 14, 2009, $5,000 was advanced by the Lender to 
the  Borrower  on  December  29,  2009,  $5,000  was  advanced  by  the 
Lender to the Borrower on June 18, 2010, $6,500 was advanced by the 
Lender to the Borrower on October 29, 2010 and $5,000 was advanced 
by the Lender to the Borrower on March 12, 2011. The principal amount 
outstanding under the Loan from time to time shall be evidenced by the 
Promissory Note;”
4.
Section 2.1 of the Loan Agreement is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following:
“The Lender agrees to lend to the Borrower and the Borrower agrees to 
borrow  from  the  Lender  a  Loan  in  the  principal  amount  of  up  to  U.S. 
$151,500, which Loan shall be repayable in accordance with the terms of 
this Agreement. The outstanding principal amount due and payable from 
the Borrower to the Lender pursuant to the Loan from time to time shall 
be evidenced by a Promissory Note or Promissory Notes delivered by the 
Borrower to the Lender at the time of any advance or advanced from the 
Lender to the Borrower.  The Borrower hereby acknowledges receipt on: 
(i) December 8, 2006 of the principal amount of $10,000; (ii) March 31, 
2007  of  the  principal  amount  of  $10,800;  (iii)  April  3,  2007  of  the 
principal  amount  of  $10,000;  (iv)  December  21,  2007  of  the  principal 
amount  of  $19,200;  (v)  January  8,  2008  of  the  principal  amount  of 
$25,000;  (vi)  May  24,  2008  of  the  principal  amount  of  $15,000;  (vii) 
August 14, 2008 of the principal amount of $10,000; (viii) September 16, 
2008  of  the  principal  amount  of  $15,000;  (ix)  June  8,  2009  of  the 
principal  amount  of  $10,000;    (x)  September  14,  2009  of  the  principal 
amount of $5,000;  (xi) December 29, 2009 of the principal amount of 
$5,000;    (xii)  June  18,  2010  of  the  principal  amount  of  $5,000;    (xiii) 
October 29, 2010 of the principal amount of $6,500; and (xiv) March 12, 
2011  of  the  principal  amount  of  $5,000;  advanced  by  the  Lender  and 
forming part of the Loan.”
5.
6.
7.
8.
The Loan Agreement shall continue in full force and effect in accordance with its terms save and 
except as expressly amended by this Amending Agreement.
The Loan Agreement, as amended by this Seventh Amending Agreement, is hereby ratified and 
confirmed.
This Amending Agreement shall enure to the benefit of and be binding upon the parties and their 
respective heirs, successors, administrators and permitted assigns.
Each  of  Borrower  and  Lender  agrees  to  make, do  and  execute  or  cause  to  be  made,  done  and 
executed all such further and other things, acts, deeds, documents, assignments and assurances as 
may  be  necessary  or  reasonably  required  to  carry  out  the  intent  and  purpose  of  the  Loan 
Agreement, as amended by this Amending Agreement, fully and effectually.
- 2 -
This Amending Agreement may be executed in one or more counterparts by the parties hereto, 
each  of  which  shall  be  deemed  an  original  but  all  of  which  together  shall  constitute  one 
agreement.
9.
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF  this  Amending  Agreement  has  been  signed  by  a  duly  authorized
officer of each of the parties in that behalf.
/s/
Robert Hall
Witness to signature of Tim Coupland
Name:
Robert Hall
Address:  506-675 West Hastings Street
Vancouver, BC, V6B 1N2
/s/ Tim Coupland
TIM COUPLAND
DYNAMIC GOLD CORP.
Per:
/s/ Gord Steblin
Authorized Signature
- 3 -
JAMES STAFFORD
James Stafford, Inc. 
Chartered Accountants 
Suite 350 – 1111 Melville Street 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Canada V6E 3V6 
Telephone +1 604 669 0711 
Facsimile +1 604 669 0754 
www.jamesstafford.ca
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
 
We consent to the incorporation of our report dated 12 August 2011, except for Note 12, as to 
which the date is 15 September 2011, with respect to the consolidated balance sheets of 
Dynamic Gold Corp. as at 30 June 2011 and 2010 and the related consolidated statements of 
operations and deficit, cash flows and changes in stockholders’ deficiency for each of the 
years in the three-year period ended 30 June 2011 on Form 10-K dated 23 September 2011.
Chartered Accountants 
 
Vancouver, Canada 
23 September 2011
Exhibit 31.a
CERTIFICATION
I, Tim Coupland, certify that:
I have reviewed the report of Dynamic Gold Corp.;
1.
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to 
state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which 
such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.  Based  on  my  knowledge,  the  financial  statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this 
report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows 
of the small business issuer as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.  The  small  business  issuer's  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and 
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a–15(e) and 15d–
15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a–15(f) and 
15d–15(f)) for the small business issuer and have:
(a)  Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and 
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to 
the small business issuer, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others 
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)  Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over 
financial  reporting  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance 
regarding  the reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation of financial  statements  for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)  Evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  the  small  business  issuer's  disclosure  controls  and  procedures 
and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls 
and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and 
(d)  Disclosed in this report any change in the small business issuer's internal control over financial 
reporting that occurred during the small business issuer's most recent fiscal quarter (the small 
business  issuer's  fourth  fiscal  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially 
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the small business issuer's internal control 
over financial reporting; and
5.   The  small  business  issuer's  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent 
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the small business issuer's auditors and the audit 
committee  of  the  small  business  issuer's  board  of  directors  (or  persons  performing  the  equivalent 
functions):
(a)  All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal 
control  over  financial  reporting  which  are  reasonably  likely  to  adversely  affect  the  small 
business  issuer's  ability  to  record,  process,  summarize  and  report  financial  information;  and
(b)  Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the small business issuer's internal control over financial reporting.
Date: September 23, 2011 
 
/ s / Tim Coupland 
Tim Coupland, President and CEO 
 
(Principal Executive Officer)
53
Exhibit 31.b
CERTIFICATION
I, Gord Steblin, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed the report of Dynamic Gold Corp.;
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to 
state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which 
such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.  Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, 
fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the 
small business issuer as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.  The  small  business  issuer's  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and 
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a–15(e) and 15d–
15(e))  and  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  (as  defined  in  Exchange  Act  Rules  13a–15(f)  and 
15d–15(f)) for the small business issuer and have:
(a)  Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and 
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to 
the small business issuer, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others 
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)  Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over 
financial  reporting  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance 
regarding  the reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation of financial  statements  for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)  Evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  the  small  business  issuer's  disclosure  controls  and  procedures 
and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls 
and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and 
(d)  Disclosed in this report any change in the small business issuer's internal control over financial 
reporting that occurred during the small business issuer's most recent fiscal quarter (the small 
business  issuer's  fourth  fiscal  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially 
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the small business issuer's internal control 
over financial reporting; and
5.   The  small  business  issuer's  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent 
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the small business issuer's auditors and the audit 
committee  of  the  small  business  issuer's  board  of  directors  (or  persons  performing  the  equivalent 
functions):
(a)  All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal 
control  over  financial  reporting  which  are  reasonably  likely  to  adversely  affect  the  small 
business  issuer's  ability  to  record,  process,  summarize  and  report  financial  information;  and
(b)  Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the small business issuer's internal control over financial reporting.
Date: September 23, 2011 
 
/ s / Gord Steblin 
Gord Steblin, CFO 
 
(Principal Accounting Officer)
54
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Company’s Report of Dynamic Gold Corp. (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the 
year  ended  June  30,  2011,  as  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on  the  date  hereof  (the 
"Report"), I, Tim Coupland, Principal Executive Officer and I, Gord Steblin, Principal Financial Officer of 
the  Company,  certify,  pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  Section  1350,  as  adopted  pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that: 
 
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934; and 
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and 
result of operations of the Company.
(2)
Exhibit 32.a
/ s / Tim Coupland 
Tim Coupland, Principal Executive Officer 
September 23, 2011 
 
/ s / Gord Steblin 
Gord Steblin, Principal Financial Officer 
September 23, 2011
55