
The Manager
Company Announcements Office
Australian Securities Exchange
5th September 2016
rimfire pacific mining nl 
a.c.n. 006 911 744 
 
Exchange Tower 
Suite 411 
530 Little Collins Street 
Melbourne Victoria  
Australia. 3000 
 
Telephone   61 3 9620 5866 
Facsimile     61 3 9620 5822 
e-mail: rimfire@rimfire.com.au 
website: www.rimfire.com.au
Transaction Specific Prospectus
Rimfire Pacific Mining NL  has lodged a transaction specific prospectus this  morning  with  ASIC as part 
of its compliance requirements for its recent SPP. 
 
The prospectus does not raise any funds, nor is any action required from shareholders with respect to the 
prospectus.
_______________________ 
JOHN KAMINSKY 
CEO and Managing Director 
Rimfire Pacific Mining NL
PROSPECTUS
For an Offer of 1 New Share at an issue price of 
2.1 cents per New Share.
Important Notice
This Prospectus has been prepared primarily for the purpose of Section 708A(11) of the 
Corporations Act to remove any trading restrictions on the sale of Shares issued by the 
Company prior to the Closing Date.  Its purpose is not to raise capital.
This document is important and should be read in its entirety.  If after reading this Prospectus 
you  have  any  questions  about  Securities  being  offered  under  this  Prospectus  or  any  other 
matter, then you should consult your stockbroker, accountant or other professional adviser.
The Securities offered by this Prospectus should be considered as speculative.
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
IMPORTANT NOTICE 
 
This  Prospectus  is  dated  5  September  2015.  A  copy  of  this  Prospectus  has  been  lodged  with 
ASIC on that date. ASIC takes no responsibility for the contents of this Prospectus.  
 
This  Prospectus  has  been  prepared  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  Section  708A(11)  of  the 
Corporations  Act  to  remove  any  trading  restrictions  on  the  sale  of  Shares  issued  by  the 
Company prior to the Closing Date. 
 
No Shares will be issued or allotted on the basis of this Prospectus later than 13 months after 
the date of this Prospectus. 
 
Rimfire  Pacific  Mining  NL  ACN  006  911  744  (“Rimfire”)  will  apply  to  ASX  for  quotation  of  the 
New Share within 7 days after the date of this prospectus. ASX takes no responsibility for the 
contents of this Prospectus. The fact that ASX may quote the New Shares is not to be taken in 
any way as an indication of the merits of Rimfire. 
 
This  Prospectus  is  a  transaction  specific  prospectus  for  an  offer  of  continuously  quoted 
securities  (as  defined  in  the  Corporations  Act)  and  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with 
Section  713  of  the  Corporations  Act.  It  does  not  contain  the  same  level  of  disclosure  as  an 
initial  public  offering  prospectus.  In  making  representations  in  this  Prospectus,  regard  has 
been  had  to  the  fact  that  the  Company  is  a  disclosing  entity  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Corporations  Act  and  certain  matters  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  known  to  investors 
and professional advisers whom potential investors may consult. 
 
Before  deciding  to  invest  in  Rimfire,  you  should  read  and  understand  the  entire  Prospectus 
and, in particular, in considering Rimfire's prospects, you should consider the risk factors that 
could affect Rimfire's performance. You should carefully consider these factors in light of your 
personal  circumstances  (including  financial  and  taxation  issues)  and  seek  advice  from  your 
professional  adviser  before  deciding  to  invest.  Investing  in  Rimfire  involves  risks.  See  'Risk 
Factors'  in  Section  4  for  a  discussion  of  certain  risk  factors  that  you  should  consider  before 
deciding to invest in Rimfire. 
 
No  person  is  authorised to  give  any  information  or  to  make  any  representation in  connection 
with the Offer that is not contained in this Prospectus or has not been released to ASX with the 
authorisation of Rimfire.  
 
Prospectus availability 
 
This  Prospectus 
form  at  http://www.rimfire.com.au  and 
www.asx.com.au  only  for  persons  within  Australia.  Persons  who  access the  electronic  form  of 
this Prospectus must ensure that they download and read the entire Prospectus. 
 
A  printed  copy  of  this  Prospectus  is  available  free  of  charge  by  calling  Rimfire  on  (03)  9620 
5866. 
 
Definitions and glossary, financial amounts and time 
 
Definitions of certain terms used in this Prospectus are contained in Section 6. All references 
to  currency  are  to  Australian  dollars  and  all  references  to  time  are  to  AEDT,  unless 
otherwise indicated. 
 
Enquiries 
 
For further information in relation to the Offer, please call Rimfire on (03) 9620 5866.
in  electronic
is  available
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Section 1
DETAILS OF OFFER
Section 2
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE PROSPECTUS
Section 3
ACTION REQUIRED
Section 4
RISK FACTORS
Section 5
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Section 6
KEY DEFINITIONS
IMPORTANT DATES
Documents lodged with ASIC and ASX 
Opening Date for acceptances 
Closing Date for acceptances
1
2
3
4
5
10
16
5 September 2016 
5 September 2016 
5 September 2016
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Directors:
Company Secretary: 
 
Registered Office:
Lawyers for the Company:
Stock Exchange Listing:
Email address:
Website address:
Corporate Directory
Ian McCubbing (Chairman) 
John Kaminsky (CEO & Managing Director) 
Graham Billinghurst  
Ramona Enconniere 
 
 
Graham Billinghurst 
 
Suite 411, 530 Little Collins Street 
Melbourne, Victoria 3000 
Ph 03 9620 5866 
 
 
Carton Solicitors  
211 Toorak Corporate Centre 
19 Milton Parade, Malvern VIC 3144 
 
 
Australian Securities Exchange 
Home Exchange – Melbourne 
ASX Code – RIM 
 
rimfire@rimfire.com.au  
 
 
http://www.rimfire.com.au
1 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Section 1  DETAILS OF OFFER
1.1
The Offer
This Prospectus offers 1 New Share at an issue price of 2.1 cents for each New Share to raise 
2.1  cents  before  issue  costs.    This  Prospectus  has  been  prepared  for  the  purpose  of  Section 
708A(11)  of  the  Corporations  Act  to  remove  any  trading  restrictions  on  the  sale  of  Shares 
issued by the Company prior to the Closing Date.
1.2
Underwriting
The Offer is not underwritten.
1.3  Use of proceeds
This  Prospectus  has  been  issued  for  compliance  purposes  for  a  nominal  amount  and 
accordingly the purpose is not to raise capital.
1.4  Actions Required by Shareholders
An explanation of the actions required by Shareholders is set out in Section 3.
1.5
Treatment of Overseas Shareholders
The Offer in this Prospectus is not being extended to any Shareholder, as at the Record Date, 
whose  registered  address  is  not  situated  in  Australia  or  New  Zealand  because  of  the  small 
number of such Shareholders, the cost of complying with applicable regulations in jurisdictions 
outside Australia and New Zealand and the value of the Securities offered.  The Prospectus is 
sent to those Shareholders for information only. 
 
The  Offer  contained  in  this  Prospectus  to  Eligible  Shareholders  with  registered  addresses  in 
New Zealand is made in reliance on the Securities Act (Overseas Companies) Exemption Notice 
2002 (New Zealand). Members of the public in New Zealand who are not existing Shareholders 
on the Record Date are not entitled to apply for any New Shares and New Options. 
 
Recipients  may  not  send  or  otherwise  distribute  this  Prospectus  or  the  Entitlement  and 
Acceptance Form to any person outside Australia (other than to Eligible Shareholders). 
 
1.6  Rights and liabilities attaching to New Shares
From Issue, the New Shares issued under this Prospectus will rank equally in all respects with 
existing Shares
1.7
Investment Risks
Section 4 outlines the key risk factors involved in investing in Rimfire.
1.8  Summary only
The information set out in this Section provides a summary of the information contained in this 
Prospectus.
2 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Section 2
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF PROSPECTUS
2.1
Purpose of the Prospectus
This transaction specific Prospectus has been prepared for the purpose of Section 708A(11) of 
the  Corporations  Act  to  remove  any  trading  restrictions  on  the  sale  of  Shares  issued  by  the 
Company prior to the Closing Date.  Its purpose is not to raise capital. 
 
Relevantly, Section 708A(11) of the Corporations Act provides that a sale offer does not need 
disclosure to investors if:  
 
(a)  the  relevant  securities  are  in  a  class  of  securities  that  are  quoted  securities  of  the  body; 
and  
 
(b) either:
(i)  a  prospectus  is  lodged  with  the  ASIC  on  or  after  the  day  on  which  the  relevant 
securities were issued but before the day on which the sale offer is made; or  
(ii) a prospectus is lodged with ASIC before the day on which the relevant securities are 
issued and offers of securities that have been made under the prospectus are still open 
for acceptance on the day on which the relevant securities were issued; and
(c) the prospectus is for an offer of securities issued by the body that are in the same class of 
securities as the relevant securities. 
 
 
2.2
Effect of the Offer on capital structure
The effect of the Offer on the Company's issued share capital will be as follows:
Ordinary Shares
Existing Shares 
Issue under the Offer
Totals
Number
918,091,962  
1
918,091,963
3 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Section 3
ACTION REQUIRED
3.1  What you may do
Applications  for Shares  must  only  be  made  by investors  at  the  direction  of  the  Company  and 
must be made using the Application Form accompanying this Prospectus 
 
3.2
Payment
The Application Price for New Shares is payable in full on application by a payment of 2.1 cents 
per  New  Share.  The  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  must  be  accompanied  by  a  cheque  or 
bank draft for the Application Monies. 
 
Cheques or bank drafts must be drawn in Australian currency on an Australian bank and made 
payable  to  "Rimfire  Pacific  Mining  RI  AC"  and  crossed  "Not  Negotiable".  Applicants  must 
not forward cash.  Receipts for payment will not be issued.  
 
You should ensure that sufficient funds are held in relevant account(s) to cover the cheque(s). 
If the amount of your cheque(s) for Application Money is not sufficient to pay for the number 
of New Shares you have applied for, you may be taken to have applied for such lower number 
of  New  Shares  as  your  cleared  Application  Money  will  pay  for  or  your  Application  may  be 
rejected.
CHEQUES SHOULD BE MADE PAYABLE TO:
"RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL"
AND CROSSED “NOT NEGOTIABLE”.
You  need  to  ensure  that  your  completed  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  and  cheque 
payment reaches the Share Registry at the following address: 
 
Rimfire Pacific Mining NL 
c/- Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited 
GPO Box 505 
Melbourne VIC 3001 
Australia
4 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Section 4
RISK FACTORS
The  New  Shares  offered  under  this  Prospectus  are  considered  speculative  because  of  the 
inherent risks associated with minerals exploration and appraisal and the current status of the 
Company’s exploration projects.  In addition, there are risks inherent in investing in the share 
market in general. 
 
The Directors have considered and identified in this section of the Prospectus the critical areas 
of  risk  associated  with investing  in the  New Shares.   The  risks  identified  by the  Directors  are 
not exhaustive and potential investors should read this Prospectus in full and seek professional 
advice if they require further information on material risks in deciding whether to subscribe for 
New Shares. 
 
4.1
Specific Risks
4.1.1
Exploration Risks
The  Company’s  projects  are  at  the  early  or  late  exploration  stage.    The  business  of 
minerals  exploration,  project  development  and  production  involves  risks  by  its  very 
nature.    There  can  be  no  assurance  that  exploration  of  the  tenements,  or  any  other 
tenement in which the Company may acquire an interest in the future, will result in the 
discovery of an economic mineral deposit.  Even if an apparent viable mineral deposit is 
identified, there is no guarantee that it will be able to be profitably exploited. 
 
Any  exploitation  of  a  deposit  will  involve  the  need  to  obtain  the  necessary  licences  or 
clearances  from relevant  authorities,  and  renewals of licences and permits, which may 
require conditions to be satisfied and/or the exercise of discretions by such authorities. 
It  may  or  may  not  be  possible  for  such  conditions  to  be  satisfied.  Exploration  and 
development  may  be  hampered  by  mining,  heritage  and  environmental  legislation, 
industrial  disputes,  cost  overruns,  land  claims  and  compensation  and  other  unforseen 
contingencies. 
 
Exploration may ultimately be unsuccessful, resulting in a reduction of the value of the 
Company’s  projects,  diminution  in  the  cash  reserves  of  the  Company  and  possible 
relinquishment  of  the  exploration  tenements.  Outcomes  of  any  exploration  program 
outlined  in  this  Prospectus  will  affect  the  future  performance  of  the  Company  and  its 
Shares.
4.1.2
Production Risks
Operations such as design and construction of efficient mining and processing facilities, 
competent  operation  and  managerial  performance,  and  efficient  transport  and 
marketing  services,  are  required  to  be  successful.    In  particular  production  operations 
can  be  hampered  by  force  majeure  circumstances,  engineering  difficulties,  cost 
overruns,  inconsistent  recovery  rates  and  other  unforeseen  events.    In  the  event  the 
Company’s  exploration  projects identify  economic  deposits,  development  of  production 
may be affected by these and many other matters. 
 
4.1.3
Access to Land
Significant delays may be experienced in gaining access to privately owned freehold or 
leasehold  land.  Delays  may  be  caused by  weather,  deference  to  landholders’  activities 
such as cropping, harvesting, calving and mustering, and other factors.
5 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
4.1.4
Cultural Heritage
Delays may be experienced if evidence of Aboriginal cultural heritage exists on any land 
to which the Company requires access. 
 
When exercising a right or permission for access to any land, it is an offence, to disturb 
physical  evidence  of  human  occupation  of  prehistoric  or  historic  significance  without 
statutory  permission.    This  restriction  applies  to  any  activity  including  minerals 
exploration and production. 
 
The  Company  has  not  undertaken  the  comprehensive  research,  investigations  or 
enquiries which would be necessary to enable it to form an opinion with certainty as to 
whether any such evidence exists on any land covered by Rimfire’s tenements.  
 
4.1.5
Environmental Impact Constraints
The  Company’s  exploration  and  appraisal  programs  will,  in  general,  be  subject  to 
approval  by  government  authorities.    Development  of  any  mineral  resources  will  be 
dependent  on the  Company being  able  to  obtain  environmental  approvals  to  carry  out 
its  planned  activities,  and then  being  able  to meet  all  environmental  conditions  placed 
on such activities. 
 
4.1.6
Exploration and Appraisal Expenditure
Exploration and appraisal is a process subject to unforeseen contingencies. Exploration 
programs must be flexible enough to respond to the results obtained. 
 
The actual scope, costs and timetables of exploration programs may differ substantially 
from the proposals set out in this Prospectus.  Financial failure, or default by any future 
alliance  or  joint  venture  partner  of  the  Company,  may  require  the  Company  to  face 
unplanned expenditure or risk forfeiting relevant tenements. 
 
4.1.7
Funding
Unless and until the Company develops or acquires income producing assets, it will be 
dependent  upon  its  existing  financial  resources  as  augmented  by  the  funds  raised  by 
this Offer, and its ability to obtain future equity or debt funding to support exploration 
evaluation  and  development  of  the  properties  in  which  it  has  an  interest.    The 
Company’s  ability  to  raise  further  equity  or  debt  or  to  divest  part  of  its  interest  in  a 
project, and the terms of such transactions, will vary according to a number of factors, 
including  the  success  of  exploration  results  and  the  future  development  of  the 
Company’s projects, stock market conditions and prices for metals in world markets. 
 
4.1.8
Key Personnel
The  ability  of  the  Company  to  achieve  its  objectives  depends  on  the  access  to  key 
personnel  and  external  contractors  who  constitute  its  technical  panel  and  provide 
technical expertise.  If the Company cannot secure technical expertise (for example to 
carry  out  drilling)  or  if  the  services  of  the  present  technical  panel  cease  to  become 
available  to  the  Company,  this  may  affect  the  Company's  ability  to  achieve  its 
objectives  either  fully  or  within  the  timeframes  and  the  budget  the  Company  has 
decided upon.  
 
Whilst  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  achieve  its  objectives  may  be  affected  by  the 
matters  mentioned  above,  the  Directors  believe  that  appropriately  skilled  and 
experienced  professionals  would  be  available  to  provide  services  to  the  Company  at
6 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
market  levels  of  remuneration  in  the  event  key  external  contractors  cease  to  be 
available.  
 
4.1.9
Volatility in the price of minerals
Commodity  prices  are  influenced  by  the  physical  and  investment  demand  for  those 
commodities.    Fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  may  influence  timing,  viability  and 
management of projects in which the Company has an interest. 
 
4.1.10
Volatility in the market price of Shares
Although the Company is listed on the Official List, there is no assurance that an active 
trading  market  for  its  Shares  or  the  Securities  will  be  sustained.    There  is  also  no 
assurance that the market price for the Securities will not decline below the issue price.  
The market price of the Company's Shares and Securities could be subject to significant 
fluctuations  due  to  various  external  factors  and  events,  including  the  liquidity  of  the 
Shares  and  Securities  in  the  market,  any  difference  between  the  Company's  actual 
financial or operating results and broader market-wide fluctuations.   Furthermore, any 
stock market volatility and weakness could result in the market price of the Shares and 
Securities  decreasing  so  that  they  trade  at  prices  significantly  below  the  issue  price, 
without regard to the Company's operating performance.  
 
4.1.11
Negative publicity may adversely affect the Share Price
Any negative publicity or announcement relating to any of our substantial shareholders 
or key personnel may adversely affect the stock performance of the Company, whether 
or  not  this  is  justifiable.    Examples  of  this  negative  publicity  or  announcement  may 
include  involvement  in  legal  or  insolvency  proceedings,  failed  attempts  in  takeovers, 
joint ventures or other business transactions.  
 
4.1.12
Insurance Risks
The  Company  maintains  insurance  coverage  that  is  substantially  consistent  with 
exploration  industry  practice.    However,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  such  insurance  or 
any future necessary coverage will be available to the Company at economically viable 
premiums (if at all) or that, in the event of a claim, the level of insurance carried by the 
Company now or in the future will be adequate, or that a liability or other claim would 
not materially and adversely affect the Company's business. 
 
4.1.13
Construction Capital Costs
The  Company  is  conscious  that  in  the  future,  there  could  be  competition  for  skilled 
labour  and  key  materials,  and  the  impact  of  these  factors  could  be  that  there  are 
upward costs pressures on any forecasts.   
 
4.1.14
Government Regulation and Policy
The  Company’s  tenements  may  be  subject  to  extensive  regulation  by  local,  state  and 
federal governments in relation to exploration, development, production, exports, taxes 
and  royalties,  labour  standards,  occupational  health,  waste  disposal,  protection  and 
rehabilitation of the environment, mine reclamation, mine safety, toxic and radioactive 
substances, native title  and  other  matters.  Compliance  with such laws  and regulations 
will  increase  the  costs  of  exploring,  drilling,  developing,  constructing,  operating  and 
closing mines and other production facilities.
7 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
There can be no assurance that future government policy will not change and this may 
adversely affect the long term prospects of the Company. In addition, future changes in 
governments, regulations and policies may have an adverse impact on the Company.  
 
4.1.15
Native Title
The  existence  of  native  title  and/or  native  title  claims  in  relation  to  the  land  on  which 
the Company operates may have an adverse impact on the Company’s activities and its 
ability to fund those activities. It is impossible at this stage to quantify the impact that 
these matters may have on the Company’s operations but the main risks include: 
 
  Delays  or  difficulties  in  obtaining  the  grant  of  the  applications  for  Authorities, 
renewals or conversions of the Authorities, or further applications, as a result of the 
right to negotiate  process, as this process can take as long as 2 years.
  Compensation  may  be  payable  by  the  Company  as  a  result  of  agreements  made 
pursuant  to  the  right  to  negotiate  or  alternative  process  or  as  a  result  of  a 
compensation  order  made  by  the  Federal  Court  in  the  event  native  title  has  been 
determined  to  exist.  The  amount  of  such  compensation  is  not  quantifiable  at  this 
stage.
  If native title is found to exist the nature of the native title may be such that consent 
to mining is required from the native title holders but is withheld or only granted on 
conditions unacceptable to the Company.
  The  risk  that  Aboriginal  sites  and  objects  exist  on  the  land  the  subject  of  the 
Authorities,  the  existence  of  which  sites  and  objects  may  preclude  or  limit  mining 
activities  in  certain  areas  of  the  Authorities.  Further,  the  disturbance  of  such  sites 
and  objects  is  likely  to  be  an  offence  under  the  applicable  legislation,  exposing  the 
Company to fines and other penalties.
4.2  General Risks
4.2.1
General Economic Climate
Factors  such  as  inflation,  currency  fluctuations,  interest  rates,  legislative  changes, 
political  decisions  and  industrial  disruption  have  an  impact  on  operating  costs  and  on 
metals prices.  
 
The  Company's  future  income,  asset  values  and  share  price  can  be  affected  by  these 
factors  and,  in  particular,  by  the  market  price  for  any  metals  that  the  Company  may 
produce and sell.  
 
4.2.2
Stock Market Conditions
The  market  price  of  the  New  Shares  when  quoted  on  the  ASX  will  be  influenced  by 
international  and  domestic factors  affecting  conditions in  equity  and financial  markets. 
These factors may affect the prices for the securities of minerals exploration companies 
quoted on the ASX, including Rimfire. 
 
The  stock  market  has  in  the  past  and  may  in  the  future  be  affected  by  a  number  of 
matters including:  
 
  commodity prices;
  market confidence;
8 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
  supply and demand for money; and
  currency exchange rates.
4.2.3
Commodity Prices May Go Down
The demand for, and price of, commodities is highly dependent on a variety of factors, 
including  international  supply  and  demand,  the  level  of  consumer  product  demand, 
weather conditions, the price and availability of alternative commodities, actions taken 
by  governments  and  international  cartels,  and  global  economic  and  political 
developments.  Commodity  prices  have  fluctuated  widely  in  recent  years  and  may 
continue to fluctuate significantly in the future. Fluctuations in commodity prices and, in 
particular, a material decline in the price of commodities may have a materially adverse 
effect on the Company's business, financial condition and results of operations.
4.2.4
Governments May Stop Exploration and Production Activities
Any  material  adverse  changes  in  government  policies  or  legislation  of  the  various 
countries in which it operates affecting mining and exploration activities may affect the 
viability and profitability of the Company.
4.2.5
Foreign Currency and Exchange Rate Fluctuations
Revenue and expenditure of the Company may be denominated in currencies other than 
Australian  dollars  and  as  such  expose  the  Company  to  foreign  exchange  movements, 
which  may  have  a  positive  or  negative  influence  on  the  Australian  dollar  equivalent  of 
such revenue and expenditure.
The  Company  will  appropriately  monitor  and  assess  such  risks  and  may  from  time  to 
time  implement  measures,  such  as  foreign  exchange  currency  hedging,  to  assist 
manage these risks. However, the implementation of such measures may not eliminate 
all such risks and the measures themselves may expose the Company to related risks.
4.2.6
Speculative Nature of Investment
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the risks faced by 
the  Company  or  by  investors  in  the  Company.    The  above  factors,  and  others  not 
specifically  referred  to  above,  may  in  the  future  materially  affect  the  financial 
performance  of  the  Company  and  the  value  of  the  Securities  offered  under  this 
Prospectus.
Therefore,  the  Securities  to  be  issued  pursuant  to  this  Prospectus  carry  no  guarantee 
with  respect  to  the  payment  of  dividends,  returns  of  capital  or  the  market  value  of 
those Shares.
Potential  investors  should  consider  that  the  investment  in  the  Company  is  speculative 
and  should  consult  their  professional  advisers  before  deciding  whether  to  apply  for 
Shares in the Company.
9 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Section 5
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
5.1  Nature of the Prospectus
The Company is a “disclosing entity” (as defined in section 111AC of the Corporations Act) for 
the  purposes  of  section  713  of  the  Corporations  Act  and,  as  such,  is  subject  to  regular 
reporting  and  disclosure  obligations.  Specifically,  like  all  listed  companies,  the  Company  is 
required  to  continuously  disclose  any  information  it  has  to  the  market  which  a  reasonable 
person  would  expect  tohave  a  material  effect  on  the  price  or  the  value  of  the  Company’s 
securities. 
 
This Prospectus is a “transaction specific  prospectus”. In general terms a “transaction specific 
prospectus”  is  only  required  to  contain  information  in  relation  to  the  effect  of  the  issue  of 
securities  on  a  company  and  the  rights  attaching  to  the  securities.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
include  general  information  in  relation  to  all  of  the  assets  and  liabilities,  financial  position, 
profits and losses or prospects of the issuing company. 
 
This Prospectus is intended to be read in conjunction with the publicly available information in 
relation  to  the  Company  which  has  been  notified  to  ASX  and  does  not  include  all  of  the 
information that would be included in a prospectus for an initial public offering of securities in 
an  entity  that  is  not  already  listed  on  a  stock  exchange.  Investors  should  therefore  have 
regard to the other publicly available information in relation to the Company before making a 
decision  whether  or  not  to  invest.  Having  taken  such  precautions  and  having  made  such 
enquires  as  are  reasonable,  the  Company  believes  that  it  has  complied  with  the  general  and 
specific requirements of ASX as applicable from time to time throughout the 3 months before 
the  issue  of  this  Prospectus  which  required  the  Company  to  notify  ASX  of  information  about 
specified  events  or  matters  as  they  arise  for  the  purpose  of  ASX  making  that  information 
available to the stock market conducted by ASX. 
 
Information that is already in the public domain has not been reported in this Prospectus other 
than that which is considered necessary to make this Prospectus complete. 
 
The Company, as a disclosing entity under the Corporations Act, states that: 
 
(a) it is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations; 
 
(b)  copies  of  documents  lodged  with  the  ASIC  in  relation  to  the  Company  (not  being 
documents referred to in section 1274(2)(a) of the Corporations Act) may be obtained from, or 
inspected at, the offices of ASIC; and 
 
(c) it will provide a copy of each of the following documents, free of charge, to any person on 
request between the date of issue of this Prospectus and the Closing Date:
(i)  the annual financial report most recently lodged with ASIC and ASX by the body; 
(ii)  any half-year financial report lodged with ASIC and ASX by the body  
(iii)   any  continuous  disclosure  notices  given  by  the  body  after  the  lodgment  of  that 
annual financial report and before the lodgment of the copy of the prospectus with ASIC 
and ASX.
Documents  lodged  since  the  lodgment  of  the  annual  report,  and  financial  statements  for  30 
June 2015 are as follows:
10 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Date lodged 
01/09/2016  
25/08/2016  
23/08/2016  
19/08/2016  
05/08/2016  
03/08/2016  
01/08/2016  
29/07/2016  
29/07/2016  
28/07/2016  
25/07/2016  
15/07/2016  
07/07/2016  
06/07/2016  
04/07/2016  
08/06/2016  
31/05/2016  
16/05/2016  
29/04/2016  
29/04/2016  
21/04/2016  
08/04/2016  
06/04/2016  
21/03/2016  
11/03/2016  
07/03/2016  
25/02/2016  
19/02/2016  
18/02/2016  
08/02/2016  
27/01/2016  
27/01/2016  
15/01/2016  
14/12/2015 
08/12/2015  
07/12/2015  
04/12/2015  
03/12/2015  
27/11/2015  
27/11/2015  
27/11/2015  
27/11/2015  
27/11/2015  
20/11/2015  
17/11/2015  
13/11/2015  
10/11/2015  
05/11/2015  
05/11/2015  
04/11/2015  
02/11/2015  
02/11/2015  
30/10/2015
11 | P a g e
Nature of document
Appendix 3B (cid:173) SPP  
708A Notice  
Drilling at Fortuna Gold Prospect (cid:173) Roadside Assay Update  
Appendix 3B (cid:173) SPP closes 26 August (cid:173) Drilling at Fortuna  
SPP Letter and Acceptance Form Sent to Shareholders  
Successful $1.6M Placement Completed and SPP Announced  
Trading Halt  
Quarterly Activities Report June 2016  
Quarterly Cashflow Report June 2016  
Initial Director's Interest Notice (cid:173) Mr Ian McCubbing  
Mr Ian McCubbing appointed as Chairman  
Fortuna Gold anomaly established in 7km Corridor  
Final Directors' Interest Notice (cid:173) J Gillett and T Burrowes  
Drilling Results incl 1m @ 6.24g/t Gold and 3170 g/t Silver  
Change in Board of Directors  
Change of Director's Interest Notice  
9m at 16.10g/t Gold and 297g/t Silver (incl. 1m @70.2g/t Au)  
7m at 2.44g/t Gold and 461g/t Silver with Bonanza grade  
Quarterly Activities Report 7m at 13.41g/t Au and 751g/t Ag  
Quarterly Cashflow Report March 2016  
Sorpresa results incl 7m at 4.60g/t Gold and 199g/t Silver  
Appendix 4G (cid:173) Corporate Governance Statement  
Presentation Mines and Money Asia  
New Regional Gold Prospects and Sorpresa Drill Results  
Appendix 3B (cid:173) Issue of Shares  
Half Year Report December 2015  
Change of Director's Interest Notice (cid:173) Mr Thomas Burrowes  
7m @ 13.41g/t Au and 751g/t Ag Drilling at Sorpresa  
Appendix 3B (cid:173) Issue of Shares  
RC Drilling results include 15m @3.91g/t Au & 223g/t Ag  
Quarterly Activities Report December 2015  
Quarterly Cashflow Report December 2015  
Appendix 3B  
Change of Directors' Interest Notices (cid:173) Rights Issue  
Change of Director's Interest Notice (cid:173) Mr John Gillett  
Application for Quotation New Securities (cid:173) Rights Issue  
Drilling Results 9m @ 18.15g/t gold at Sorpresa, Fifield NSW  
New Capital $1.043M raised (cid:173) Shortfall Notice  
AGM Results of Meeting All Resolutions Passed Comfortably  
AGM 2015 CEO Presentation Corporate and Exploration  
AGM 2015 H Widdup Presentation Mining Market Snapshot  
AGM 2015 Richard Schodde Presentation Exploration Trends  
Chairman Address AGM 2015  
Sorpresa drilling gives 13m@8.46g/t gold (incl. 2m@31.35g/t)  
Notice to Holders (cid:173) Options Expiring 14 Dec 2015  
Prospectus (cid:173) 1 for 7 Rights Issue plus Free Option  
IMARC Conference Presentation 10 Nov 2015  
Ausindustry Funds of $1.046M Received (cid:173) Drilling Continues  
Letter to Shareholders 1 for 7 Rights Issue  
Appendix 3B (cid:173) Rights Issue  
1 for 7 Rights Issue to raise $2.126m (cid:173) Directors to uptake  
Quarterly Activities Report Sept 2015  
Quarterly Cashflow Report Sept 2015
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
27/10/2015 
27/10/2015 
20/10/2015
Proxy Form for AGM 27 November 2015 
Notice of Meeting AGM 27 November 2015 8 PDF 
Sorpresa drilling gives high grades include 3m@ 20.42g/t Au 29
5.2
CHESS
The  Company  participates  in  CHESS  and  will  despatch  holding  statements  in  lieu  of  share 
certificates that set  out  the number  of  New Shares  issued to  each  successful  Applicant under 
this Prospectus. 
 
It  is  the  responsibility  of  Applicants  to  determine  their  allocation  before  trading  in  the  New 
Shares. Applicants who sell New Shares before they receive their statement do so at their own 
risk. 
 
5.3  Rights and liabilities attaching to New Shares
The  rights  attaching  to  ownership  of  the  New  Shares  are  set  out  in  the  Company's 
Constitution, a copy of which is available for inspection at the registered office of the Company 
during business hours. The following is a summary of the principal rights of holders of the New 
Shares:  
 
  Ranking 
 
New Shares are ordinary shares in the capital of the Company and rank equally with all other 
ordinary  shares  issued  by  the  Company.    Currently  all  shares  issued  by  the  company  are 
ordinary shares. 
 
  Meetings and Voting 
 
Each holder of Shares will be entitled to receive notice of and to attend and vote at any duly 
convened annual general meeting or extraordinary general meeting of the Company. 
 
At  any  such  meeting  of  the  Company  every  Shareholder  present  in  person,  or  by  proxy, 
attorney or representative appointed pursuant to the Corporations Act has one vote on a show 
of hands and upon a poll, one vote for every Share held by them. 
 
  Dividends 
 
New  Shares  will  participate  in  any  dividend  declared  by  the  Company  from  time  to  time. 
Subject  to  the  rights  of  holders  of  shares  of  any  special  preferential  or  qualified  rights 
attaching  thereto,  the  profits  of  the  Company  are  divisible  amongst  the  holders  of  Shares  in 
proportion to the Shares held by them irrespective of the amount paid up or credited as paid 
up thereon.  
 
  Transfer of the Shares 
 
Transfer  of  New  Shares  may  be effected  in  any  manner  required  or  permitted  by  ASX  Listing 
Rules  or  Securities  Clearance  House  Business  Rules  or  by  an  instrument  of  transfer  in  any 
usual from or by another form approved by the Directors or recognised by the Corporations Act 
or the ASX Listing Rules. 
 
The Company, may refuse to register any transfer of Shares or apply a holding lock to prevent 
a proper Securities Clearance House transaction where permitted to do so by the Corporations 
Act, the ASX Listing Rules or the SCH Business Rules.    If the Directors decline to register a
12 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
transfer,  the  Company  must  give  to  the  lodging  party  written  notice  of  the  refusal  and  the 
precise reasons for it in accordance with the Listing Rules. 
 
  Winding up 
 
Upon paying the Application Price, Shareholders will have no further liability to make payments 
to  the  Company  in  the  event  of  the  Company  being  wound  up.    Surplus  assets  after  the 
winding up of the Company shall be distributed firstly in repayment of paid-up capital with any 
balance  being  distributed  among  Shareholders  in  proportion  to  the  capital  paid  up  or  which 
ought  to  have  been  paid  up  at  the  commencement  of  the  winding  up  of  the  Shares  held  by 
them. 
 
  Future increases in Capital 
 
The allotment and issue of any New Shares is under the control of the Directors. Subject to the 
Listing Rules, the Company's Constitution and the Corporations Act, the Directors may allot or 
otherwise dispose of New Shares on such terms and conditions as they see fit. 
 
  Variation of Rights 
 
At present, the Company has one class of share on issue, being ordinary shares. If shares of 
another class were issued, the rights and privileges attaching to ordinary shares could only be 
altered with the approval of a resolution passed at a separate general meeting of the holders 
of  ordinary  shares  by  a  three  quarter  majority  of  such  holders  or  the  written  consent  of  the 
holders of at least three quarters of the ordinary shares. 
 
There are no liabilities attaching to New Shares. 
 
5.4
Privacy
If you apply for New Shares, you will provide personal information to the Company. Company 
laws and tax laws require some of the information to be collected and kept. The Company will 
collect,  hold  and  use  the  information  provided  by  you  to  process  your  application  and  to 
administer your investment in the Company.   
 
If you do not provide the information requested in the  Entitlement and Acceptance Form, the 
Company and the Share Registry may not be able to process your application. 
 
The Company may disclose your personal information for purposes related to your investment 
to  the  Company's  agents  and  service  providers.    The  types  of  agents  and  service  providers 
that  may  be  provided  with  your  personal  information  and  the  circumstances  in  which  your 
personal information may be shared are: 
 

the Share Registry for ongoing administration of the shareholder register;


printers  and  other  companies  for  the  purpose  of  preparation  and  distribution  of 
statements and for handling mail; and
legal  and  accounting firms,  auditors,  contractors,  consultants  and  other  advisers  for  the 
purpose of administering, and advising, on the Shares and for associated actions.
The Company complies with its legal obligations under the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth). 
 
You may request access to your personal information held by (or on behalf of) the Company.  
You may be required to pay a reasonable charge to the Share Registry in order to access your 
personal  information.    You  can  request  access  to  your  personal  information  by  writing  to  or 
telephoning the Share Registry as follows:
13 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited 
GPO Box 505 
Melbourne VIC 3001 
 
 
5.5
Interests of Directors
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus, no:  
 
(a) 
 
(b)
Director or proposed Director;
person named in this Prospectus as performing a function in a professional, advisory or 
other capacity in connection with the preparation or distribution of this Prospectus;
(c) 
 
(d)
promoter of the Company; or
financial  services  licensee  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  a  financial  services  licensee 
involved the Offer,
holds, or has held within 2 years before the date of this Prospectus, any interest in the Offer or 
in the formation  or  promotion  of,  or in  any  property  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by, 
the Company in connection with its formation or promotion or the Offer.  
 
Other  than  as  set  out  in  Section  4.4  or  elsewhere  in  the  Prospectus,  no  amounts  have  been 
paid or agreed to be paid and no benefits have been given or agreed to be given:  
 
(a)
to  a  Director  or  proposed  Director  to  induce  him  to  become,  or  to  qualify  him  as,  a 
director of the Company; or
(b)
for services provided in connection with the formation or promotion of the Company or 
the Offer
by  any  Director  or  proposed  Director,  any  person  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  performing  a 
function  in  a  professional,  advisory  or  other  capacity  in  connection  with  the  preparation  or 
distribution  of  this  Prospectus,  any  promoter  of  the  Company,  or  any underwriter  or  financial 
services  licensee  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  an  underwriter  or  financial  services  licensee 
involved in the Offer.
The interests of Directors (direct and indirect) in Shares in the Company as at the date of this 
Prospectus is as follows:
Director
No of Shares
G Billinghurst
19,502,375
No of listed
options (RIMOA) 
442,019
R Enconniere
9,069,860
803,405
I McCubbing
J Kaminsky
2,574,285
33,408,169
Nil
3,500,000
The remuneration for each Director during the 2015 financial year was as follows:  
 
Benefits  to  senior  executives  and  the  Non-Executive  Directors  consisted  exclusively  of  cash 
benefits  in  the  period.  A  nonexecutive  Director  Pool  of  $200,000  was  available  in  2015 
($200,000  in  2014)  and  represents  the  maximum  aggregate  payments  to  Non-Executive 
14 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Directors,  in  their  capacities  as  Directors,  that can  be  paid  in  any  one  year  without  requiring 
additional  shareholder  approval.  The  actual  Non-Executive  Director  pool  utilised  in  the  12 
month period was $117,500 in total ($90,000 in 2014). This rate is below the industry norm.  
 
2015 Primary Post Employment Equity Compensation 
 
Name 
Director
Contributions 
Shares 
Options ($)
Superannuation 
($)
Total 
($)
&
of
Salary,  Fees 
& 
Commissions 
($)
Cash 
Bonus 
($)
238,532  Nil 
25,114  Nil 
30,000  Nil 
30,000  Nil 
27,397  Nil 
Nil  Nil
22,661 
2,386 
Nil 
Nil 
2,603
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
261,193 
27,500 
30,000 
30,000 
30,000
J Kaminsky 
J Gillett 
G Billinghurst 
R Enconniere 
T Burrowes 
I McCubbing 
 
 
5.6
Electronic prospectus
Pursuant to class order 00/44 the ASIC has exempted compliance with certain provisions of the 
Corporations  Act  to  allow  distribution  of  an  Electronic  Prospectus  in  the  basis  of  a  paper 
Prospectus lodged with ASIC and the issue of shares and options in response to an electronic 
application, subject to compliance with certain provisions.
If you have received this Prospectus as an Electronic Prospectus please ensure that you have 
the entire Prospectus accompanied by the Entitlement and Acceptance Form.  If you have not, 
please e-mail the Company at rimfire@rimfire.com.au and the Company will send you, for free, 
either a hard copy or a further electronic copy of the Prospectus or both.
The  Company  reserves  the  right  not  to  accept  an  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  from  a 
person if  it has  reason  to  believe that  when that  person  was  given  access  to  the  Entitlement 
and  Acceptance  Form,  it  was  not  provided  with  an  entire  copy  of  the  Prospectus  and  any 
relevant  supplementary  or  replacement  material  or  any  of  those  documents  were  incomplete 
or altered.  In such case, the Application monies received will be dealt with in accordance with 
section 722 of the Corporations Act.
5.7
Cost of Offer
The  estimates  costs  of  making  this  offer  is  $5,500  including  ASIC  filing  fees  and  legal 
expenses.
5.8  Directors’ authorisation
Each Director of Rimfire Pacific Mining NL has given, and has not withdrawn, their consent to 
the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC. 
 
Signed on behalf of the Directors pursuant to a Resolution of the Board.
John Kaminsky 
Managing Director 
Dated: 5 September 2015
15 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
Section 6
KEY DEFINITIONS
“Applicant” means a person who submits an Application.
“Application”  means  a  valid  application  made  to  subscribe  for  Securities  in  accordance  with 
the Offer.
“Application Money” means monies received from persons applying for Securities pursuant 
to the terms of the Rights Offer.
“Application Price” means 2.1 cents per Share.
"ASIC" means Australian Securities & Investments Commission.
”ASTC” means ASX Settlement and Transfer Corporation Pty Ltd.
"ASX" means ASX Limited ACN 008 624 691.
“AEDT” means Australian Eastern Daylight Time
“Business Day” means a day on which trading takes place on the stock market of ASX.
“CHESS” means ASX Clearing House Electronic Sub-registry System.
“Closing  Date”  means  5  September  2016  or  such  other  date  as  may  be  determined  by  the 
Directors under this Prospectus.
"Company"  and  "Rimfire"  means  Rimfire  Pacific  Mining  NL  ACN  006  911  744  and  where 
relevant, its subsidiary companies.
“Constitution” means the Company's Constitution as at the date of this Prospectus.
“Corporations Act” means the Corporations Act 2001 (Commonwealth).
"Directors" means the Directors of the Company.
“Dollar” or $ means Australian dollars.
“Issue” means the issue of Securities under this Prospectus.
“Listing Rules” means the Listing Rules of the ASX.
“New  Share”  means  a  fully  paid  ordinary share  in  the  capital  of the  Company  to  be issued 
under this Prospectus.
“Non-qualifying Foreign Shareholder” means a Shareholder, whose registered address is 
not in Australia or New Zealand.
“Rimfire” means Rimfire Pacific Mining NL ACN 006 911 744.
“Offer” means the offer of 1 New Share at an issue price of 2.1 cents per New Share.
“Official List” means the official list of the ASX.
“Prospectus” means the prospectus constituted by this document.
16 | P a g e
RIMFIRE PACIFIC MINING NL
“SCH  Business  Rules”  means  the  business  rules  of  the  securities  clearing  house  which 
operates CHESS.
“Securities” means the New Share to be issued under this Prospectus.
“Share” means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
“Shareholder” means the holder of a Share registered on the Record Date.
“Share Registry” means Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited (ABN 48 078 279 277)
17 | P a g e