
ASX RELEASE
ASX: JAL
$0.01 - $0.03 
208,565,619 
16,300,000 
~$6M
3 AUGUST 2016 
 
Fast Facts 
 
Share Price Range (6mths) 
Shares on Issue 
Options ($0.16 - $0.20) 
Market Capitalisation 
 
Major Shareholders 
(as at August 2, 2016) 
 
Zero Nominees Pty Ltd 
9.4% 
Hillboi Nominees                                     5.9% 
Wholesalers Morley PL 
5.3% 
 
Directors & Management 
 
Art Palm (Chairman & CEO) 
Jeff Bennett (Non Executive Director) 
Steve van Barneveld (Non Executive Director) 
 
Key Projects 
 
Crown Mountain Coking Coal Project  
Elk Valley Coal Field, Canada 
Dunlevy Coal Project  
Peace River Coal Field, Canada 
 
Investment Highlights 
 
  Positioned in world class metallurgical
coalfields
  Significant development expertise on
board with successful track record
Q3 2016 
ongoing 
ongoing
Overview
Overview
  Modern rail and port facilities 
  Strong financial position 
 
Newsflow / Catalysts 
 
Complete Crown EA pre-app  
Crown PFS enhancements 
Crown enviro permit progress 
 
Contact Details 
 
Australia 
 
Suite 5, 62 Ord Street 
West Perth, WA 6005 
P    +61 (8) 9200 4473 
F    +61 (8) 9200 4463 
E    admin@jamesonresources.com .au  
 
Canada 
Suite 800, 1199 West Hastings, Vancouver 
P    +1 (604) 629-8605
Dunlevy Project Update 
 
Highlights
  The  province  has  refunded  the  full  amount  of  the  reclamation  bond
held as security for 2014’s Dunlevy exploration program.
  Other  than  annual  rent,  there  are  no  ongoing  expenses  associated
with the project.
Jameson Resources  (“Jameson”,  the “Company”)  is pleased to report that the 
Ministry  of  Energy  and  Mines  has  inspected  reclamation  performed  at  the 
Dunlevy project (“Dunlevy”, the “Project”) and accepted it without exception.   
 
This action has resulted in a full refund of the reclamation bond, in the amount 
of $35,000, held as security by the province. 
 
Dunlevy consists of 2,534 hectares of approved exploration licenses located in 
the  Peace  River  coal  field  in  northeast  British  Columbia.    The  Company 
conducted an exploration program at Dunlevy in 2014.  There are no activities 
planned  at  Dunlevy  until  the  current  coal  market  recovery  expands  further.  
Jameson  has  directed  its  efforts  in  coal  to  the  Crown  Mountain  coking  coal 
project in southeast British Columbia. 
 
Jameson  has  no  material  financial  obligations  on  the  Project  outside  of  the 
annual exploration license renewal fee of $17,738.   
 
On Behalf of the Board of Directors,
Art Palm 
Chief Executive Officer
www.jamesonresources.com.au
About Jameson Resources Limited 
Jameson  Resources  Limited  (ASX:JAL)  is  a  junior  resources  company  focused  on  the  acquisition,  exploration 
and development of strategic coal projects in western Canada.  The Company has a 90% interest in the Crown 
Mountain  coking  coal  project,  and  a  100%  interest  in  the  Dunlevy  coal  project,  both  located  in  British 
Columbia.    Jameson’s  tenement  portfolio  is  positioned  in coalfields  responsible  for  the  majority  of  Canada’s 
metallurgical coal exports and is near railways connecting to export facilities.
To learn more, please contact the Company at +61 89200 4473, or visit: www.jamesonresources.com.au
Forward Looking Statements
This announcement contains “forward-looking statements”. Such forward-looking statements include, without 
limitation: estimates of future earnings, the sensitivity of earnings to commodity prices and foreign exchange 
rate  movements;  estimates  of  future  production  and  sales;  estimates  of  future  cash  flows,  the  sensitivity  of 
cash  flows  to  commodity  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rate  movements;  statements  regarding  future  debt 
repayments; estimates of future capital expenditures; estimates of resources and statements regarding future 
exploration results; and where the Company expresses or implies an expectation or belief as to future events 
or  results,  such  expectation  or  belief  is  expressed  in  good  faith  and  believed  to  have  a  reasonable  basis. 
However, forward looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, which could cause 
actual results to differ materially from future results expressed, projected or implied by such forward-looking 
statements.  Such  risks  include,  but  are  not  limited  to  commodity  price  volatility,  currency  fluctuations, 
increased production costs and variances in resource or reserve rates from those assumed in the company’s 
plans, as well as political and operational risks in the countries and states in which we operate or sell product 
to, and governmental regulation and judicial outcomes.  For a more detailed discussion of such risks and other 
factors,  see  the  Company’s  Annual  Reports,  as  well  as  the  Company’s  other  filings.    The  Company  does  not 
undertake any obligation to release publicly any revisions to any “forward looking statement” to reflect events 
or circumstances after the date of this release, or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as 
may be required under applicable securities laws.
www.jamesonresources.com.au