
Security Class
Holder Account Number
Voting Instruction Form ("VIF") - Annual General Meeting to be held by Friday, September 30, 2016
3.
NON-REGISTERED (BENEFICIAL) SECURITYHOLDERS
1. We are sending to you the enclosed proxy-related materials that relate to a meeting of the holders of the series or class of securities that are held on your behalf by the intermediary identified
above. Unless you attend the meeting and vote in person, your securities can be voted only by management, as proxy holder of the registered holder, in accordance with your instructions.
2. We are prohibited from voting these securities on any of the matters to be acted upon at the meeting without your specific voting instructions. In order for these securities to be voted at the
meeting, it will be necessary for us to have your specific voting instructions. Please complete and return the information requested in this VIF to provide your voting instructions to us promptly.
If you want to attend the meeting and vote in person, please write your name in the place provided for that purpose in this form. You can also write the name of someone else whom you wish
to attend the meeting and vote on your behalf. Unless prohibited by law, the person whose name is written in the space provided will have full authority to present matters to the meeting and
vote on all matters that are presented at the meeting, even if those matters are not set out in this form or the information circular. Consult a legal advisor if you wish to modify the authority of
that person in any way. If you require help, please contact the Registered Representative who services your account.
4. This VIF should be signed by you in the exact manner as your name appears on the VIF. If these voting instructions are given on behalf of a body corporate set out the full legal
name of the body corporate, the name and position of the person giving voting instructions on behalf of the body corporate and the address for service of the body corporate.
If this VIF is not dated, it will be deemed to bear the date on which it is mailed by management to you.
5.
6. When properly signed and delivered, securities represented by this VIF will be voted as directed by you, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, the VIF
will direct the voting of the securities to be made as recommended in the documentation provided by Management for the meeting.
7. This VIF confers discretionary authority on the appointee to vote as the appointee sees fit in respect of amendments or variations to matters identified in the notice of meeting or other matters
as may properly come before the meeting or any adjournment thereof.
8. Your voting instructions will be recorded on receipt of the VIF.
9. By providing voting instructions as requested, you are acknowledging that you are the beneficial owner of, and are entitled to instruct us with respect to the voting of, these securities.
10. If you have any questions regarding the enclosed documents, please contact the Registered Representative who services your account.
11. This VIF should be read in conjunction with the information circular and other proxy materials provided by Management.
-------
Fold
-------
Fold
VIFs submitted must be received by 10:00 AM (Vancouver Time) on September 28, 2016.
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
• Call the number listed BELOW from a touch tone
telephone.
1-866-734-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
• Go to the following web site:
www.investorvote.com
• Smartphone?
Scan the QR code to vote now.
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this VIF.
Voting by mail  may be the only method for securities held in the name of a corporation or securities being voted on behalf of another individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet  are the only methods by which a holder may choose an appointee other than the Management appointees named on the reverse of this VIF. Instead of mailing this VIF,
you may choose one of the two voting methods outlined above to vote this VIF.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER
Appointee(s)
Management Appointees are: Rui Feng, or failing him, Paul Simpson,
or failing him, Lorne Waldman,
OR
If you wish to attend in person or appoint
someone else to attend on your behalf,
print your name or the name of your
appointee in this space (see Note #3 on
reverse).
as my/our appointee to attend, act and to vote in accordance with the following direction (or if no directions have been given, as the appointee sees fit) and all other matters that may properly
come before the Annual General Meeting of securityholders of Silvercorp Metals Inc. to be held at 1378 - 200 Granville Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C 1S4, on Friday,
September 30, 2016 at 10:00 AM (Vancouver Time) and at any adjournment or postponement thereof.
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
For
Against
1. Number of Directors
To set the number of Directors at 5.
2. Election of Directors
01. Dr. Rui Feng
04. Yikang Liu
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
-------
Fold
02. S. Paul Simpson
05. Malcolm Swallow
03. David Kong
3. Appointment of Auditors
Appointment of Deloitte LLP as Auditors of the Company for the ensuing year and authorizing the Directors to fix their remuneration.
4. Re-Approve Stock Option Plan
To re-approve the Company's Stock Option Plan as described in the Information Circular of the Company dated August 15, 2016.
For
Withhold
For
Against
-------
Fold
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be completed for your
instructions to be executed.
If you are voting on behalf of a corporation or another individual you may be required to provide
documentation evidencing your power to sign this VIF with signing capacity stated.
Signature(s)
Date
Interim Financial Statements - Mark this box if you would
like to receive Interim Financial Statements and
accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis by
mail.
If you are not mailing back your VIF, you may register online to receive the above financial report(s) by mail at www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
Annual Financial Statements - Mark this box if you would
like to receive the Annual Financial Statements and
accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis by
mail.
S  R  L  Q
2  3  4  6  2  4
A  R  1