
S-3ASR 1 d237786ds3asr.htm FORM S-3ASR Form S-3ASR
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 9, 2016
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form S-3
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Continental Resources, Inc.
(and its Subsidiaries Identified on the Following Page)
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Oklahoma
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
73-0767549
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
20 N. Broadway
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73102
(405) 234-9000
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Eric S. Eissenstat
Senior Vice President, General Counsel, Chief Risk Officer and Secretary
20 N. Broadway
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73102
(405) 234-9000
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copy to:
David P. Oelman
Michael S. Telle
Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.
1001 Fannin Street, Suite 2500
Houston, Texas 77002
Telephone: (713) 758-2222
Approximate Date of Commencement of Proposed Sale to the Public: From time to time after the effective date of this
registration statement, as determined by market conditions.
If the only securities being registered on this Form are being offered pursuant to dividend or interest reinvestment plans,
please check the following box.  ¨
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415
under the Securities Act of 1933, other than securities offered only in connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans,
check the following box.  x
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement
for the same offering.  ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and
list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
If this Form is a registration statement pursuant to General Instruction I.D. or a post-effective amendment thereto that shall
become effective upon filing with the Commission pursuant to Rule 462(e) under the Securities Act, check the following box.  x
If this Form is a post-effective amendment to a registration statement filed pursuant to General Instruction I.D. filed to register
additional securities or additional classes of securities pursuant to Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check the following
box.  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a
smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company”
in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer  x
Non-accelerated filer   ¨  (Do not check the box if a smaller reporting company)
Accelerated filer
  ¨
  Smaller reporting company  ¨
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of
Amount
to be
Proposed
Maximum
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Securities to be Registered
Registered (1)(2) 
 
   
Debt Securities
   
   
Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share    
Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share    
   
Subsidiary Guarantees of Debt Securities
(4)
 
 
(1) There are being registered under this registration statement such indeterminate number of shares of common stock and
Offering Price
Registration Fee (2)(3)
Offering Price (1)(2) 
Per Unit (1)(2)
Amount of
preferred stock and such indeterminate principal amount of debt securities, which may be senior or subordinated, of
Continental Resources, Inc. as may from time to time be offered at indeterminate prices and as may be issuable upon the
conversion, redemption, exchange, exercise or settlement of any securities registered hereunder, including under any
applicable anti-dilution provisions. Any securities registered under this registration statement may be sold separately or as
units with other securities registered under this registration statement. Separate consideration may or may not be received
for securities that are being registered that are issued in exchange for, or upon the conversion or exercise of, the debt
securities being registered hereunder.
(2) Omitted pursuant to Form S-3 General Instruction II.E.
(3) In accordance with Rule 456(b) and Rule 457(r), the registrants are deferring payment of the registration fee required in
connection with this registration statement. Accordingly, no registration fee is paid herewith.
(4) Guarantees may be provided by subsidiaries of Continental Resources, Inc. of the payment of principal of and interest on
the Debt Securities. Pursuant to Rule 457(n) of the Securities Act, no separate registration fee is payable for the
guarantees.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF SUBSIDIARY GUARANTOR REGISTRANTS
Exact Name of Subsidiary Guarantor Registrant as  Specified in its
Charter (1)
Banner Pipeline Company, L.L.C.
CLR Asset Holdings, LLC
The Mineral Resources Company
State or Other Jurisdiction of
Identification Number
Organization
Oklahoma
Oklahoma
Oklahoma
20-3304849
46-1489128
81-3056209
I.R.S. Employer
(1) The address for the subsidiary guarantor registrants is 20 N. Broadway, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73102, and the
telephone number for the subsidiary guarantor registrants is (405) 234-9000.
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS
Debt Securities
Common Stock
Preferred Stock
We may offer from time to time debt securities, common stock and preferred stock. Our subsidiaries may guarantee the debt
securities offered by this prospectus.
We will provide additional terms of our securities in one or more prospectus supplements to this prospectus. You should read
this prospectus and the related prospectus supplement carefully before you invest in our securities.
The securities may be offered directly by us or by any selling security holder, through agents designated from time to time by
us or to or through underwriters or dealers. If any agents, dealers or underwriters are involved in the sale of any of the
securities, their names and any applicable purchase price, fee, commission or discount arrangement between or among them
will be set forth, or will be calculable from the information set forth, in the applicable prospectus supplement. See the sections
entitled “About This Prospectus” and “Plan of Distribution” for more information.
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CLR.”
You should consider carefully “Risk Factors” on page 2 before investing in our securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved
of these securities or determined if this prospectus or the accompanying prospectus supplement is truthful or
complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Table of Contents
The date of this prospectus is August 9, 2016.
In making your investment decision, you should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference
in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement and any written communication from us or any underwriter specifying
the final terms of a particular offering. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with any other information. We
are not making an offer to sell or soliciting an offer to buy in any jurisdiction in which the offer or solicitation is not
authorized or in which the person making that offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so or to anyone to which it is
unlawful to make an offer or solicitation. You should not assume that the information in this prospectus, any
prospectus supplement or any written communication from us or any underwriter specifying the final terms of a
particular offering, as well as the information we previously filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
“SEC”) that is incorporated by reference herein, is accurate as of any date other than its respective date.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
About This Prospectus
Where You Can Find More Information
Incorporation by Reference
About Us
Risk Factors
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Use of Proceeds
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
Description of Debt Securities
i  
    
ii  
     iii  
     1  
     2  
     3  
     5  
     5
Description of Debt Securities
Description of Capital Stock
Global Securities
Plan of Distribution
Legal Matters
Experts
6  
    13  
    18  
    21  
    23  
    23
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of an automatic shelf registration statement that we have filed with the SEC as a “well-known seasoned
issuer” as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), using a “shelf” registration
process. Using this process, we may offer the securities described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. In addition,
selling security holders to be named in a prospectus supplement may sell certain of our securities from time to time. This
prospectus provides you with a general description of the securities we may offer.
Each time we use this prospectus to offer securities, we will provide a prospectus supplement and, if applicable, a pricing
supplement. The prospectus supplement and any pricing supplement will describe the specific terms of that offering. The
prospectus supplement and any pricing supplement may also add to, update or change the information contained in this
prospectus. Please carefully read this prospectus, the prospectus supplement and any pricing supplement together with the
information contained in the documents we refer to under the heading “Incorporation by Reference.”
In this prospectus, “we,” “us,” “our” the “Company,” and “Continental” refer to Continental Resources, Inc. and its consolidated
subsidiaries, unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires.
Table of Contents
i
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the SEC. You may read and copy any materials we
have filed with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. You
may obtain information about the operation of the SEC’s public reference room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The
SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding us.
The SEC’s website address is www.sec.gov. You may also inspect our SEC records at our website at www.clr.com. We do not
intend for information contained in our website to be part of this prospectus.
This prospectus does not contain all the information the registration statement sets forth or includes in its exhibits and
schedules, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, and we refer you to that omitted information. The
statements this prospectus makes pertaining to the content of any contract, agreement or other document that is an exhibit to
the registration statement necessarily are summaries of their material provisions, and we qualify them in their entirety by
reference to those exhibits for complete statements of their provisions. The registration statement and its exhibits and
schedules are available at the SEC’s public reference room or through its website.
Table of Contents
ii
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” the information that we file with it, which means that we can disclose
important information to you by referring you to other documents. The information we incorporate by reference is an important
part of this prospectus, and information that we file later with the SEC will automatically update and supersede that
information. Any information so updated or superseded will not be deemed, except as so updated or superseded, to be a part
of this prospectus. We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and any filings we make with the SEC under
Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) (excluding
information deemed to be furnished and not filed with the SEC) after the date of this prospectus. The documents we
incorporate by reference are:
Continental SEC filings (file no. 001-32886)
Annual Report on Form 10-K
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q
Current Report on Form 8-K
Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A
The description of our common stock set forth in the registration
statement on Form 8-A
Year ended December 31, 2015 filed on February 24, 2016
Period and/or date filed
Quarter ended March 31, 2016 filed on May 4, 2016 and
Quarter ended June 30, 2016 filed on August 3, 2016
Filed on May 24, 2016
Filed on April 7, 2016 (those parts incorporated by
reference in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2015)
Filed on May 19, 2006
We will provide without charge to each person, including any beneficial owner, to whom a copy of this prospectus has been
delivered, upon written or oral request, a copy of any or all of the documents we incorporate by reference in this prospectus,
other than any exhibit to any of those documents, unless we have specifically incorporated that exhibit by reference into the
information this prospectus incorporates. You may request copies by written or oral request by requesting them in writing or by
telephone at:
Table of Contents
Continental Resources, Inc.
20 N. Broadway
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73102
Telephone number: (405) 234-9000
iii
ABOUT US
We are an independent crude oil and natural gas company engaged in the exploration, development and production of crude
oil and natural gas. We derive the majority of our operating income and cash flows from the sale of crude oil and natural gas
and expect this to continue in the future. Our operations are primarily focused on exploration and development activities in the
Bakken field of North Dakota and Montana and the SCOOP, STACK, and Northwest Cana areas of Oklahoma. For additional
information about our business, operations and financial results, please read the documents listed under “Incorporation by
Reference.”
Our principal executive offices are located at 20 N. Broadway, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73102, and our telephone number at
that address is (405) 234-9000.
Table of Contents
1
RISK FACTORS
Investment in any securities offered pursuant to this prospectus and the applicable prospectus supplement involves risks. You
should carefully consider the risk factors incorporated by reference to our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with
the Securities and Exchange Commission and any subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q or Current Reports on Form
8-K we file after the date of this prospectus, and all other information contained or incorporated by reference into this
prospectus, as updated by our subsequent filings under the Exchange Act, and the risk factors and other information contained
in the applicable prospectus supplement before acquiring any of such securities. The occurrence of any of these risks might
cause you to lose all or part of your investment in the offered securities.
2
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The information in this prospectus, including information in documents incorporated by reference, includes “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
as amended (the “Exchange Act”). All statements, other than statements of historical fact included or incorporated by reference
in this prospectus, including, but not limited to, statements or information concerning our future operations, performance,
financial condition, production and reserves, schedules, plans, timing of development, rates of return, budgets, costs, business
strategy, objectives and cash flows are forward-looking statements. When used in this prospectus, the words “could,” “may,”
“believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “budget,” “plan,” “continue,” “potential,” “guidance,” “strategy” and
similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain
such identifying words. Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and assumptions about future
events and are based on currently available information as to the outcome and timing of future events. Although we believe the
expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable and based on reasonable assumptions, no assurance
can be given that such expectations will be correct or achieved or that the assumptions are accurate or will not change over
time. When considering forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary statements
described under the heading “Risk Factors” included in this prospectus, the risk factors and other cautionary statements
described under the heading “Risk Factors” of our most recent Form 10-K and subsequent Form 10-Qs, where applicable, all
of which are incorporated by reference in this prospectus.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, certain statements incorporated by reference or included in this prospectus
constitute forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements may include statements about:
•
our strategy;
•
our business and financial plans;
•
our future operations;
•
our crude oil and natural gas reserves and related development plans;
•
technology;
•
crude oil, natural gas liquids, and natural gas prices and differentials;
•
the timing and amount of future production of crude oil and natural gas and flaring activities;
•
the amount, nature and timing of capital expenditures;
•
estimated revenues, expenses and results of operations;
•
drilling and completing of wells;
•
competition;
•
marketing of crude oil and natural gas;
•
transportation of crude oil, natural gas liquids, and natural gas to markets;
•
property exploitation or property acquisitions and dispositions;
•
costs of exploiting and developing our properties and conducting other operations;
•
our financial position;
•
general economic conditions;
•
credit markets;
Table of Contents
3
•
our liquidity and access to capital;
•
the impact of governmental policies, laws and regulations, as well as regulatory and legal proceedings involving us
and of scheduled or potential regulatory or legal changes;
•
our future operating and financial results;
•
our commodity or other hedging arrangements; and
•
the ability and willingness of current or potential lenders, hedging contract counterparties, customers, and working
interest owners to fulfill their obligations to us or to enter into transactions with us in the future on terms that are
acceptable to us.
We caution you these forward-looking statements are subject to all of the risks and uncertainties, most of which are difficult to
predict and many of which are beyond our control, incident to the exploration for, and development, production, and sale of
crude oil and natural gas. These risks include, but are not limited to, commodity price volatility, inflation, lack of availability of
drilling, completion and production equipment and services, environmental risks, drilling and other operating risks, regulatory
changes, the uncertainty inherent in estimating crude oil and natural gas reserves and in projecting future rates of production,
cash flows and access to capital, the timing of development expenditures, and the other risks described under “Risk Factors”
of our most recent Form 10-K and subsequent Form 10-Qs, and other announcements, we make from time to time where
applicable.
Reserve engineering is a process of estimating underground accumulations of crude oil and natural gas that cannot be
measured in an exact way. The accuracy of any reserve estimate depends on the quality of available data, the interpretation of
such data, and price and cost assumptions made by reservoir engineers. In addition, the results of drilling, testing, and
production activities may justify revisions of estimates that were made previously. If significant, such revisions could change
the schedule of any further production and development drilling. Accordingly, reserve estimates may differ significantly from
the quantities of crude oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered.
Should one or more of the risks or uncertainties described or incorporated by reference in this prospectus occur, or should
underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results and plans could differ materially from those expressed in any
forward-looking statements.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. All
forward-looking statements, expressed or implied, included in this prospectus, or in the documents incorporated by reference
in this prospectus, are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. This cautionary statement should also
be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we or persons acting on our
behalf may issue.
Except as otherwise required by applicable law, we disclaim any duty to update any forward-looking statements, all of which
are expressly qualified by the statements in this section, to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this prospectus.
Please read “Where You Can Find More Information” and “Incorporation by Reference.”
Table of Contents
4
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless specified otherwise in the applicable prospectus supplement, we expect to use the net proceeds we receive from the
sale of the securities offered by this prospectus and any accompanying prospectus supplement for general corporate
purposes, which may include, among other things:
•
•
•
•
•
funding working capital requirements;
making capital expenditures;
repayment or refinancing of indebtedness;
repurchases and redemptions of securities; and
consummating acquisitions.
Any specific allocation of the net proceeds of an offering of securities to a specific purpose will be determined at the time of the
offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement. Pending any specific application, we may initially invest proceeds
in short-term marketable securities. We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of securities offered by any selling
security holder.
The following table sets forth our ratio of earnings to fixed charges for each of the periods indicated.
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
Year Ended December 31,
Six
Months Ended,
June 30,
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
2011      2012     2013     2014     2015
n/a(1)
10.0x
9.2x
6.2x
6.5x
2016
n/a(1)
(1) Earnings, as defined below, for the year ended December 31, 2015 and the six months ended June 30, 2016 were
insufficient to cover fixed charges by $535.1 million and $511.7 million, respectively.
For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, “earnings” consists of pretax income (loss) from continuing
operations plus fixed charges. “Fixed charges” represents interest incurred (whether expensed or capitalized) and amortization
of debt expense.
We had no preferred stock outstanding and there were no preferred stock dividends paid or accrued for any period presented
above, and accordingly, the ratio of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is the same as the ratio
of earnings to fixed charges.
Table of Contents
5
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
The following description, together with the additional information we include in any applicable prospectus supplement,
summarizes certain general terms and provisions of the debt securities that we may offer under this prospectus. When we offer
to sell a particular series of debt securities, we will describe the specific terms of the series in a supplement to this prospectus.
We will also indicate in the supplement to what extent the general terms and provisions described in this prospectus apply to a
particular series of debt securities.
We may issue debt securities either separately, or together with, or upon the conversion or exercise of or in exchange for, other
securities described in this prospectus. Debt securities may be our senior, senior subordinated or subordinated obligations
and, unless otherwise specified in a supplement to this prospectus, the debt securities will be our direct, unsecured obligations
and may be issued in one or more series.
The debt securities will be issued under an indenture between us and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee. We
have summarized select portions of the indenture below. The summary is not complete. The form of the indenture has been
incorporated by reference as an exhibit to the registration statement and you should read the indenture for provisions that may
be important to you. Capitalized terms used in the summary and not defined herein have the meanings specified in the
indenture.
As used in this section only, “Continental,” “we,” “our” or “us” refer to Continental Resources, Inc. excluding our subsidiaries,
unless expressly stated or the context otherwise requires.
General
The terms of each series of debt securities will be established by or pursuant to a resolution of our board of directors and/or
committee thereof and set forth or determined in the manner provided in a resolution of our board of directors and/or committee
thereof, in an officer’s certificate or by a supplemental indenture. The particular terms of each series of debt securities will be
described in a prospectus supplement relating to such series (including any pricing supplement or term sheet).
We can issue an unlimited amount of debt securities under the indenture that may be in one or more series with the same or
various maturities, at par, at a premium, or at a discount. We will set forth in a prospectus supplement (including any pricing
supplement or term sheet) relating to any series of debt securities being offered, the aggregate principal amount and the
following terms of the debt securities, if applicable:
•
the title and ranking of the debt securities (including the terms of any subordination provisions);
•
the price or prices (expressed as a percentage of the principal amount) at which we will sell the debt securities;
•
any limit on the aggregate principal amount of the debt securities;
•
the date or dates on which the principal of the securities of the series is payable;
•
•
•
the rate or rates (which may be fixed or variable) per annum or the method used to determine the rate or rates
(including any commodity, commodity index, stock exchange index or financial index) at which the debt securities
will bear interest, the date or dates from which interest will accrue, the date or dates on which interest will commence
and be payable and any regular record date for the interest payable on any interest payment date;
the place or places where principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the debt securities will be payable (and the
method of such payment), where the securities of such series may be surrendered for registration of transfer or
exchange, and where notices and demands to us in respect of the debt securities may be delivered;
the period or periods within which, the price or prices at which and the terms and conditions upon which we may
redeem the debt securities;
Table of Contents
6
•
•
•
any obligation we have to redeem or purchase the debt securities pursuant to any sinking fund or analogous
provisions or at the option of a holder of debt securities and the period or periods within which, the price or prices at
which and in the terms and conditions upon which securities of the series shall be redeemed or purchased, in whole
or in part, pursuant to such obligation;
the dates on which and the price or prices at which we will repurchase debt securities at the option of the holders of
debt securities and other detailed terms and provisions of these repurchase obligations;
the denominations in which the debt securities will be issued, if other than denominations of $1,000 and any integral
multiple thereof;
•
whether the debt securities will be issued in the form of certificated debt securities or global debt securities;
•
•
•
the portion of principal amount of the debt securities payable upon declaration of acceleration of the maturity date, if
other than the principal amount;
the currency of denomination of the debt securities, which may be U.S. Dollars or any foreign currency, and if such
currency of denomination is a composite currency, the agency or organization, if any, responsible for overseeing
such composite currency;
the designation of the currency, currencies or currency units in which payment of principal of, premium and interest
on the debt securities will be made;
•
•
if payments of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the debt securities will be made in one or more currencies
or currency units other than that or those in which the debt securities are denominated, the manner in which the
exchange rate with respect to these payments will be determined;
the manner in which the amounts of payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the debt securities will be
determined, if these amounts may be determined by reference to an index based on a currency or currencies other
than that in which the debt securities are denominated or designated to be payable or by reference to a commodity,
commodity index, stock exchange index or financial index;
•
any provisions relating to any security provided for the debt securities;
•
•
•
•
•
any addition to, deletion of or change in the Events of Default described in this prospectus or in the indenture with
respect to the debt securities and any change in the acceleration provisions described in this prospectus or in the
indenture with respect to the debt securities;
any addition to, deletion of, or change in the covenants described in this prospectus or in the indenture with respect
to the debt securities;
any depositaries, interest rate calculation agents, exchange rate calculation agents or other agents with respect to
the debt securities;
the provisions, if any, relating to conversion or exchange of any securities of such series, including if applicable, the
conversion or exchange price and period, provisions as to whether conversion or exchange will be mandatory, the
events requiring an adjustment of the conversion or exchange price and provisions affecting conversion or
exchange; and
any other terms of the debt securities, which may supplement, modify or delete any provision of the indenture as it
applies to that series, including any terms that may be required under applicable law or regulations or advisable in
connection with the marketing of the securities.
We may issue debt securities that provide for an amount less than their stated principal amount to be due and payable upon
declaration of acceleration of their maturity pursuant to the terms of the indenture. We will provide you with information on the
federal income tax considerations and other special considerations applicable to any of these debt securities in the applicable
prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
7
If we denominate the purchase price of any of the debt securities in a foreign currency or currencies or a foreign currency unit
or units, or if the principal of and any premium and interest on any series of debt securities is payable in a foreign currency or
currencies or a foreign currency unit or units, we will provide you with information on the restrictions, elections, general tax
considerations, specific terms and other information with respect to that issue of debt securities and such foreign currency or
currencies or foreign currency unit or units in the applicable prospectus supplement.
Transfer and Exchange
Each debt security will be represented by either one or more global securities registered in the name of The Depository Trust
Company (the “Depositary”) or a nominee of the Depositary (we will refer to any debt security represented by a global debt
security as a “book-entry debt security”), or a certificate issued in definitive registered form (we will refer to any debt security
represented by a certificated security as a “certificated debt security”) as set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement.
Except as set forth under the heading “Global Debt Securities and Book-Entry System” below, book-entry debt securities will
not be issuable in certificated form.
Certificated Debt Securities. You may transfer or exchange certificated debt securities at any office we maintain for this
purpose in accordance with the terms of the indenture. No service charge will be made for any transfer or exchange of
certificated debt securities, but we may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge
payable in connection with a transfer or exchange.
You may effect the transfer of certificated debt securities and the right to receive the principal of, premium, if any, and interest
on certificated debt securities only by surrendering the certificate representing those certificated debt securities and either
reissuance by us or the trustee of the certificate to the new holder or the issuance by us or the trustee of a new certificate to the
new holder.
Global Debt Securities and Book-Entry System. Each global debt security representing book-entry debt securities will be
deposited with, or on behalf of, the Depositary, and registered in the name of the Depositary or a nominee of the Depositary.
Please see “Global Securities.”
Covenants
We will set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement any restrictive covenants applicable to any issue of debt securities.
No Protection In the Event of a Change of Control
Unless we state otherwise in the applicable prospectus supplement, the debt securities will not contain any provisions which
may afford holders of the debt securities protection in the event we have a change in control or in the event of a highly
leveraged transaction (whether or not such transaction results in a change in control) which could adversely affect holders of
debt securities.
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets
We may not consolidate with or merge with or into, or convey, transfer or lease all or substantially all of our properties and
assets to any person (a “successor person”) unless:
•
•
we are the surviving corporation or the successor person (if other than Continental) is a corporation organized and
validly existing under the laws of any U.S. domestic jurisdiction and expressly assumes our obligations on the debt
securities and under the indenture; and
immediately after giving effect to the transaction, no Default or Event of Default, shall have occurred and be
continuing.
8
Table of Contents
Notwithstanding the above, any of our subsidiaries may consolidate with, merge into or transfer all or part of its properties to
us.
Events of Default
“Event of Default” means with respect to any series of debt securities, any of the following:
•
default in the payment of any interest upon any debt security of that series when it becomes due and payable, and
continuance of such default for a period of 30 days (unless the entire amount of the payment is deposited by us with
the trustee or with a paying agent prior to the expiration of the 30-day period);
•
default in the payment of principal of any security of that series at its maturity;
•
default in the performance or breach of any other covenant or warranty by us in the indenture (other than a covenant
or warranty that has been included in the indenture solely for the benefit of a series of debt securities other than that
series), which default continues uncured for a period of 60 days after we receive written notice from the trustee, or
Continental and the trustee, receive written notice from the holders of not less than 25% in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of that series as provided in the indenture;
•
certain voluntary or involuntary events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of Continental;
•
any other Event of Default provided with respect to debt securities of that series that is described in the applicable
prospectus supplement.
No Event of Default with respect to a particular series of debt securities (except as to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency
or reorganization) necessarily constitutes an Event of Default with respect to any other series of debt securities. The
occurrence of certain Events of Default or an acceleration under the indenture may constitute an event of default under certain
indebtedness of ours or our subsidiaries outstanding from time to time.
If an Event of Default with respect to debt securities of any series at the time outstanding occurs and is continuing, then the
trustee or the holders of not less than 25% in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series may, by a notice
in writing to us (and to the trustee if given by the holders), declare to be due and payable immediately the principal of (or, if the
debt securities of that series are discount securities, that portion of the principal amount as may be specified in the terms of that
series) and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all debt securities of that series. In the case of an Event of Default resulting
from certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization, the principal (or such specified amount) of and accrued and
unpaid interest, if any, on all outstanding debt securities will become and be immediately due and payable without any
declaration or other act on the part of the trustee or any holder of outstanding debt securities. At any time after a declaration of
acceleration with respect to debt securities of any series has been made, but before a judgment or decree for payment of the
money due has been obtained by the trustee, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of
that series may rescind and annul the acceleration if all Events of Default, other than the non-payment of accelerated principal
and interest, if any, with respect to debt securities of that series, have been cured or waived as provided in the indenture. We
refer you to the prospectus supplement relating to any series of debt securities that are discount securities for the particular
provisions relating to acceleration of a portion of the principal amount of such discount securities upon the occurrence of an
Event of Default.
The indenture provides that the trustee will be under no obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers under the indenture
unless the trustee receives indemnity satisfactory to it against any cost, liability or expense which might be incurred by it in
exercising such right of power. Subject to certain rights of the trustee, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of any series will have the right to direct the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding
for any remedy available to the trustee or exercising any trust or power conferred on the trustee with respect to the debt
securities of that series.
Table of Contents
9
No holder of any debt security of any series will have any right to institute any proceeding, judicial or otherwise, with respect to
the indenture or for the appointment of a receiver or trustee, or for any remedy under the indenture, unless:
•
•
that holder has previously given to the trustee written notice of a continuing Event of Default with respect to debt
securities of that series; and
the holders of not less than 25% in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series have made
written request to, and offered indemnity or security reasonably acceptable to, the trustee to institute the proceeding
as trustee, and the trustee has not received from the holders of not less than a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of that series a direction inconsistent with that request and has failed to institute the
proceeding within 60 days.
Notwithstanding any other provision in the indenture, the holder of any debt security will have an absolute and unconditional
right to receive payment of the principal of, premium and any interest on that debt security on or after the due dates expressed
in that debt security and to institute suit for the enforcement of payment.
The indenture requires us, within 90 days after the end of our fiscal year, to furnish to the trustee a statement as to compliance
with the indenture. If a Default or Event of Default occurs and is continuing with respect to the securities of any series and if it is
known to a responsible officer of the trustee, the trustee shall mail to each Securityholder of the securities of that series notice
of a Default or Event of Default within 90 days after it occurs. The indenture provides that the trustee may withhold notice to the
holders of debt securities of any series of any Default or Event of Default (except in payment on any debt securities of that
series) with respect to debt securities of that series if the trustee determines in good faith that withholding notice is in the
interest of the holders of those debt securities.
Modification and Waiver
We and the trustee may modify and amend the indenture or the debt securities of any series without the consent of any holder
of any debt security:
•
to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
•
to comply with covenants in the indenture described above under the heading “Consolidation, Merger and Sale of
Assets”;
•
to provide for uncertificated securities in addition to or in place of certificated securities;
•
to make any change that does not adversely affect the rights of any holder of debt securities;
•
•
•
to provide for the issuance of and establish the form and terms and conditions of debt securities of any series as
permitted by the indenture;
to effect the appointment of a successor trustee with respect to the debt securities of any series and to add to or
change any of the provisions of the indenture to provide for or facilitate administration by more than one trustee; or
to comply with requirements of the Commission in order to effect or maintain the qualification of the indenture under
the Trust Indenture Act.
We may also modify and amend the indenture with the consent of the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of each series affected by the modifications or amendments. We may not make any modification or
amendment without the consent of the holders of each affected debt security then outstanding if that amendment will:
•
reduce the amount of debt securities whose holders must consent to an amendment, supplement or waiver;
10
Table of Contents
•
reduce the rate of or extend the time for payment of interest (including default interest) on any debt security;
•
reduce the principal of or premium on or change the fixed maturity of any debt security or reduce the amount of, or
postpone the date fixed for, the payment of any sinking fund or analogous obligation with respect to any series of
debt securities;
•
reduce the principal amount of discount securities payable upon acceleration of maturity;
•
•
•
waive a default in the payment of the principal of, premium or interest on any debt security (except a rescission of
acceleration of the debt securities of any series by the holders of at least a majority in aggregate principal amount of
the then outstanding debt securities of that series and a waiver of the payment default that resulted from such
acceleration);
make the principal of or premium or interest on any debt security payable in currency other than that stated in the
debt security;
make any change to certain provisions of the indenture relating to, among other things, the right of holders of debt
securities to receive payment of the principal of, premium and interest on those debt securities and to institute suit for
the enforcement of any such payment and to waivers or amendments; or
•
waive a redemption payment with respect to any debt security.
Except for certain specified provisions, the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities
of any series may on behalf of the holders of all debt securities of that series waive our compliance with provisions of the
indenture. The holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series may on behalf of the
holders of all the debt securities of such series waive any past default under the indenture with respect to that series and its
consequences, except a default in the payment of the principal of, premium or any interest on any debt security of that series;
provided, however, that the holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series may
rescind an acceleration and its consequences, including any related payment default that resulted from the acceleration.
Defeasance of Debt Securities and Certain Covenants in Certain Circumstances
Legal Defeasance. The indenture provides that, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the applicable series of debt
securities, we may be discharged from any and all obligations in respect of the debt securities of any series (subject to certain
exceptions). We will be so discharged upon the deposit with the trustee, in trust, of money and/or U.S. government obligations
or, in the case of debt securities denominated in a single currency other than U.S. Dollars, government obligations of the
government that issued or caused to be issued such currency, that, through the payment of interest and principal in
accordance with their terms, will provide money in an amount sufficient in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of
independent public accountants or investment bank to pay and discharge each installment of principal, premium and interest
on and any mandatory sinking fund payments in respect of the debt securities of that series on the stated maturity of those
payments in accordance with the terms of the indenture and those debt securities.
This discharge may occur only if, among other things, we have delivered to the trustee an opinion of counsel stating that we
have received from, or there has been published by, the United States Internal Revenue Service a ruling or, since the date of
execution of the indenture, there has been a change in the applicable United States federal income tax law, in either case to
the effect that, and based thereon such opinion shall confirm that, the holders of the debt securities of that series will not
recognize income, gain or loss for United States federal income tax purposes as a result of the deposit, defeasance and
discharge and will be subject to United States federal income tax on the same amounts and in the same manner and at the
same times as would have been the case if the deposit, defeasance and discharge had not occurred.
Table of Contents
11
Defeasance of Certain Covenants. The indenture provides that, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the applicable
series of debt securities, upon compliance with certain conditions:
•
•
we may omit to comply with the covenant described under the heading “Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets”
and certain other covenants set forth in the indenture, as well as any additional covenants which may be set forth in
the applicable prospectus supplement; and
any omission to comply with those covenants will not constitute a Default or an Event of Default with respect to the
debt securities of that series (“covenant defeasance”).
The conditions include:
•
•
depositing with the trustee money and/or U.S. government obligations or, in the case of debt securities denominated
in a single currency other than U.S. Dollars, government obligations of the government that issued or caused to be
issued such currency, that, through the payment of interest and principal in accordance with their terms, will provide
money in an amount sufficient in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants or
investment bank to pay and discharge each installment of principal of, premium and interest on and any mandatory
sinking fund payments in respect of the debt securities of that series on the stated maturity of those payments in
accordance with the terms of the indenture and those debt securities; and
delivering to the trustee an opinion of counsel to the effect that the holders of the debt securities of that series will not
recognize income, gain or loss for United States federal income tax purposes as a result of the deposit and related
covenant defeasance and will be subject to United States federal income tax on the same amounts and in the same
manner and at the same times as would have been the case if the deposit and related covenant defeasance had not
occurred.
Covenant Defeasance and Events of Default. In the event we exercise our option to effect covenant defeasance with respect to
any series of debt securities and the debt securities of that series are declared due and payable because of the occurrence of
any Event of Default, the amount of money and/or U.S. government obligations or foreign government obligations on deposit
with the trustee will be sufficient to pay amounts due on the debt securities of that series at the time of their stated maturity but
may not be sufficient to pay amounts due on the debt securities of that series at the time of the acceleration resulting from the
Event of Default. However, we shall remain liable for those payments.
Governing Law
The indenture and the debt securities, including any claim or controversy arising out of or relating to the indenture or the
securities, will be governed by the laws of the State of New York (without regard to the conflicts of laws provisions thereof
other than Section 5-1401 of the General Obligations Law).
Table of Contents
12
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
As of the date of this prospectus, we are authorized to issue up to 1,000,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.01 par value per
share, and 25,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $0.01 par value per share.
Common Stock
As of June 30, 2016, we had 374,581,304 shares of common stock outstanding, all of which is voting common stock.
Holders of our common stock are entitled to one vote for each share held on all matters submitted to a vote of shareholders
and do not have cumulative voting rights. Accordingly, holders of a majority of the shares of our common stock entitled to vote
in any election of directors may elect all of the directors standing for election.
Holders of our common stock are entitled to receive proportionately any dividends if and when such dividends are declared by
our board of directors, subject to any preferential dividend rights of outstanding preferred stock. Upon the liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of us, the holders of our common stock are entitled to receive ratably our net assets available after
the payment of all debts and other liabilities and subject to the prior rights of any outstanding preferred stock. Holders of our
common stock have no preemptive, subscription, redemption or conversion rights. The rights, preferences and privileges of
holders of our common stock are subject to, and may be adversely affected by, the rights of the holders of shares of any series
of preferred stock that we may designate and issue in the future.
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CLR.”
Preferred Stock
Under the terms of our third amended and restated certificate of incorporation, as amended (our “amended and restated
certificate of incorporation”), our board of directors is authorized to designate and issue shares of preferred stock in one or
more series without shareholder approval. Our board of directors has discretion to determine the rights, preferences, privileges
and restrictions, including voting rights, dividend rights, conversion rights, redemption privileges and liquidation preferences,
of each series of preferred stock. It is not possible to state the actual effect of the issuance of any shares of preferred stock
upon the rights of holders of the common stock until the board of directors determines the specific rights of the holders of the
preferred stock. However, these effects might include:
•
•
•
•
restricting dividends on the common stock;
diluting the voting power of the common stock;
impairing the liquidation rights of the common stock; and
delaying or preventing a change in control of us.
Limitations on Liability and Indemnification of Officers and Directors
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that none of our directors shall be personally liable to us or our
shareholders for monetary damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a director, except liability for:
•
•
•
any breach of the director’s duty of loyalty to us or our shareholders;
acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
under Section 1053 of the Oklahoma General Corporation Act (the “OGCA”) regarding unlawful dividends and stock
purchases or redemptions; and
•
any transaction from which the director derived any improper personal benefit.
13
Table of Contents
This provision of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation eliminates our right and the rights of our shareholders to
recover monetary damages against a director for breach of the director’s fiduciary duty of care, including breaches resulting
from negligent or grossly negligent behavior, except in the situations described above. This provision does not limit or
eliminate our rights or the rights of any shareholder to seek non-monetary relief, such as an injunction or rescission in the
event of a breach of a director’s duty of care.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that we shall indemnify, to the fullest extent permitted by the
laws of the State of Oklahoma as from time to time in effect, our directors and officers, and may indemnify our employees and
agents, and all other persons we are authorized to indemnify under the provisions of the OGCA.
Our amended and restated bylaws also provide that we will indemnify officers and directors against losses that they may incur
in investigations and legal proceedings resulting from their services to us.
Our amended and restated bylaws also provide that:
•
•
we may indemnify our other employees and agents to the extent that we indemnify our officers and directors; and
we will be required to advance expenses, as incurred, to our directors and officers in connection with a legal
proceeding to the fullest extent permitted by law and, the indemnification and advancement of expenses, shall be
deemed to be contractual rights upon which the directors and officers are presumed to have relied in determining to
serve or to continue to serve in their capacity with us.
We also have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors and officers to give them additional
contractual assurances regarding the scope of the indemnification set forth in our amended and restated certificate of
incorporation and amended and restated bylaws and to provide additional procedural protections.
Anti-takeover Effects of Provisions of Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and Amended and
Restated Bylaws and of Oklahoma Law
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws contain the following additional
provisions, some of which are intended to enhance the likelihood of continuity and stability in the composition of our board of
directors and in the policies formulated by our board of directors. In addition, some provisions of the OGCA, if applicable to us,
may hinder or delay an attempted takeover without prior approval of our board of directors.
Provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws and of the OGCA could
discourage attempts to acquire us or remove incumbent management. These provisions could, therefore, prevent shareholders
from receiving a premium over the market price for the shares of common stock they hold.
Classified Board. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation divides our board of directors into three classes of
directors, with the classes to be as nearly equal in number as possible. As a result, approximately one-third of our board of
directors is elected each year. The classification of directors has the effect of making it more difficult for shareholders to
change the composition of our board. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws
also provide that the number of directors will be fixed from time to time exclusively pursuant to a resolution adopted by the
board.
Filling Board of Directors Vacancies; Removal. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that vacancies
and newly created directorships resulting from any increase in the authorized number of directors or any vacancies resulting
from death, resignation, retirement, disqualification, removal from office or other cause, may be filled by the affirmative vote of a
majority of our directors then in office, though less than a
Table of Contents
14
quorum. Each director will hold office until his or her successor is elected and qualified, or until the director’s earlier death,
resignation, retirement or removal from office. Any director may resign at any time upon written notice to us.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that, for so long as Harold G. Hamm, our Chairman, Chief
Executive Officer and principal shareholder, and his affiliates own 50% or more of our outstanding shares of common stock,
directors may be removed, with or without cause, by the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of our outstanding shares
of common stock. However, from and after the date on which Mr. Hamm and his affiliates cease to own 50% or more of our
outstanding shares of common stock, directors may be removed only for cause by the affirmative vote of the holders of a
majority of our outstanding shares of common stock.
Shareholder Action by Written Consent. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that, for so long as
Mr. Hamm and his affiliates own 50% or more of our outstanding shares of capital stock entitled to vote in the election of
directors, any action required or permitted to be taken by our shareholders may be taken at a duly called meeting of
shareholders or by the written consent of shareholders owning the minimum number of shares required to approve the action.
However, from and after the date on which Mr. Hamm and his affiliates cease to own 50% or more of our outstanding shares of
common stock, shareholders will not be permitted to act by written consent.
Call of Special Meetings. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws provide
that special meetings of our shareholders may be called at any time by the chairman of the board or by the board of directors
acting pursuant to a resolution adopted by the board.
Advance Notice Requirements for Shareholder Proposals and Director Nominations. Our amended and restated bylaws
provide that shareholders seeking to bring business before or to nominate candidates for election as directors at an annual
meeting of shareholders must provide timely notice of their proposal in writing to the corporate secretary. With respect to the
nomination of directors, to be timely, a shareholder’s notice must be delivered to or mailed and received at our principal
executive offices (i) with respect to an election of directors to be held at an annual meeting of shareholders, not less than 90
days nor more than 120 days prior to the one-year anniversary date of the preceding year’s annual meeting of the
shareholders of the company and (ii) with respect to an election of directors to be held at a special meeting of shareholders,
not earlier than the ninetieth day prior to such special meeting and not later than the close of business on the later of the
seventieth day prior to such special meeting or the tenth day following the day on which public announcement of the date of
the special meeting is first made. With respect to other business to be brought before an annual meeting of shareholders, to be
timely, a shareholder’s notice must be delivered to or mailed and received at our principal executive offices not less than 90
days nor more than 120 days prior to the one-year anniversary date of the preceding year’s annual meeting of the
shareholders of the company. Our amended and restated bylaws also specify requirements as to the form and content of a
shareholder’s notice. These provisions may preclude shareholders from bringing matters before an annual meeting of
shareholders or from making nominations for directors at an annual meeting of shareholders or may discourage or defer a
potential acquirer from conducting a solicitation of proxies to elect its own slate of directors or otherwise attempting to obtain
control of us.
No Cumulative Voting. Under cumulative voting, a minority shareholder holding a sufficient percentage of a class of shares
may be able to ensure the election of one or more directors. The OGCA provides that shareholders are not entitled to the right
to cumulate votes in the election of directors unless our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides otherwise.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation does not provide for cumulative voting.
Authorized but Unissued Shares. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that authorized but unissued
shares of common stock and preferred stock are available for future issuance without shareholder approval, subject to various
limitations imposed by the New York Stock Exchange. These additional shares may be utilized for a variety of corporate
purposes, including future public offerings to raise additional
Table of Contents
15
capital, corporate acquisitions and employee benefit plans. The existence of authorized but unissued shares of common stock
and preferred stock could make it more difficult or discourage an attempt to obtain control of our company by means of a proxy
contest, tender offer, merger or otherwise.
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and Amended and Restated Bylaws. Pursuant to the OGCA, our amended
and restated certificate of incorporation may not be repealed or amended, in whole or in part, without the approval of the
holders of at least a majority of the outstanding shares of our capital stock. In addition, after such time as Mr. Hamm and his
affiliates cease to own 50% or more of our outstanding shares of capital stock entitled to vote in the election of directors, the
provision of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation relating to the classification of our board of directors may not
be repealed or amended without the approval of the holders of at least 80% of the outstanding shares of our capital stock
entitled to vote in the election of directors.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation permits our board of directors to adopt, amend and repeal our bylaws.
Our amended and restated bylaws can be amended by either our board of directors or, as long as Mr. Hamm and his affiliates
own 50% or more of our outstanding shares of capital stock entitled to vote in the election of directors, the affirmative vote of
the holders of at least a majority of the outstanding shares of our capital stock entitled to vote in the election of directors.
Oklahoma Business Combination Statute. Under the terms of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and as
permitted under the OGCA, we have elected not to be subject to Section 1090.3 of the OGCA, Oklahoma’s anti-takeover law.
In general this section prevents an “interested shareholder” from engaging in a “business combination” with us for three years
following the date the person became an interested shareholder, unless:
•
•
•
prior to the date the person became an interested shareholder, our board of directors approved the transaction in
which the interested shareholder became an interested shareholder or approved the business combination;
upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the interested shareholder becoming an interested
shareholder, the interested shareholder owns stock having at least 85% of all voting power at the time the
transaction commenced, excluding stock held by our directors who are also officers and stock held by certain
employee stock plans; or
on or subsequent to the date of the transaction in which the person became an interested shareholder, the business
combination is approved by our board of directors and authorized at a meeting of shareholders by the affirmative
vote of the holders of two-thirds of all voting power not attributable to shares owned by the interested shareholder.
An “interested shareholder” is defined, generally, as any person that owns stock having 15% or more of all of our voting power,
any person that is an affiliate or associate of us and owned stock having 15% or more of all of our voting power at any time
within the three-year period prior to the time of determination of interested shareholder status, and any affiliate or associate of
such person.
A “business combination” generally includes:
•
•
•
•
any merger or consolidation involving us and an interested shareholder;
any sale, lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge, transfer or other disposition to or with an interested shareholder of
10% or more of our assets;
subject to certain exceptions, any transaction that results in the issuance or transfer by us of any of our stock to an
interested shareholder;
any transaction involving us that has the effect of increasing the proportionate share of the stock of any class or
series or voting power owned by the interested shareholder;
Table of Contents
16
•
the receipt by an interested shareholder of any loans, guarantees, pledges or other financial benefits provided by or
through us; or
•
any share acquisition by the interested shareholder pursuant to Section 1090.1 of the OGCA.
Because we opted out of Section 1090.3 of the OGCA, any interested shareholder can pursue a business combination
transaction that is not approved by our board of directors.
Oklahoma Control Share Statute. Under the terms of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and as permitted
under the OGCA, we have elected not to be subject to Sections 1145 through 1155 of the OGCA, Oklahoma’s control share
acquisition statute. In general, Section 1145 of the OGCA defines “control shares” as our issued and outstanding shares that,
in the absence of the Oklahoma control share statute, would have voting power, when added to all of our other shares that are
owned, directly or beneficially, by an acquiring person or over which the acquiring person has the ability to exercise voting
power, that would entitle the acquiring person, immediately after the acquisition of the shares to exercise, or direct the exercise
of, such voting power in the election of directors within any of the following ranges of voting power:
•
•
•
one-fifth (1/5) or more but less than one-third (1/3) of all voting power;
one-third (1/3) or more but less than a majority of all voting power; or
a majority of all voting power.
A “control share acquisition” means the acquisition by any person of ownership of, or the power to direct the exercise of voting
power with respect to, “control shares.” After a control share acquisition occurs, the acquiring person is subject to limitations on
the ability to vote such control shares. Specifically, Section 1149 of the OGCA provides that under most control share
acquisition scenarios, “the voting power of control shares having voting power of one-fifth (1/5) or more of all voting power is
reduced to zero unless the shareholders of the issuing public corporation approve a resolution…according the shares the
same voting rights as they had before they became control shares.” Section 1153 of the OGCA provides the procedures for
obtaining shareholder consent of a resolution of an “acquiring person” to determine the voting rights to be accorded the shares
acquired or to be acquired in the control share acquisition.
Because we opted out of Sections 1145 through 1155 of the OGCA, any shareholder holding control shares has the right to
vote his or its shares in full in the election of directors.
Registration Rights
In connection with our initial public offering, we entered into a registration rights agreement with a trust controlled by our
principal shareholder and the two trusts established for the benefit of Mr. Hamm’s children covering all of the shares of
common stock owned by our principal shareholder and such trusts. In September 2015, the trusts mentioned in the previous
sentence transferred the securities subject to this registration rights agreement to the Harold Hamm Family LLC (the “Hamm
LLC”). We have also entered into a registration rights agreement with a trust controlled by our principal shareholder and our
current Vice Chairman of Strategic Growth Initiatives covering all the shares of common stock issued by us to such holders of
our common stock in connection with our acquisition in 2012 of certain crude oil and natural gas properties of Wheatland Oil
Inc. In September 2015, the trust mentioned in the prior sentence transferred the securities subject to this registration rights
agreement to the Hamm LLC.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our common stock is American Stock Transfer & Trust Company.
Table of Contents
Book-Entry, Delivery and Form
17
GLOBAL SECURITIES
Unless we indicate differently in a prospectus supplement, the securities initially will be issued in book-entry form and
represented by one or more global notes or global securities, or, collectively, global securities. The global securities will be
deposited with, or on behalf of, The Depository Trust Company, New York, New York, as depositary, or DTC, and registered in
the name of Cede & Co., the nominee of DTC. Unless and until it is exchanged for individual certificates evidencing securities
under the limited circumstances described below, a global security may not be transferred except as a whole by the depositary
to its nominee or by the nominee to the depositary, or by the depositary or its nominee to a successor depositary or to a
nominee of the successor depositary.
DTC has advised us that it is:
•
•
•
•
•
a limited-purpose trust company organized under the New York Banking Law;
a “banking organization” within the meaning of the New York Banking Law;
a member of the Federal Reserve System;
a “clearing corporation” within the meaning of the New York Uniform Commercial Code; and
a “clearing agency” registered pursuant to the provisions of Section 17A of the Exchange Act.
DTC holds securities that its participants deposit with DTC. DTC also facilitates the settlement among its participants of
securities transactions, such as transfers and pledges, in deposited securities through electronic computerized book-entry
changes in participants’ accounts, thereby eliminating the need for physical movement of securities certificates. “Direct
participants” in DTC include securities brokers and dealers, including underwriters, banks, trust companies, clearing
corporations and other organizations. DTC is a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation, or
DTCC. DTCC is the holding company for DTC, National Securities Clearing Corporation and Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation, all of which are registered clearing agencies. DTCC is owned by the users of its regulated subsidiaries. Access
to the DTC system is also available to others, which we sometimes refer to as indirect participants, that clear through or
maintain a custodial relationship with a direct participant, either directly or indirectly. The rules applicable to DTC and its
participants are on file with the SEC.
Purchases of securities under the DTC system must be made by or through direct participants, which will receive a credit for
the securities on DTC’s records. The ownership interest of the actual purchaser of a security, which we sometimes refer to as a
beneficial owner, is in turn recorded on the direct and indirect participants’ records. Beneficial owners of securities will not
receive written confirmation from DTC of their purchases. However, beneficial owners are expected to receive written
confirmations providing details of their transactions, as well as periodic statements of their holdings, from the direct or indirect
participants through which they purchased securities. Transfers of ownership interests in global securities are to be
accomplished by entries made on the books of participants acting on behalf of beneficial owners. Beneficial owners will not
receive certificates representing their ownership interests in the global securities, except under the limited circumstances
described below.
To facilitate subsequent transfers, all global securities deposited by direct participants with DTC will be registered in the name
of DTC’s partnership nominee, Cede & Co., or such other name as may be requested by an authorized representative of DTC.
The deposit of securities with DTC and their registration in the name of Cede & Co. or such other nominee will not change the
beneficial ownership of the securities. DTC has no knowledge of the actual beneficial owners of the securities. DTC’s records
reflect only the identity of the direct participants to whose accounts the securities are credited, which may or may not be the
beneficial owners. The participants are responsible for keeping account of their holdings on behalf of their customers.
Table of Contents
18
So long as the securities are in book-entry form, you will receive payments and may transfer securities only through the
facilities of the depositary and its direct and indirect participants. We will maintain an office or agency in the location specified
in the prospectus supplement for the applicable securities, where notices and demands in respect of the securities and the
indenture may be delivered to us and where certificated securities may be surrendered for payment, registration of transfer or
exchange.
Conveyance of notices and other communications by DTC to direct participants, by direct participants to indirect participants
and by direct participants and indirect participants to beneficial owners will be governed by arrangements among them,
subject to any legal requirements in effect from time to time.
Redemption notices will be sent to DTC. If less than all of the securities of a particular series are being redeemed, DTC’s
practice is to determine by lot the amount of the interest of each direct participant in the securities of such series to be
redeemed.
Neither DTC nor Cede & Co. (or such other DTC nominee) will consent or vote with respect to the securities. Under its usual
procedures, DTC will mail an omnibus proxy to us as soon as possible after the record date. The omnibus proxy assigns the
consenting or voting rights of Cede & Co. to those direct participants to whose accounts the securities of such series are
credited on the record date, identified in a listing attached to the omnibus proxy.
So long as securities are in book-entry form, we will make payments on those securities to the depositary or its nominee, as
the registered owner of such securities, by wire transfer of immediately available funds. If securities are issued in definitive
certificated form under the limited circumstances described below, we will have the option of making payments by check
mailed to the addresses of the persons entitled to payment or by wire transfer to bank accounts in the United States
designated in writing to the applicable trustee or other designated party at least 15 days before the applicable payment date by
the persons entitled to payment.
Redemption proceeds, distributions and dividend payments on the securities will be made to Cede & Co., or such other
nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of DTC. DTC’s practice is to credit direct participants’ accounts
upon DTC’s receipt of funds and corresponding detail information from us on the payment date in accordance with their
respective holdings shown on DTC records. Payments by participants to beneficial owners will be governed by standing
instructions and customary practices, as is the case with securities held for the account of customers in bearer form or
registered in “street name.” Those payments will be the responsibility of participants and not of DTC, the trustee or us, subject
to any statutory or regulatory requirements in effect from time to time. Payment of redemption proceeds, distributions and
dividend payments to Cede & Co., or such other nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of DTC, is our
responsibility, disbursement of payments to direct participants is the responsibility of DTC, and disbursement of payments to
the beneficial owners is the responsibility of direct and indirect participants.
Except under the limited circumstances described below, purchasers of securities will not be entitled to have securities
registered in their names and will not receive physical delivery of securities. Accordingly, each beneficial owner must rely on
the procedures of DTC and its participants to exercise any rights under the securities and the indenture.
The laws of some jurisdictions may require that some purchasers of securities take physical delivery of securities in definitive
form. Those laws may impair the ability to transfer or pledge beneficial interests in securities.
DTC may discontinue providing its services as securities depository with respect to the securities at any time by giving
reasonable notice to us. Under such circumstances, in the event that a successor depository is not obtained, securities
certificates are required to be printed and delivered.
Table of Contents
19
As noted above, beneficial owners of a particular series of securities generally will not receive certificates representing their
ownership interests in those securities. However, if:
•
DTC notifies us that it is unwilling or unable to continue as a depositary for the global security or securities
representing such series of securities or if DTC ceases to be a clearing agency registered under the Exchange Act at
a time when it is required to be registered and a successor depositary is not appointed within 90 days of the
notification to us or of our becoming aware of DTC’s ceasing to be so registered, as the case may be;
•
we determine, in our sole discretion, not to have such securities represented by one or more global securities; or
•
an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing with respect to such series of securities,
we will prepare and deliver certificates for such securities in exchange for beneficial interests in the global securities. Any
beneficial interest in a global security that is exchangeable under the circumstances described in the preceding sentence will
be exchangeable for securities in definitive certificated form registered in the names that the depositary directs. It is expected
that these directions will be based upon directions received by the depositary from its participants with respect to ownership of
beneficial interests in the global securities.
We have obtained the information in this section and elsewhere in this prospectus concerning DTC and DTC’s book-entry
system from sources that are believed to be reliable, but we take no responsibility for the accuracy of this information.
Table of Contents
20
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We and/or any selling security holder may sell the offered securities in and outside the United States (1) through underwriters
or dealers, (2) directly to purchasers, (3) through agents or (4) a combination of any of these methods. The prospectus
supplement will set forth the following information:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the terms of the offering;
the names of any underwriters or agents;
the name or names of any managing underwriter or underwriters;
the purchase price of the securities from us;
the net proceeds we will receive from the sale of the securities;
any delayed delivery arrangements;
any underwriting discounts, commissions and other items constituting underwriters’ compensation;
the initial public offering price;
any discounts or concessions allowed or reallowed or paid to dealers; and
any commissions paid to agents.
Sale Through Underwriters or Dealers
If we and/or any selling security holder use underwriters in the sale of the offered securities, the underwriters will acquire the
securities for their own account. The underwriters may resell the securities from time to time in one or more transactions,
including negotiated transactions, at a fixed public offering price or at varying prices determined at the time of sale.
Underwriters may offer securities to the public either through underwriting syndicates represented by one or more managing
underwriters or directly by one or more firms acting as underwriters. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus
supplement, the obligations of the underwriters to purchase the securities will be subject to certain conditions, and the
underwriters will be obligated to purchase all the offered securities if they purchase any of them. The underwriters may sell
securities to or through dealers, and the dealers may receive compensation in the form of discounts, concessions or
commissions from the underwriters and/or commissions from the purchasers for whom they may act as agent. The
underwriters may change from time to time the public offering price and any discounts, concessions or commissions allowed
or reallowed or paid to dealers.
During and after an offering through underwriters, the underwriters may purchase and sell the securities in the open market.
These transactions may include overallotment and stabilizing transactions and purchases to cover syndicate short positions
created in connection with the offering. The underwriters may also impose a penalty bid, which means that selling
concessions allowed to syndicate members or other broker-dealers for the offered securities sold for their account may be
reclaimed by the syndicate if the offered securities are repurchased by the syndicate in stabilizing or covering transactions.
These activities may stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the market price of the offered securities, which may be higher than
the price that might otherwise prevail in the open market. If commenced, these activities may be discontinued at any time.
If we and/or any selling security holder use dealers in the sale of securities, we and/or any selling security holder may sell the
securities to them as principals. They may then resell those securities to the public at varying prices determined by the dealers
at the time of resale. The dealers participating in any sale of the securities may be deemed to be underwriters within the
meaning of the Securities Act with respect to any sale of these securities. We will include in the prospectus supplement the
names of the dealers and the terms of the transaction.
21
Table of Contents
Direct Sales and Sales Through Agents
We and/or any selling security holder may sell the securities directly. In that event, no underwriters or agents would be
involved. We and/or any selling security holder may also sell the securities through agents we designate from time to time. In
addition, we and/or any selling security holder may offer securities through at-the-market transactions. In the prospectus
supplement, we will name any agent involved in the offer or sale of the offered securities, and we will describe any
commissions payable by us to the agent. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement, any agent will agree
to use its reasonable best efforts to solicit purchases for the period of its appointment.
We and/or any selling security holder may sell the securities directly to institutional investors or others who may be deemed to
be underwriters within the meaning of the Securities Act with respect to any sale of those securities. We will describe the terms
of any such sales in the prospectus supplement.
Delayed Delivery Contracts
If we and/or any selling security holder so indicate in the prospectus supplement, we and/or any selling security holder may
authorize agents, underwriters or dealers to solicit offers from selected types of institutions to purchase securities from us
and/or any selling security holder at the public offering price under delayed delivery contracts. These contracts would provide
for payment and delivery on a specified date in the future. The contracts would be subject only to those conditions described in
the prospectus supplement. The prospectus supplement will describe the commission payable for solicitation of those
contracts.
General Information
We and/or any selling security holder may have agreements with firms, agents, dealers and underwriters to indemnify them
against civil liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act, or to contribute with respect to payments that the firms,
agents, dealers or underwriters may be required to make. Such firms, agents, dealers and underwriters may be customers of,
engage in transactions with or perform services for us and/or any selling security holder in the ordinary course of their
businesses.
Each series of offered securities will be a new issue, and other than our common stock, which is listed on the New York Stock
Exchange, will have no established trading market. We may elect to list any series of offered securities on an exchange, but
we are not obligated to do so. It is possible that one or more underwriters may make a market in a series of offered securities.
However, they will not be obligated to do so and may discontinue market making at any time without notice. We cannot assure
you that a liquid trading market for any of our offered securities will develop.
Table of Contents
22
LEGAL MATTERS
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, the validity of the securities offered under this prospectus
will be passed upon for us by Conner & Winters, LLP, Tulsa, Oklahoma. Certain other legal matters will be passed upon for us
by Vinson & Elkins L.L.P., Houston, Texas. Additional legal matters may be passed upon for us, or any underwriters, dealers
or agents, by counsel we will name in the applicable prospectus supplement.
EXPERTS
The audited consolidated financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting incorporated by reference in this prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement have been so
incorporated by reference in reliance upon the reports of Grant Thornton LLP, independent registered public accountants,
upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
Estimates of the crude oil and natural gas reserves of Continental Resources, Inc. and related future net cash flows and the
present values thereof as of December 31, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 incorporated by reference in this prospectus
were based in part upon reserve reports prepared by Ryder Scott Company, L.P., independent petroleum engineers. We have
incorporated these estimates in reliance on the authority of such firm as an expert in such matters.
Table of Contents
23
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
ITEM 14. OTHER EXPENSES OF ISSUANCE AND DISTRIBUTION
The expenses of this offering (all of which are to be paid by the registrant) are estimated to be as follows:
*
**
Securities and Exchange Commission registration fee
Legal fees and expenses
Accounting fees and expenses
Trustee fees and expenses
Printing expenses
Miscellaneous
Total
*  
$
**  
 
**  
 
**  
 
**  
 
 
**  
$            **
In accordance with Rules 456(b) and 457(r) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the registrant is deferring payment
of all of the registration fee.
These fees are calculated based on the number of issuances and amount of securities offered and accordingly cannot be
estimated at this time.
ITEM 15.
INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
Continental Resources, Inc. (“Continental”) is incorporated in Oklahoma. Section 1031 of the Oklahoma General Corporation
Act (the “OGCA”) authorizes a court to award, or a corporation’s board of directors to grant, indemnity under certain
circumstances to directors, officers, employees or agents in connection with actions, suits or proceedings, by reason of the fact
that the person is or was a director, officer, employee or agent, against expenses and liabilities incurred in such actions, suits
or proceedings so long as they acted in good faith and in a manner the person reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to,
the best interests of Continental, and with respect to any criminal action if they had no reasonable cause to believe their
conduct was unlawful. With respect to suits by or in the right of such corporation, however, indemnification is generally limited
to attorneys’ fees and other expenses and is not available if such person is adjudged to be liable to such corporation unless
the court determines that indemnification is appropriate.
As permitted by the OGCA, Continental’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation includes a provision that
eliminates the personal liability of its directors to Continental or its shareholders for monetary damages for breach of fiduciary
duty as a director, except for liability:
•
•
•
•
for any breach of the director’s duty of loyalty to it or its shareholders;
for acts or omissions not in good faith or that involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
under section 1053 of the OGCA regarding unlawful dividends and stock purchases or redemptions; or
for any transaction for which the director derived an improper personal benefit.
As permitted by the OGCA, Continental’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that Continental is
required to indemnify its directors and officers to the fullest extent permitted by the OGCA.
As permitted by Oklahoma law, Continental’s amended and restated bylaws provide that:
•
•
Continental may indemnify its other employees and agents;
Continental is required to advance expenses (including without limitation, attorneys’ fees), as incurred, to its
directors and officers in connection with a legal proceeding, subject to very limited exceptions; and
II-1
Table of Contents
•
the rights conferred in Continental’s amended and restated bylaws are not exclusive, and shall be deemed, with
respect to indemnification and advancement of expenses, contractual rights upon which the directors and officers are
presumed to have relied in determining to serve or to continue to serve in their capacity with us.
The indemnification provisions in Continental’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation may be sufficiently broad to
permit indemnification of its directors and officers for liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
Under Oklahoma law, corporations also have the power to purchase and maintain insurance for directors, officers, employees
and agents. Continental maintains liability insurance policies which indemnify its directors and officers against loss arising
from claims by reason of their legal liability for acts as such directors and officers, subject to limitations and conditions as set
forth in the policies.
Continental has entered into written indemnification agreements with each of its directors and officers. These indemnification
agreements are intended to permit indemnification to the fullest extent permitted by the OGCA. It is possible that the applicable
law could change the degree to which indemnification is expressly permitted.
The indemnification agreements cover expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement
incurred as a result of the fact that such person, in his or her capacity as a director or officer, is made, or threatened to be
made, a party to any suit or proceeding. The indemnification agreements generally cover claims relating to the fact that the
indemnified party is or was an officer, director, employee or agent of Continental or any of its affiliates, or is or was serving at
Continental’s request in such a position for another entity. The indemnification agreements also obligate Continental to
promptly advance all reasonable expenses incurred in connection with any claim. The indemnitee is, in turn, obligated to
reimburse Continental for all amounts so advanced if it is later determined that the indemnitee is not entitled to indemnification.
The indemnification provided under the indemnification agreements is not exclusive of any other indemnity rights; however,
double payment to the indemnitee is prohibited.
Continental will not be obligated to indemnify the indemnitee with respect to claims brought by the indemnitee against it
without prior approval of a majority of Continental’s board of directors, except for claims brought by the Indemnitee to enforce
his or her rights under the indemnification agreement.
The foregoing discussion of Continental’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated
bylaws and Oklahoma law is not intended to be exhaustive and is qualified in its entirety by such certificate of incorporation,
bylaws or law.
ITEM 16.
EXHIBITS
Exhibit
Number  
1.1**
  
4.1
4.2
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number  
  4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
Description
Form of Underwriting Agreement.
Conformed version of Third Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Continental Resources,
Inc. as amended by amendment filed on June 15, 2015 filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (Commission File No. 001-32886) filed August 5, 2015 and
incorporated herein by reference.
Third Amended and Restated By-laws of Continental Resources, Inc. filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K (Commission File No. 001-32886) filed November 6, 2012 and
incorporated herein by reference.
II-2
Description
Registration Rights Agreement dated as of May 18, 2007 among Continental Resources, Inc., the Revocable
Inter Vivos Trust of Harold G. Hamm, the Harold Hamm DST Trust and the Harold Hamm HJ Trust, filed
February 24, 2012 as Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s 2011 Form 10-K (Commission File No. 001-32886) and
incorporated herein by reference.
Registration Rights Agreement dated as of August 13, 2012 among Continental Resources, Inc., the
Revocable Inter Vivos Trust of Harold G. Hamm, and Jeffrey B. Hume filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K (Commission File No. 001-32886) filed August 17, 2012 and incorporated herein
by reference.
Specimen Common Stock Certificate filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Registration Statement on Form
S-1 (Commission File No. 333-132257) filed April 14, 2006 and incorporated herein by reference.
Form of Indenture, filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the Company’s Registration Statement on Form S-3ASR
(Commission File No. 333-190015) filed July 18, 2013 and incorporated herein by reference.
Indenture dated as of April 5, 2010 among Continental Resources, Inc., Banner Pipeline Company, L.L.C.
and Wilmington Trust FSB, as trustee, filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
(Commission File No. 001-32886) filed February 24, 2016 and incorporated herein by reference.
Indenture dated as of September 16, 2010 among Continental Resources, Inc., Banner Pipeline Company,
L.L.C. and Wilmington Trust FSB, as trustee, filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form
10-K (Commission File No. 001-32886) filed February 24, 2016 and incorporated herein by reference.
Indenture dated as of March 8, 2012 among Continental Resources, Inc., Banner Pipeline Company, L.L.C.
and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K (Commission File No. 001-32886) filed March 8, 2012 and incorporated herein by reference.
Indenture dated as of April 5, 2013 among Continental Resources, Inc., Banner Pipeline Company, L.L.C.,
CLR Asset Holdings, LLC and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K (Commission File No. 001-32866) filed April 11, 2013 and
incorporated herein by reference.
Indenture dated as of May 19, 2014 among Continental Resources, Inc., Banner Pipeline Company, L.L.C.,
CLR Asset Holdings, LLC and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee, filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K (Commission File No. 001-32886) filed May 22, 2014 and
incorporated herein by reference.
Opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.
Opinion of Conner & Winters, LLP.
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
Consent of Grant Thornton LLP.
Consent of Ryder Scott Company, L.P.
Consent of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. (included in Exhibit 5.1).
Consent of Conner & Winters, LLP (included in Exhibit 5.2).
Powers of Attorney (included on the signature pages of the Registration Statement).
Statement of Eligibility of the Trustee under the Senior Indenture on Form T-1.
II-3
5.1*
  5.2*
12.1*
23.1*
23.2*
23.3*
23.4*
24.1*
25.1*
Table of Contents
Filed herewith.
*
** Continental will file as an exhibit to a current report on Form 8-K (i) any underwriting agreement relating to securities
offered hereby, (ii) the instruments setting forth the terms of any debt securities or preferred stock, (iii) any additional
required opinion of counsel to Continental as to the legality of the securities offered hereby, (iv) any required opinion of
counsel to Continental as to certain tax matters relative to securities offered hereby or (v) any additional Statement of
Eligibility and Qualification under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 of the applicable trustee under the Senior Indenture.
ITEM 17.
UNDERTAKINGS
(a) Each undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the most
recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the
information set forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of
securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation
from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the
Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20 percent
change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective
registration statement; and
(iii) To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in the registration
statement or any material change to such information in the registration statement;
provided , however, that paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii) and (a)(1)(iii) of this section do not apply if the information required to be
included in a post-effective amendment by those paragraphs is contained in reports filed with or furnished to the Commission
by the registrant pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that are incorporated by
reference in the registration statement, or is contained in a form of prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) that is part of the
registration statement.
(2) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective amendment
shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities
at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which remain
unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4) That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser:
(i) Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be deemed to be part of the registration statement as
of the date the filed prospectus was deemed part of and included in the registration statement; and
(ii) Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5) or (b)(7) as part of a registration statement in reliance
on Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to Rule 415(a)(1)(i), (vii) or (x) for the purpose of providing the information
required by Section 10(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement
as of the earlier of the date such form of prospectus is first used after effectiveness or the date of the first contract of sale of
securities in the offering described in the prospectus. As provided in Rule 430B, for
Table of Contents
II-4
liability purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an underwriter, such date shall be deemed to be a new
effective date of the registration statement relating to the securities in the registration statement to which the prospectus
relates, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof. Provided,
however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a
document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the
registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such effective date, supersede or modify any
statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any
such document immediately before such effective date.
(5) That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial
distribution of the securities, the undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned
registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the
purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the
undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i) Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant
to Rule 424;
(ii) Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or referred
to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii) The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the
undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and
(iv) Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(b) The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of
1933, each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that
is incorporated by reference in the registration statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering
thereof.
(c) Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers and
controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in
the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than
the payment by either registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the
successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection
with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by
controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against
public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
(d) The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to file an application for the purpose of determining the eligibility of the
trustee to act under subsection (a) of Section 310 of the Trust Indenture Act in accordance with the rules and regulations
prescribed by the Commission under Section 305(b)(2) of the Trust Indenture Act.
Table of Contents
II-5
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, each of the registrants certifies that it has reasonable grounds to
believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has duly caused this registration statement to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Oklahoma City, State of Oklahoma, on August 9,
2016.
CONTINENTAL RESOURCES, INC.
By:
/S/ JOHN D. HART
John D. Hart
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer and Treasurer
BANNER PIPELINE COMPANY, L.L.C.
By:
/S/ JOHN D. HART
John D. Hart
Manager
CLR ASSET HOLDINGS, LLC
By:
Continental Resources, Inc., its Member and
Manager
By:
/S/ JOHN D. HART
John D. Hart
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer and Treasurer
THE MINERAL RESOURCES COMPANY
By:
/S/ JOHN D. HART
John D. Hart
Vice President
Table of Contents
II-6
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints John D. Hart and Eric S. Eissenstat, and each of them,
severally, as his true and lawful attorney or attorneys-in-fact and agent or agents, each of whom shall be authorized to act with
or without the other, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place and stead in his capacity
as a director of the registrant named below, to sign any and all amendments (including post-effective amendments) to this
registration statement, and any subsequent registration statement filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of
1933, as amended, and all documents or instruments necessary or appropriate to enable such registrant to comply with the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same with the Securities and Exchange Commission, with full power and
authority to each of said attorneys-in-fact and agents to do and perform in the name and on behalf of each such director, each
and every act whatsoever that is necessary, appropriate or advisable in connection with any or all of the above-described
matters and to all intents and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorneys-in-fact and agents or any of them or their substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement on Form S-3 has been signed by the
following persons in the capacities indicated below on August 9, 2016.
Continental Resources, Inc.
Signature
Title
/S/ HAROLD G. HAMM
Chief Executive Officer, Chairman of the Board and Director
Harold G. Hamm
/S/ JOHN D. HART
John D. Hart
/S/ WILLIAM B. BERRY
William B. Berry
/S/ DAVID L. BOREN
David L. Boren
/S/ LON MCCAIN
Lon McCain
/S/ JOHN T. MCNABB, II
John T. McNabb, II
/S/ / MARK E. MONROE
Mark E. Monroe
(principal executive officer)
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Treasurer
(principal financial and accounting officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
II-7