
S-4 1 d755134ds4.htm S-4 S-4
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 6, 2014
Registration No. 333-
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
WESTMORELAND COAL COMPANY
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or Other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization)
1221
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
23-1128670
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
(FOR CO-REGISTRANTS, PLEASE SEE “TABLE OF CO-REGISTRANTS”
ON THE FOLLOWING PAGE)
9540 South Maroon Circle, Suite 200
Englewood, Colorado 80112
Telephone: (303) 922-6463
(Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Registrant’s Principal
Executive Offices)
Jennifer S. Grafton
General Counsel and Secretary
Westmoreland Coal Company
9540 South Maroon Circle, Suite 200
Englewood, Colorado 80112
Telephone: (303) 922-6463
(Name, Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Agent for Service)
With a copy to:
Amy L. Bowler, P.C.
Holland & Hart LLP
6380 South Fiddlers Green Circle, Suite 500
Greenwood Village, CO 80111
Phone (303) 290-1600
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after the effective
date of this Registration Statement.
If the securities being registered on this Form are being offered in connection with the formation of a holding company
and there is compliance with General Instruction G, check the following box.  ¨
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration number of the earlier effective registration statement for
the same offering.  ¨
If this Form is a post effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following
box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same
offering.  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer,
or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer  ¨
Non-accelerated filer   ¨  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Accelerated filer
  x
  Smaller reporting company  ¨
If applicable, place an X in the box to designate the appropriate rule provision relied upon in conducting this
transaction:
Exchange Act Rule 13e-4(i) (Cross-Border Issuer Tender Offer)  ¨
Exchange Act Rule 14d-1(d) (Cross-Border Third-Party Tender Offer)  ¨
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of
Securities to be Registered
Proposed
Proposed
Maximum
Offering Price
Maximum
Aggregate
Amount
to be
Registered  
 
  $425,000,000
NA
per Note
Offering Price(1) 
 
  $425,000,000
NA
Amount of
Registration Fee
10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
Guarantees(2)(3)
 
 
(1) Estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee in accordance with Rule 457(f) under the
100%
NA
NA
$54,740
Securities Act of 1933.
(2) The guarantors are each of the subsidiaries of Westmoreland Coal Company that have guaranteed the notes
being registered. Those subsidiaries are identified below in the “Table of Co-Registrants.”
(3) No separate consideration will be received for the guarantees, and no separate fee is payable pursuant to
Rule 457(n) under the Securities Act of 1933.
The Registrant hereby amends this registration statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay
its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this
registration statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of
1933 or until this registration statement shall become effective on such date as the Commission, acting
pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CO-REGISTRANTS
Primary Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code No.
Exact Name of Co-Registrant as Specified in its Charter  
   
Coal Valley Resources Inc.
Dakota Westmoreland Corporation
   
   
Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership
   
Prairie Coal Ltd.
Prairie Mines and Royalty ULC
   
   
Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
   
WCC Holding B.V.
   
WCC Land Holding Company, Inc.
WEI—Roanoke Valley, Inc.
   
   
Western Energy Company
   
Westmoreland Canada LLC
   
Westmoreland Canada Holdings Inc.
Westmoreland Canadian Investments L.P.
   
   
Westmoreland Coal Sales Company, Inc.
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
84-1575177
State or Other
Jurisdiction of
I.R.S. Employer
Incorporation or
Identification No.  
Organization  
   
Alberta  
   
Delaware  
    Saskatchewan  
    Saskatchewan  
   
Alberta  
Montana  
   
Netherlands  
   
Delaware  
   
   
Delaware  
Montana  
   
Delaware  
   
Alberta  
   
   
Quebec  
Delaware
81-0331383
98-1169295
27-3965489
23-2544944
81-0299780
46-5345545
98-1169129
23-1701997
N/A
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221    
4991    
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221    
1221
Westmoreland Energy LLC
Westmoreland Energy Services, Inc.
Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc.
Westmoreland Mining LLC
Westmoreland—North Carolina Power, L.L.C.
Westmoreland Partners
Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Westmoreland Prairie Resources Inc.
Westmoreland Resources, Inc.
Westmoreland—Roanoke Valley, L.P.
Westmoreland Savage Corporation
Willowvan Mining Ltd.
WRI Partners, Inc.
4991    
1221    
1221    
1221    
4991    
4991    
1221    
1221    
1221    
4991    
1221    
1221    
1221
61-1409081
46-3426792
27-2103673
84-1575176
20-5102494
33-0487790
84-1579965
N/A
81-0364990
23-2609738
84-1575204
N/A
26-2703697
Delaware  
   
Delaware  
   
Delaware  
   
Delaware  
   
Virginia  
   
Virginia  
   
Delaware  
   
Alberta  
   
Delaware  
   
Delaware  
   
   
Delaware  
    Saskatchewan  
Delaware
Address, including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, including Area Code, of each of Dakota Westmoreland
Corporation, Texas Westmoreland Coal Co., WCC Land Holding Company, Inc., WEI—Roanoke Valley, Inc., Western
Energy Company, Westmoreland Canada LLC, Westmoreland Coal Sales Company, Inc., Westmoreland Energy LLC,
Westmoreland Energy Services, Inc., Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc., Westmoreland Mining LLC, Westmoreland—
North Carolina Power, L.L.C., Westmoreland Partners, Westmoreland Power, Inc., Westmoreland Resources, Inc.,
Westmoreland—Roanoke Valley, L.P., Westmoreland Savage Corporation and WRI Partners, Inc.: 9540 South
Maroon Circle, Suite 200, Englewood, Colorado 80112; Telephone: (855) 922-6463.
Address, including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, including Area Code, of each of Coal Valley Resources Inc.,
Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership, Prairie Coal Ltd., Prairie Mines and Royalty ULC, Westmoreland Canada
Holdings Inc., Westmoreland Canadian Investments L.P., Westmoreland Prairie Resources Inc., and Willowvan
Mining Ltd.: 1100, 10123 99 Street, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T5J 3H1; Telephone: (780) 420-5810.
Address, including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, including Area Code, of WCC Holding B.V.: Schiphol
Boulevard 231, B-Tower, 5th Floor, 1118BH Schiphol, The Netherlands; Telephone: +31 088 560 9950.
Table of Contents
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell these securities until
the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This prospectus is
not an offer to sell these securities and is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction
where the offer or sale is not permitted.
PROSPECTUS
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED AUGUST 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND COAL COMPANY
WESTMORELAND PARTNERS
Offer to Exchange
All outstanding $425,000,000 of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
(CUSIP Nos. 960887 AD9 and U96068 AC2)
for $425,000,000 of new 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
that have been registered under the Securities Act of 1933
Terms of the Exchange Offer
•   We are offering to exchange up to $425,000,000 of our outstanding unregistered 10.75% Senior Secured
Notes due 2018 (“Restricted Notes”) for new 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018 with substantially
identical terms that have been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (“Exchange Notes”).
•   The exchange offer expires at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on             , 2014, unless we decide to
extend the expiration date.
•   We will exchange for an equal principal amount of Exchange Notes all Restricted Notes that you validly
tender and do not validly withdraw before the exchange offer expires.
•   Tenders of Restricted Notes may be withdrawn at any time prior to the expiration date of the exchange offer.
•   The exchange of Exchange Notes for Restricted Notes should generally not be a taxable event for U.S.
federal income tax purposes.
•   The terms of the Exchange Notes are identical to the terms of the Restricted Notes, except that the Exchange
Notes will be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and there are
certain differences relating to transfer restrictions, registration rights and payment of additional interest in
case of non-registration. We will not list the Exchange Notes on any securities exchange.
You should carefully consider the risk factors beginning on page 12 of this prospectus before participating in
the exchange offer.
Each broker-dealer that receives Exchange Notes for its own account pursuant to the exchange offer must
acknowledge that it will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale of such Exchange Notes. The letter of
transmittal states that by so acknowledging and by delivering a prospectus, a broker-dealer will not be deemed to
admit that it is an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act. This prospectus, as it may be amended or
supplemented from time to time, may be used by a broker-dealer in connection with resales of Exchange Notes
received in exchange for Restricted Notes where such Restricted Notes were acquired by such broker-dealer as a
result of market-making activities or other trading activities if such broker-dealer indicates in the letter of transmittal that
it will do so. We have agreed to make this prospectus available until the earlier of 180 days from the completion date of
this exchange offer or such time as such broker-dealers no longer hold any Restricted Notes, to any broker-dealer for
use in connection with any such resale. See “Plan of Distribution.”
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Table of Contents
Prospectus dated             , 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
THE EXCHANGE OFFER
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXCHANGE NOTES
MATERIAL UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
1  
    12  
    34  
    35  
    42  
    94  
    95  
    95  
    95
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus and the documents incorporated by
reference in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with different information. The
information contained in this prospectus or in any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus is
accurate only as of its date. We are not making this exchange offer to, nor will we accept surrenders for
exchange from, holders of Restricted Notes in any jurisdiction in which the exchange offer would violate
securities or blue sky laws or where it is otherwise unlawful.
INDUSTRY AND MARKET DATA
The industry and market data contained in this prospectus is based either on our management’s own estimates or on
independent industry publications, reports by market research firms or other published independent sources that we
believe to be reliable. However, certain industry and market data is subject to change and cannot always be verified
with complete certainty due to limits on the availability and reliability of raw data, the voluntary nature of the data
gathering process and other limitations and uncertainties inherent in any statistical survey. Accordingly, you should be
aware that the industry and market data contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus, and estimates
and beliefs based on such data, may not be reliable. Unless otherwise indicated, all information contained in or
incorporated by reference into this prospectus concerning the industry in general is based on management’s estimates
using internal data, data from industry related publications, consumer research and marketing studies and other
externally obtained data. Industry ranking and market data involve risks and uncertainties and are subject to change
based on various factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 12 of this prospectus.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, a registration statement on Form S-4 under
the Securities Act with respect to the Exchange Notes. This prospectus, which forms a part of the registration
statement, does not contain all of the information set forth in the registration statement. For further information with
respect to us and the Exchange Notes, reference is made to the registration statement. Statements contained in this
prospectus as to the contents of any contract or other documents are not necessarily complete.
We are subject to the informational requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange
Act”), and we file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. You may
read and copy any document we have filed or will file with the SEC at the SEC’s public website (www.sec.gov) or at
the Public Reference Room of the SEC located at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of such
materials can be obtained from the Public Reference Room of the SEC at prescribed rates. You can call the SEC at 1-
800-SEC-0330 to obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room.
So long as we are subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act, we and the guarantors are required to
make available to the trustee and the holders of the Notes (as defined below) the information required to be filed with
the SEC. Regardless of whether we are subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act, we have agreed
that for as long as any of the Notes remain outstanding, we will furnish to the trustee and holders of the Notes certain
information that would otherwise be required to be filed with the SEC under Sections 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act.
This prospectus contains summaries of certain agreements that we have entered into in connection with the exchange
offer, such as the indenture governing the Exchange Notes, or the Indenture, and related agreements. The
descriptions contained in this prospectus of these agreements do not purport to be complete and are subject to, or
qualified in their entirety by reference to, the definitive agreements themselves.
Table of Contents
i
This prospectus incorporates important business and financial information about us that is not included in or delivered
with this prospectus. We will provide this information and any and all of the documents referred to herein, including the
registration rights agreement related to the Restricted Notes and the Indenture, which are summarized in this
prospectus, without charge to each person to whom a copy of this prospectus has been delivered, who makes a
written or oral request at the following address or telephone number:
Jennifer S. Grafton, General Counsel and Secretary
9540 South Maroon Circle, Suite 200
Englewood, Colorado 80112
Telephone: (303) 922-6463
In order to ensure timely delivery of the requested documents, requests should be made no later than five business
days before the expiration date of this exchange offer. In the event that we extend the exchange offer, we urge you to
submit your request at least five business days before the expiration date, as extended. You will not be charged for
any of the documents that you request.
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
We “incorporate by reference” in this prospectus the following documents that we have previously filed with the SEC.
This means that we are disclosing important information to you without actually including the specific information in
this prospectus by referring you to other documents that we have filed separately with the SEC. The information
incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus. Information that we later provide to the SEC, and
which is deemed “filed” with the SEC, will automatically update information that we previously filed with the SEC, and
may replace information in this prospectus and information that we previously filed with the SEC:
•   our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, filed with the SEC on February 28,
2014 (the “2013 Form 10-K”);
•   our Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed with the SEC on March 26, 2014;
•   our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q (i) for the quarter ended March 31, 2014, filed with the SEC on April 25,
2014 (the “First Quarter 2014 Form 10-Q”), and (ii) for the quarter ended June 30, 2014, filed with the SEC on
July 31, 2014 (the “Second Quarter 2014 Form 10-Q” and collectively with our First Quarter 2014 Form 10-Q,
the “2014 Form 10-Qs”); and
•   our Current Reports on Form 8-K or Form 8-K/A filed with the SEC on January 23, 2014, January 30,
2014, February 4, 2014, February 12, 2014, March 27, 2014, May 2, 2014 (except for Exhibit 99.2), May 22,
2014, June 3, 2014, June 18, 2014 (two filings), July 8, 2014, July 16, 2014 and August 6, 2014.
We also incorporate by reference each of the documents that we file with the SEC (excluding those filings made under
Items 2.02 or 7.01 of Form 8-K and corresponding information furnished under Item 9.01 of Form 8-K or included as an
exhibit, or other information furnished to the SEC) under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14, or 15(d) of the Exchange Act on or
after the date of the initial registration statement and prior to effectiveness of the registration statement and on or after
the date of this prospectus and prior to the completion of the exchange offer. Any statements made in such documents
will automatically update and supersede the information contained in this prospectus, and any statements made in this
prospectus update and supersede the information contained in past SEC filings incorporated by reference into this
prospectus.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus and documents incorporated by reference into this prospectus contains “forward-looking statements,”
as that term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements can be
identified by words such as “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “seeks,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “will,” “should”
and similar references to future periods. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to,
statements we incorporate by reference to our 2013 Form 10-K, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Significant Anticipated Variances Between 2013 and 2014 and
Related Uncertainties” regarding factors that may cause our results of operations in future periods to differ from our
expectations, statements regarding the recent Canadian Acquisition (defined below), including statements about
operations at the acquired mines after the acquisition (including years of estimated production), and future capital
expenditures for the acquired mines and costs associated with liabilities assumed in the acquisition, the effect of the
acquisition on our liquidity and other results of operations.
Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and assumptions regarding our business, the
economy and other future conditions. Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, they are subject to
inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. Our actual results may differ
materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements. We therefore caution you against relying on any
of these forward-looking statements. They are statements neither of historical fact nor guarantees or assurances of
future performance. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-
looking statements include political, economic, business, competitive, market, weather and regulatory conditions and
the following:
•   Our substantial level of indebtedness;
ii
Table of Contents
•   The effect of Environmental Protection Agency and Environmental Canada inquiries and regulations on the
operations of the power plants to which we provide coal;
•   Future legislation and changes in regulations, governmental policies and taxes, including those aimed at
reducing emissions of elements such as mercury, sulfur dioxides, nitrogen oxides, particulate matter or
greenhouse gases;
•   Our expansion into international operations as a result of the Canadian Acquisition, which exposes us to
risks relating to exchange rates and exchange controls, general economic and political conditions, costs
associated with compliance with governmental regulations in multiple jurisdictions, tax-related risks and
export or import requirements for, or restrictions related to, our products;
•   Changes in our post-retirement medical benefit and pension obligations and the impact of the recently
enacted healthcare legislation on our employee health benefit costs;
•   Our potential inability to expand or continue current coal operations due to limitations in obtaining bonding
capacity for new mining permits, and/or increases in our mining costs as a result of increased bonding
expenses;
•   The effect of prolonged maintenance or unplanned outages at our operations or those of our major power
generating customers;
•   Inaccuracies in our estimates of our coal reserves;
•   Competition within our industry and with producers of competing energy sources;
•   Existing and future legislation and regulation affecting both our coal mining operations and our customers’
coal usage, governmental policies and taxes, including those aimed at reducing emissions of elements such
as mercury, sulfur dioxides, nitrogen oxides, particulate matter or greenhouse gases;
•   The inability to control costs, recognize favorable tax credits and/or receive adequate train traffic at our open
market mine operations;
•   Our efforts to effectively integrate the Canadian Subsidiaries (defined below) with our existing business and
our ability to manage our expanded operations following the Canadian Acquisition;
•   Our ability to realize growth opportunities and cost synergies as a result of the Canadian Acquisition; and
•   other factors that are described in “Risk Factors” herein.
The forward-looking statements in this prospectus speak as of the date hereof. Although we may from time to time
voluntarily update our prior forward-looking statements, we disclaim any commitment to do so except as required by
securities laws.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of financial performance that are not required by, or
presented in accordance with, GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are included in this prospectus because they
are key metrics used by management to assess our operating performance and we believe that EBITDA and Adjusted
EBITDA are useful in evaluating our operating performance because these measures:
•   are used widely by investors to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items
excluded from the calculation of such terms, which can vary substantially from company to company
depending upon accounting methods and book value of assets, capital structure and the method by which
assets were acquired, among other factors; and
•   help investors to more meaningfully evaluate and compare the results of our operations from period to period
by removing the effect of our capital structure and asset base from our operating results.
Neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA is a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. The items excluded from
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are significant in assessing our operating results. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have
limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, analysis of our
results as reported under GAAP. For example, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
•   do not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital and major maintenance expenditures
or contractual commitments;
•   do not reflect income tax expenses or the cash requirements necessary to pay income taxes;
•   do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; and
•   do not reflect the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or
principal payments, on certain of our debt obligations.
In addition, although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized
will often have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements
for such replacements. Other companies in our industry and in other industries may calculate EBITDA and Adjusted
EBITDA differently from the way that we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures. Because of these
limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to
us to invest in the growth of its business. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results
and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental data.
Table of Contents
iii
SUMMARY
The following summary contains basic information about us and this exchange offer. It is likely that this summary does
not contain all of the information that is important to you. You should read the entire prospectus, including the risk
factors included elsewhere in this prospectus, and the financial statements and related notes incorporated by
reference into this prospectus, before making an investment decision. In addition, certain statements include forward-
looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. In this prospectus, “Westmoreland,” the “company,” “we,” “our”
and “us” refer to Westmoreland Coal Company and its subsidiaries collectively, unless otherwise indicated or the
context otherwise requires.
This summary highlights information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus about us and this
exchange offer. It does not contain all of the information that is important to you. You should carefully read this
prospectus and the documents and information incorporated by reference into this prospectus for a more complete
understanding of our business, as well as certain tax and other considerations that are important to you in making your
investment decision. You should pay special attention to “Risk Factors” beginning on page 12 of this prospectus and
included in our 2013 Form 10-K which is incorporated by reference herein, before making an investment decision.
Throughout this prospectus, when we use the terms “we,” “our,” “us” or “Westmoreland,” we are referring to
Westmoreland Coal Company in its individual capacity or to Westmoreland Coal Company and its subsidiaries
collectively, as the context requires. Unless we indicate otherwise, or the context otherwise requires, information
identified in this prospectus supplement as “pro forma” or “pro forma combined” gives effect to our acquisition of
Sherritt International Corporation’s, or Sherritt’s, coal mining operations located in Alberta and Saskatchewan,
Canada, which transaction we refer to as the Canadian Acquisition, as if it occurred on the date indicated.
All dollar values refer to U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted, and all tons refer to short tons.
Business Overview
We are an energy company with 12 coal mines in the western U.S. and Canada, a char production facility, a 50%
stake in an activated carbon plant and two coal-fired power generation units. Our headquarters are located in
Englewood, Colorado and we have approximately 2,900 employees.
On April 28, 2014, we completed the Canadian Acquisition. The coal operations we acquired from Sherritt consisted of
its Prairie Mines & Royalty Ltd. subsidiary, or PMRL or Prairie, and its Coal Valley Resources Inc. subsidiary, or CVRI
or Mountain. Upon closing of the Canadian Acquisition, PMRL and CVRI, which we refer to as the Canadian
Subsidiaries, became wholly owned subsidiaries of Westmoreland.
We believe we are now the sixth largest North American coal producer (as measured by 2013 pro forma combined
production of approximately 51 million tons, including Sherritt 2013 production), and we believe that we are the largest
operator of mobile draglines in the world, with 30 draglines owned or operated. We produce and sell thermal coal
primarily to investment grade power plants under long-term cost-protected contracts, as well as to industrial customers
and barbeque briquettes manufacturers. We operate 12 surface mines and a 50% interest in an activated carbon plant
and char production facility. Our U.S. coal operations are located in Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota and Texas. Our
Canadian coal operations are located in Alberta and Saskatchewan. As a result of the Canadian Acquisition, we own
a thermal coal export mine with production capacity of 3.3 million tons per annum and with established sales to the
Asian markets. We also operate two coal-fired power generating units in North Carolina with a total capacity of
approximately 230 megawatts. Our focus is on simple surface mining methods, highly predictable dragline operations,
customer proximity (i.e. mine mouth power plants) and strategically located rail transportation that allow us to be a low
cost supplier to the customers that we serve.
Table of Contents
1
The following map shows our operations following the Canadian Acquisition:
Westmoreland Operations
Table of Contents
Competitive strengths
2
We believe we have the following strengths that will help us execute our strategy.
•
Mine mouth operations provide cost advantages and significant barriers to entry: We believe that the
majority of our mines are the most economic supplier to their respective principal customers. Our mine mouth
positioning and shortened rail and truck routes provide us with a transportation advantage over other sources
of coal. Ten of our 12 mines supply mine mouth customers by conveyor belt or other similar economical
•
•
•
•
delivery methods. In certain cases, our conveyor systems are the only viable delivery method due to limited
rail and truck access at customer facilities. Several customers have designed and built power plant facilities
for the specific chemical specifications of the coal we supply. We believe that these factors provide
significant barriers to entry and enhance our competitive position in the markets we serve.
Long-term low risk contracts with highly-rated customers provide stable cash flows: The majority of
our coal sales are via long-term cost-protected contracts with terms ranging from three to 40 years which
limits a customer’s ability to switch suppliers. Our contracts include a variety of provisions, including, among
others, return on capital investment and cost of production plus margin provisions. Our mines have provided
coal to substantially all of their principal customers for over 25 years. Similarly, our power plant assets have a
long-term off-take agreement with a contract length extending to 2019. The majority of our customers are
investment-grade rated utilities.
Established exports of thermal coal to Pacific-rim countries with strategic access to port capacity: Our
Coal Valley Mine is an established exporter of high-quality thermal coal with strategic access to port facilities.
The majority of our anticipated 2014 Coal Valley Mine production is already committed and priced. The
newly constructed Western Wye rail spur near the Absaloka Mine provides additional export capacity and
access to the seaborne market.
Experienced management team with a proven track record: We have a strong management team with a
proven track record of operating and improving mining operations, focused and disciplined growth, and cost
reduction. The team is responsible for spearheading organic investments and strategic acquisitions,
including the successful acquisition and integration of the Kemmerer Mine from Chevron in 2012 and the
Canadian Acquisition in 2014. The Kemmerer acquisition exceeded financial projections as a result of
operational and productivity improvements as well as improved labor relations, and we are ahead of
schedule in transitioning the newly-acquired Canadian Subsidiaries into our business. In addition, our
management team has been successful in implementing significant cost reduction initiatives, such as our
effort to reduce employee healthcare costs through a more efficiently administered prescription drug program
that reduced our prescription drug liabilities by over $100 million in the year the program was implemented.
Superior safety and environmental record: We have a long history of superior safety and environmental
performance, consistently achieving performance better than the national average. Our highly skilled work
force is well-trained with a culture focused on safety. We are a repeat winner of the National Mining
Association’s Sentinels of Safety Award and the Canadian Institute of Mining’s John T. Ryan Trophy. In
addition, in 2013 our Jewett Mine was recognized by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, the Railroad
Commission of Texas – Surface Mining and Reclamation Division and the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality with a trio of awards in connection with recently completed reclamation work.
Business strategy
Our objective is to increase value for our stockholders through free cash flow generation and sustained earnings
growth while protecting our liquidity and financial position. Our key strategies to achieve this objective are described
below.
•
Growth through Organic Opportunities and Acquisitions. We are focused on growth using existing
resources to maximize revenue and profitability. We have focused our expansion efforts in the following
areas:
•
Organic growth through contract extensions, renewals and renegotiations: We have extended
our business through the renegotiation of existing customer contracts, including improving the
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
length of contracts and implementing cost-plus provisions;
Open market growth: The Absaloka Mine presents our primary U.S. open market growth
opportunity. The location of the Absaloka Mine provides a significant rail advantage over
Southern Powder River Basin competitors for sales to our current principal customers and
potential additional customers. The addition of the Western Wye provides us the capability to
sell coal out of the Absaloka Mine to western markets and customers, as well as to the export
market. The Coal Valley Mine represents our Canadian open market growth opportunity. Port
capacity in western Canada provides attractive expansion opportunities, allowing us to
deliver premium thermal coal into high growth Asian markets;
3
Contract mining: We may pursue contract mining opportunities on an opportunistic basis.
Prospective customers select a contract miner on the basis of various factors, including (i) the
terms of the proposal, (ii) the operating track record of the contract miner, and (iii) the
capitalization and financial viability of the contract miner. We believe that these contract
mining opportunities present a low-cost and low-risk avenue for business expansion; and
Acquisition of strategic mining operations: We believe our core competency is running mine
mouth operations under long-term contracts with adjacent power plants and we have a
proven record of successfully integrating existing operating assets. We will opportunistically
pursue acquisition opportunities that fit and extend our core business model of providing
superior service to neighboring power plant customers, typically under long-term contracts
with cost-protection features, and continue to leverage our transportation advantages over our
competitors in each of our key markets. The Kemmerer and Canadian acquisitions are
examples of this strategy and we will continue to pursue similar opportunistic growth
opportunities.
Managing costs for our customers: We strive to optimize our costs to ensure that our operations are run
efficiently. By driving down the overall cost of production that is passed through to our customer, we are
actively working with our customers to create the lowest possible cost of delivered energy. If our customers
maintain a low cost of production, they are more likely to be dispatched to produce power on their respective
grids. This collaboration creates the greatest potential for increased coal demand from our mines.
Continue to pursue best-in-class safety and environmental stewardship: Our commitment to safety, at
both our coal mines and power plant facilities, is consistently recognized through special safety awards and
honors. Safety performance at our mines continues to be significantly better than the national average for
surface operations. Our U.S. mines had reportable and lost time incident rates for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 of 1.09 and 0.68, respectively, versus the national surface mine rates of 1.67 and 1.15,
respectively. Our Canadian mines had recordable and lost time incident rates for the nine months ended
September 30, 2013 of 0.42 and 0.08, respectively. In addition, our Roanoke Valley Power Facility (“ROVA”)
set a run time record at one ROVA unit during the summer of 2013, and has not experienced a lost time
incident since January 2011. We are also committed to responsible environmental stewardship as evidenced
by our environmental record and receipt of various environmental stewardship awards such as those noted
above. Both safety and environmental stewardship are critical components of our business strategy.
•
Enhance coal reserve base through economical acquisitions: We are committed to economically
maintaining and expanding our coal reserves to extend the life of our current mines by acquiring or leasing
tracts of land on coal deposits that are in close geographic proximity to our existing footprint. This strategy
will enable us to utilize our existing infrastructure at those facilities, thereby limiting the time and capital cost
associated with expansions. We believe that a number of such opportunities are available in the marketplace
and we continually assess such opportunities. We are also committed to pursuing acquisitions of operating
coal mines having substantial contiguous coal reserves that fit our business model of operating mines with
mine mouth customers at transportation advantaged locations. In addition, we avoid operating on U.S.
federal lands that are subject to an open bidding process and are therefore acquired at a higher cost than
similar non-federal leases.
Segment Information
We operate our business in five segments which include three principal operating segments, Coal – U.S., Coal –
Canada, and Power, and two non-operating segments, Corporate and Heritage.
Coal-U.S. Segment: For the twelve months ended December 31, 2013, our Coal – U.S. Segment sold 24.9 million
tons of coal and, as of December 31, 2013, it owned or controlled approximately 514.5 million tons of proven or
probable coal reserves. The Coal – U.S. Segment generated revenue of $587.1 million related to the sale of coal for
the twelve months ended December 31, 2013, and generated revenue of $308.3 million related to the sale of coal for
the six months ended June 30, 2014. We conduct our U.S. coal operations primarily through our wholly owned
subsidiaries Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc., or WKI, Westmoreland Resources, Inc., or WRI, and Westmoreland
Mining LLC, or WML, and their respective subsidiaries. Our U.S. mines and coal reserves are strategically located in
close proximity to our domestic utility customers, which reduces transportation costs and thus provides us with a
significant competitive advantage with respect to those customers. Four of our six U.S. mines are mine mouth
operations (where our mine is adjacent to the customer’s property) with conveyor belt delivery systems direct to the
customer’s facilities. The remaining two mines utilize efficient rail and truck delivery, on a Free On Board, or FOB,
basis.
Coal-Canada Segment: For the twelve months ended December 31, 2013, prior to our acquisition, the Coal –
Canada Segment sold 26.0 million tons of coal and, as of December 31, 2013, it owned or controlled approximately
649 million tons of proven or probable coal reserves. The Coal –Canada Segment generated revenue of $652.1
million related to the sale of coal for the twelve months ended December 31, 2013, and, on a pro forma basis,
generated revenue of $322.3 million related to the sale of coal for the six
Table of Contents
4
months ended June 30, 2014. We conduct our Canada coal operations primarily through two wholly owned
subsidiaries Coal Valley Resources, Inc., or CVRI, and Prairie Mines & Royalty ULC, or PMRL, and their respective
subsidiaries. The majority of PMRL’s coal production is sold to Canadian utilities for electricity production, and all of
PMRL’s five mines are mine mouth operations (where our mine is adjacent to the customer’s property) with direct
delivery systems to the customer’s facilities. CVRI produces thermal coal which is exported primarily to the Asian
market via rail and reserved port capacity.
Power Segment: On December 23, 2013, Westmoreland Partners entered into the Consolidated Agreement with
Dominion Virginia Power (“DVP”), a subsidiary of Dominion North Carolina Power, providing for the exclusive sale to
Dominion of all of ROVA’s net electrical output and dependable capacity. The Consolidated Agreement amends,
restates and consolidates the prior agreements governing the sale of capacity and electric energy from ROVA in their
entirety. Among other things, the Consolidated Agreement: (i) contains certain provisions that we believe will allow
Westmoreland Partners to remain cash flow positive; (ii) continues to provide a right of first refusal in favor of Dominion
for the purchase of ROVA; and (iii) will terminate in March of 2019. Pursuant to the Consolidated Agreement, from
January 2014 through March 2019, ROVA will be maintained in operational condition and we anticipate running the
plants during high demand energy periods to supply DVP under the contract. During low demand periods, we do not
anticipate that the plants will be dispatched and the plants would remain in idle status. We additionally buy power from
a power provider at a fixed price, referred to as the fixed-price purchased power. Under the terms of the restructured
agreement, we may meet DVP’s power needs with the fixed-price purchased power in the event that doing so
becomes more economically attractive than our physically operating the ROVA plants to generate power. Alternatively,
we have the option to operate the ROVA plants, sell our produced power to DVP and resell the fixed-price purchased
power into the open market.
Heritage Segment: Our heritage segment includes the cost of heritage benefits we provide to former mining operation
employees. The heritage costs consist of payments to our retired workers for medical benefits, workers’ compensation
benefits, black lung benefits and combined benefit fund premiums to plans for United Mine Workers of America
(“UMWA”) retirees required by statute. Canadian heritage costs include retiree medical benefits, statutory workers’
compensation premiums, and contributions to pension plans.
Corporate Segment: Our Corporate segment includes primarily corporate administrative expenses and also includes
business development expenses. In addition, the Corporate segment contains our captive insurance company,
Westmoreland Risk Management Inc. (“WRM”), through which we have elected to retain some of our operating risks.
WRM provides our primary layer of property and casualty insurance in the United States. By using this insurance
subsidiary, we have reduced the cost of our property and casualty insurance premiums and retained some economic
benefits due to our excellent loss record.
Recent Developments
Financing Transactions in Connection with Canadian Acquisition
In connection with the Canadian Acquisition: (i) Westmoreland increased its revolving line of credit to $60 million
(which borrowing capacity may be increased to $100 million and can be used for borrowings and letters of credit); and
(ii) WML, a wholly owned subsidiary of Westmoreland, prepaid its 8.02% senior secured notes due 2018 in full and
terminated its existing credit facility. On July 31, 2014, WML and its subsidiaries became guarantors of our outstanding
10.750% Senior Secured Notes due 2018.
Additionally, in June 2014, we redeemed approximately $1 million of our 10.750% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
after making an offer, as required by the indenture, to purchase such notes with our “Excess Cash Flow” (as defined
under the indenture).
July 2014 Equity Offering
On July 16, 2014, we completed the sale and issuance of 1,685,507 shares of our common stock, par value $2.50 per
share, in a public offering registered under the Securities Act. We intend to use the net proceeds of this offering, which
were approximately $56.4 million, to increase overall financial flexibility, pursue organic and acquisition growth
strategies and for general corporate purposes.
Additional Information
For a more comprehensive overview of our business, we refer you to Items 1 and 2 of our 2013 Form10-K, which are
incorporated by reference herein.
Westmoreland Coal Company began mining in Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania in 1854 as a Pennsylvania
corporation. In 1910, we incorporated in Delaware and continued our focus on underground coal operations in
Pennsylvania and the Appalachian Basin. We moved our headquarters from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to Colorado
in 1995 and fully divested ourselves of all Eastern coal operations.
Table of Contents
5
Our principal executive offices are located at 9540 South Maroon Circle, Suite 200, Englewood, CO 80112. Our
telephone number is (303) 922-6463. Our website is www.westmoreland.com. The contents of our website are not a
part of this prospectus supplement or the accompanying prospectus.
Table of Contents
6
SUMMARY OF THE EXCHANGE OFFER
We are offering to exchange $425 million aggregate principal amount of our Exchange Notes for $425 million
aggregate principal amount of our Restricted Notes. The following is a brief summary of the terms and conditions of the
exchange offer. For a more complete description of the exchange offer, you should read the discussion under the
heading “The Exchange Offer.”
General
On February 7, 2014, Westmoreland Escrow Corporation, our wholly owned
subsidiary, completed the private offering of $425,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018 (the “Escrow Notes”), which
were automatically exchanged on April 28, 2014 for identical 10.75% Senior
Secured Notes due 2018 issued by us and Westmoreland Partners (the “Restricted
Notes”). The Restricted Notes issued in exchange for the Escrow Notes were
issued as “Add-On Notes” pursuant to the Indenture. Prior to the issuance of the
Restricted Notes, $250,500,000 aggregate principal amount of 10.75% Senior
Secured Notes due 2018 issued under the Indenture were outstanding (the
“Existing Notes”). The Restricted Notes and the Existing Notes constitute a single
class of securities and are treated as a single series under the Indenture.
Throughout this prospectus, the term “Existing Notes” refers to all of the outstanding
10.75% Senior Secured Notes, and the term “Notes” refers to the Exchange Notes
and the Existing Notes. The term “Restricted Notes” does not include the Existing
Notes.
In connection with the issuance of the Restricted Notes, we entered into a
registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers of the Restricted Notes in
which we agreed, among other things, to conduct the exchange offer for the
Restricted Notes.
You are entitled to exchange in the exchange offer your Restricted Notes for
Exchange Notes that are identical in all material respects to the Restricted Notes
except:
•     the Exchange Notes have been registered under the Securities Act;
•
the transfer restrictions and registration rights applicable to the Restricted Notes
do not apply to the Exchange Notes; and
•    rights to increased interest in addition to the stated interest rate on the
Restricted Notes will not apply to the Exchange Notes.
Exchange Offer
We are offering to exchange in minimum denominations of $2,000 principal amount
of Exchange Notes for each $2,000 principal amount of Restricted Notes, and
integral multiples of $1,000 in excess of the $2,000. In order to exchange a
Restricted Note, you must follow the required procedures set forth herein and we
must accept the Restricted Note for exchange. We will exchange all Restricted
Notes validly offered for exchange, or “tendered,” and not validly withdrawn. As of
the date of this prospectus, there is $425,000,000 aggregate principal amount of
Restricted Notes outstanding.
Expiration Time
Resale of the Exchange Notes
•
•
The exchange offer expires at 5:00 p.m. New York City time, on             , 2014,
unless we decide to extend the expiration date.
Based on an interpretation by the staff of the SEC set forth in no-action letters
issued to third parties, we believe that, as long as you are not a broker-dealer, the
Exchange Notes issued pursuant to the exchange offer in exchange for Restricted
Notes may be offered for resale, resold and otherwise transferred by you without
compliance with the registration and prospectus delivery provisions of the
Securities Act, provided that:
•
you are not an “affiliate” of ours within the meaning of Rule 405 under the
Securities Act;
•    you are acquiring the Exchange Notes in the ordinary course of your business;
at the time of the commencement and consummation of the exchange offer, you
are not participating, do not intend to participate, and have not entered into any
arrangement or understanding with any person to participate in the distribution
(within the meaning of the Securities Act) of the Exchange Notes in violation of
the provisions of the Securities Act; and
you are not acting on behalf of any person who could not truthfully make the
foregoing representations.
Table of Contents
7
If you are a broker-dealer and receive Exchange Notes for your own account in exchange
for Restricted Notes that you acquired as a result of market-making activities or other
trading activities, you must acknowledge that you will deliver this prospectus in
connection with any resale of the Exchange Notes. See “Plan of Distribution.” However,
by so acknowledging and by delivering this prospectus, you will not be deemed to admit
that you are an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act. During the period
ending 180 days after the consummation of the exchange offer, subject to extension in
limited circumstances, you may use this prospectus for an offer to sell, a resale or other
retransfer of Exchange Notes received in exchange for Restricted Notes that you
acquired through market-making activities or other trading activities if you indicate in the
letter of transmittal that you will do so.
The SEC has not considered this exchange offer in the context of a no-action letter, and
we cannot assure you that the SEC would make similar determinations with respect to
this exchange offer. If any of the conditions listed above are not satisfied, or if our belief is
not accurate, and you transfer any Exchange Notes issued to you in the exchange offer
without delivering a resale prospectus meeting the requirements of the Securities Act or
without an exemption from registration of your Exchange Notes from those requirements,
you may incur liability under the Securities Act. We will not assume, nor will we
indemnify you against, any such liability.
As a result of the making of the exchange offer, we and the guarantors will have fulfilled a
covenant under the registration rights agreement. Accordingly, there will be no increase
in the interest rate on the Restricted Notes under the circumstances described in the
registration rights agreement. If you do not tender your Restricted Notes in the exchange
offer, you will continue to be entitled to all of the rights and limitations applicable to the
Restricted Notes as set forth in the Indenture, except we and the guarantors will not have
any further obligation to you to provide for the exchange and registration of the Restricted
Notes under the registration rights agreement.
Consequences If You Do
Not Exchange Your
Restricted Notes
All untendered Restricted Notes will continue to be subject to the restrictions on transfer
set forth in the Restricted Notes and in the Indenture. In general, the Restricted Notes
may not be offered or sold unless registered under the Securities Act, except pursuant to
an exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the
Securities Act and applicable state securities laws. Other than in connection with the
exchange offer, we and the guarantors do not currently anticipate that we will register the
outstanding Notes under the Securities Act. If you do not participate or properly tender
your Restricted Notes in the exchange offer, upon completion of the exchange offer, the
liquidity of the market for your Restricted Notes could be adversely affected.
The exchange offer is subject to certain customary conditions, which we may waive, as
described below under “The Exchange Offer — Conditions to the Exchange Offer.”
If you wish to accept the exchange offer, the following must be delivered to the exchange
agent:
Conditions
Procedures for
Tendering
Restricted Notes
•
•
your Restricted Notes by timely confirmation of book-entry transfer through The
Depository Trust Company (the “DTC”);
an agent’s message from the DTC, stating that the tendering participant agrees to be
bound by the letter of transmittal and the terms of the exchange offer; and
•    all other documents required by the letter of transmittal.
   These actions must be completed before the expiration of the exchange offer.
You must comply with DTC’s standard procedures for electronic tenders, by which you
will agree to be bound by the letter of transmittal.
Table of Contents
Withdrawal of Tenders
Acceptance of Restricted
Notes and Delivery of
Exchange Notes
Fees and Expenses
Use of Proceeds
8
You may withdraw any outstanding notes tendered in the exchange offer at any time
prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on             , 2014. If we decide for any reason not to
accept any outstanding Restricted Notes tendered for exchange, the Restricted Notes
will be returned to the registered holder at our expense promptly after the expiration or
termination of the exchange offer. In the case of Restricted Notes tendered by book-entry
transfer into the exchange agent’s account at The Depository Trust Company, any
withdrawn or unaccepted outstanding notes will be credited to the tendering holder’s
account at The Depository Trust Company. For further information regarding the
withdrawal of tendered outstanding notes, please refer to the section in this prospectus
entitled “The Exchange Offer—Withdrawal of Tenders.”
Upon consummation of the exchange offer, we will accept any and all outstanding
Restricted Notes that are properly tendered in the exchange offer and not withdrawn at or
prior to the expiration time. The Exchange Notes issued pursuant to the exchange offer
will be delivered promptly after acceptance of the tendered outstanding notes. Please
refer to the section in this prospectus entitled “The Exchange Offer—Terms of the
Exchange Offer.”
We will bear all expenses related to the exchange offer. Please refer to the section in this
prospectus entitled “The Exchange Offer — Fees and Expenses.”
The issuance of the Exchange Notes will not provide us with any new proceeds. We are
making this exchange offer solely to satisfy our obligations under the registration rights
agreement.
Tax Consequences
Exchange Agent
Table of Contents
The exchange of Exchange Notes for Restricted Notes in the exchange offer should
generally not be a taxable event for U.S. federal income tax purposes. You should
consult your own tax advisor as to the tax consequences to you of the exchange
offer, as well as tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of the
exchange notes. For additional information, please refer to the section in this
prospectus entitled “Material United States Federal Income Tax Considerations.”
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. is serving as exchange agent in connection with the exchange
offer. You should direct questions and requests for assistance, for additional copies of
this prospectus or the letter of transmittal to the exchange agent addressed as follows:
Attn: Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., Corporate Trust Operations, MAC N 9303-121, Sixth &
Marquette Ave. Minneapolis Minnesota, 52479, telephone number 800-334-5128.
9
SUMMARY OF THE TERMS OF THE EXCHANGE NOTES
The terms of the Exchange Notes are identical in all material respects to the terms of the Restricted Notes, except that
the Exchange Notes will not contain terms with respect to transfer restrictions, registration rights and additional interest
upon a failure to fulfill certain of our obligations under the registration rights agreement. The summary below describes
the principal terms of the Exchange Notes. Some of the terms and conditions described below are subject to important
limitations and exceptions. The following is not intended to be complete. You should carefully review the “Description
of the Exchange Notes” section of this prospectus, which contains a more detailed description of the terms and
conditions of the Exchange Notes.
Westmoreland Coal Company and Westmoreland Partners, as co-issuers
$425,000,000 in aggregate principal amount of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018,
which will be part of a single class of securities with, and have the same terms as, the
Existing Notes except as otherwise provided herein.
February 1, 2018.
Issuers
Notes Offered Hereby
Maturity
Interest Rate and Interest
Payment Dates
Guarantees
Security
We will pay interest in cash on the principal amount of the Exchange Notes semi-
annually at the rate of 10.75% per year, on February 1st and August 1st of each year,
beginning on February 1st, 2014.
The Exchange Notes will be fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally,
on a senior secured basis by all of our subsidiaries, including those acquired in the
Canadian Acquisition, other than Absaloka Coal, LLC, or Absaloka Coal, and certain
other immaterial subsidiaries. Not all of our restricted subsidiaries under the Indenture
will be subsidiary guarantors. In particular, Absaloka Coal and Westmoreland Risk
Management Inc. will be restricted subsidiaries, but do not guarantee the Notes. Basin
Resources, Inc. will be an unrestricted subsidiary, but the Indenture contains a covenant
limiting its activities. Certain other immaterial subsidiaries are also unrestricted
subsidiaries, however, these entities have no or nominal assets, conduct no operations
and are in the process of dissolution.
The Exchange Notes will be secured by first priority liens on substantially all of the Co-
Issuers’ and the restricted subsidiaries’ assets, except for the accounts receivable,
inventory and certain other assets, which secure our revolving credit facility with The
PrivateBank and Trust Company, which we refer to as the Revolving Credit Facility, and
upon which the holders of the Notes will have second-priority liens, subject in each case
to permitted liens and certain exclusions. See “Description of the Exchange Notes –
Security.”
Ranking
The Exchange Notes and the guarantees will be our and the guarantors’ senior secured
obligations and:
•
will rank equally in right of payment with all of our and the guarantors’ respective
existing and future senior indebtedness;
will rank effectively senior in right of payment to all of our, the guarantors’ and
Absaloka Coal’s respective existing and future unsecured indebtedness;
will be effectively subordinated to indebtedness under our Revolving Credit Facility,
to the extent of the value of the first-priority collateral securing the Revolving Credit
Facility; and
will be structurally subordinated to all of the existing and future liabilities (including
trade payables but excluding intercompany liabilities) of each of our subsidiaries that
does not guarantee the Notes.
•
•
•
Optional Redemption
As of June 30, 2014, we had (i) $250.5 million in aggregate principal amount of our
Existing Notes outstanding, (ii) $425 million in aggregate principal amount of our
Restricted Notes outstanding, and (iii) an aggregate of $25 million in outstanding letters
of credit under our Revolving Credit Facility that reduce the amount available for
borrowing under the facility on a dollar-for-dollar basis, resulting in $35 million of
undrawn availability thereunder.
On or after February 1, 2015, we may redeem the Notes, in whole or in part, at the
redemption prices set forth under “Description of the Exchange Notes – Optional
Redemption.”
Prior to February 1, 2015, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount
of Notes at the redemption price set forth under “Description of the Exchange Notes –
Optional Redemption” with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings.
Table of Contents
Change of Control Offer
Asset Sale Offer or Event
of Loss Offer
Excess Cash Flow Offer
Certain Covenants
10
If we experience a change of control (as defined in the Indenture), the holders of the
Notes will have the right to require us to purchase their Notes at a price in cash equal to
101% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest and
additional interest, if any, to the date of purchase. See “Description of the Exchange
Notes – Change of Control.”
We may be required to offer to use a portion of the net proceeds of certain asset sales
and events of loss to purchase some of the Notes at 100% of the principal amount
thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest and additional interest, if any, to the
date of purchase. See “Description of the Exchange Notes – Certain Covenants –
Limitations on Asset Sales” and “–Events of Loss.”
We may be required to offer to use 75% of our Excess Cash Flow, as defined under
“Description of the Exchange Notes – Certain Definitions,” for each fiscal year to
purchase some of the Notes at 100% of the principal amount thereof, together with
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase. See “Description of the
Exchange Notes – Certain Covenants – Excess Cash Flow.”
The indenture governing the Exchange Notes contains covenants that restrict our ability
and the ability of the co-issuer and our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things:
•       incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred stock;
•       pay dividends on or make distributions in respect of capital stock or make certain
other restricted payments or investments;
•       enter into agreements that restrict distributions from restricted subsidiaries;
•       enter into agreements that restrict distributions from restricted subsidiaries;
   •       enter into transactions with affiliates;
   •       create or incur liens;
   •       sell or otherwise dispose of assets;
   •       enter into sale and leaseback transactions;
   •       sell or issue capital stock of the co-issuer or the restricted subsidiaries;
   •       repurchase any outstanding preferred stock; or
   •       merge or consolidate with or into other companies.
These covenants are subject to important exceptions and qualifications, which are
described under “Description of the Exchange Notes – Certain Covenants.”
The indenture provides that it and the Exchange Notes will be governed by, and
construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
The Exchange Notes generally will be freely transferable, but will also be new securities
for which there will not initially be a market. There can be no assurance as to the
development or liquidity of any market for the Exchange Notes. We do not intend to
apply for listing of the Exchange Notes on any securities exchange or for the quotation of
the Exchange Notes in any automated dealer quotation system.
See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 12 of this prospectus and other information
included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus for a discussion of the
factors you should carefully consider before deciding to invest in the Exchange
Notes.
11
RISK FACTORS
Governing Law
Absence of a Public
Market for the Exchange
Notes
Risk Factors
Table of Contents
Before you invest in the Exchange Notes, you should be aware that such an investment involves various risks,
including those set for below in this prospectus and in the documents we have incorporated by reference herein. You
should consider carefully the discussion of risk factors in our periodic and other filings with the SEC under the
Exchange Act, particularly under the captions “Risk Factors” in our 2013 Form 10-K and “Management’s Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our 2013 Form 10-K and our 2014 Form 10-Qs,
which are incorporated by reference into this prospectus. If any of the events that present risks actually occurs, then
our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected. The risks and
uncertainties described below and in the incorporated documents are not the only risks and uncertainties that we face.
Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also impair our
business operations.
Risks Related to the Exchange Offer
If you fail to exchange the Restricted Notes, they will remain subject to transfer restrictions, and it may be
harder for you to resell and transfer your Restricted Notes.
The Restricted Notes were not registered under the Securities Act or under the securities laws of any state. Any
Restricted Notes that remain outstanding after this exchange offer will continue to be subject to restrictions on their
transfer. Thus, you may not resell the Restricted Notes, offer them for resale or otherwise transfer them unless they are
subsequently registered or resold under an exemption from the registration requirements of the Securities Act and
applicable state securities laws. If you do not exchange your Restricted Notes for Exchange Notes by this exchange
offer, or if you do not properly tender your Restricted Notes in this exchange offer, you will not be able to resell, offer to
resell or otherwise transfer your Restricted Notes unless they are registered under the Securities Act or unless you
resell them, offer to resell or otherwise transfer them under an exemption from the registration requirements of, or in a
transaction not subject to, the Securities Act. After this exchange offer, holders of Restricted Notes will not have any
further rights to have their Restricted Notes exchanged for Exchange Notes registered under the Securities Act. The
liquidity of the market for Restricted Notes that are not exchanged could be adversely affected by this exchange offer
and you may be unable to sell your Restricted Notes.
Late deliveries of Restricted Notes and other required documents could prevent a holder from exchanging its
Restricted Notes.
Holders are responsible for complying with all exchange offer procedures. The issuance of Exchange Notes in
exchange for Restricted Notes will only occur upon completion of the procedures described in this prospectus under
“The Exchange Offer.” Therefore, holders of Restricted Notes who wish to exchange them for Exchange Notes should
allow sufficient time for completion of the exchange procedure. Neither we nor the exchange agent is obligated to
extend the offer or notify you of any failure to follow the proper procedure or waive any defect if you fail to follow the
proper procedure.
Certain persons who participate in the exchange offer must deliver a prospectus in connection with resales of
the Exchange Notes.
We have not requested, and do not intend to request, an interpretation by the staff of the SEC as to whether the
Exchange Notes issued pursuant to our exchange offer in exchange for the Restricted Notes may be offered for resale,
resold or otherwise transferred by any holder without compliance with the registration and prospectus delivery
provisions of the Securities Act. Instead, based on interpretations of the staff of the SEC contained in Exxon Capital
Holdings Corp., SEC no-action letter (May 13, 1988), Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc., SEC no-action letter (June 5, 1991)
and Shearman & Sterling, SEC no-action letter (July 2, 1993), we believe that you may offer for resale, resell or
otherwise transfer the Exchange Notes without compliance with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act except that broker-dealers receiving the Exchange Notes in the exchange offer will be subject to a
prospectus delivery requirement with respect to their resale. We cannot guarantee that the SEC would make a similar
decision about our exchange offer. If our belief is wrong, or if you cannot truthfully make the representations mentioned
in the section. “The Exchange Offer — Terms of the Exchange Offer” below, and you transfer any Exchange Note
issued to you in the exchange offer without meeting the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the
Securities Act, or without an exemption from such requirements, you could incur liability under the Securities Act.
Additionally, in some instances described in this prospectus under “Plan of Distribution,” certain holders of Exchange
Notes will remain obligated to comply with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act
to transfer the Exchange Notes. If such a holder transfers any Exchange Notes without delivering a prospectus
meeting the requirements of the Securities Act or without an applicable exemption from registration under the
Securities Act, such a holder may incur liability under the Securities Act. We do not and will not assume, or indemnify
such a holder against, this liability.
There may not be a public market for the Exchange Notes, and you may find it difficult to sell your Exchange
Notes.
You may find it difficult to sell your Exchange Notes because an active trading market for the Exchange Notes may not
develop. We do not intend to apply for listing on any securities exchange for the Exchange Notes. We do not know the
extent to which investor interest will lead to the development of a trading market or how liquid that market might be.
Table of Contents
12
If a market for the Exchange Notes does develop, it is possible that you will not be able to sell your Exchange Notes at
a particular time or that the prices that you receive when you sell will be unfavorable. It is also possible that any trading
market that does develop for the Exchange Notes will not be liquid. Future trading prices of the Exchange Notes will
depend on many factors, including:
•   our operating performance, financial condition and prospects, or the operating performance, financial
condition and prospects of companies in the coal and power industries generally;
•   our ability to complete the offer to exchange the Restricted Notes for the Exchange Notes;
•   the interest of securities dealers in making a market for the Exchange Notes;
•   prevailing interest rates; and
•   the market for similar securities.
Historically, the market for non-investment grade debt has been subject to disruptions that have caused volatility in
prices. If a market for the Exchange Notes develops, it is possible that the market for the Exchange Notes will be
subject to disruptions and price volatility. Any disruptions may have a negative effect on holders of the Exchange
Notes, regardless of our operating performance, financial condition and prospects.
The consummation of the exchange offer may not occur.
We are not obligated to complete the exchange offer under certain circumstances. See “The Exchange Offer—
Conditions to the Exchange Offer.” Even if the exchange offer is completed, it may not be completed on the schedule
described in this prospectus. Accordingly, holders participating in the exchange offer may have to wait longer than
expected to receive their Exchange Notes.
Risks Related to the Notes and the Collateral
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness, which may adversely affect our cash flow, our ability to
operate our business and our ability to satisfy our obligations under the Restricted Notes and the Exchange
Notes.
We have a significant amount of indebtedness. As of June 30, 2014, we had approximately $833.0 million of
indebtedness outstanding, including the Restricted Notes, the Existing Notes, our capital lease obligations. In addition,
we had an aggregate of $25 million in outstanding letters of credit under our Revolving Credit Facility that reduce the
amount available for borrowing under the facility on a dollar-for-dollar basis, resulting in $35 million of undrawn
availability thereunder. Our substantial amount of indebtedness could have important consequences for you. For
example, it could:
•   increase our vulnerability to adverse economic, industry or competitive developments;
•   result in an event of default if we fail to satisfy our obligations with respect to the Notes or other debt or fail to
comply with the financial and other restrictive covenants contained in the indenture governing the Notes or
agreements governing our other indebtedness, which event of default could result in all of our debt becoming
immediately due and payable and could permit our lenders to foreclose on our assets securing such debt;
•   require a substantial portion of cash flow from operations to be dedicated to the payment of principal and
interest on our indebtedness, therefore reducing our ability to use our cash flow to fund our operations, capital
expenditures and future business opportunities;
•   make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to the Notes;
•   increase our cost of borrowing;
•   restrict us from making strategic acquisitions or causing us to make non-strategic divestitures;
•   limit our ability to service our indebtedness, including the Notes;
•   limit our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, debt service
requirements, acquisitions and general corporate or other purposes;
•   limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business or the industry in which we operate,
placing us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors who are less highly leveraged and
who therefore may be able to take advantage of opportunities that our leverage prevents us from exploiting;
and
•   prevent us from raising the funds necessary to repurchase all Notes tendered to us upon the occurrence of
certain changes of control, which failure to repurchase would constitute a default under the indenture
governing the Notes.
The occurrence of any one of these events could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition,
results of operations, prospects or ability to satisfy our obligations under the Notes.
Table of Contents
13
We may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service the Notes or our other indebtedness, and may be
forced to take other actions to satisfy our obligations under our indebtedness, which may not be successful.
Our ability to make scheduled payments on our indebtedness, including the Notes, and to fund our operations will
depend on our ability to generate cash in the future. Our historical financial results have been, and we expect our
future financial results to be, subject to substantial fluctuations, and will depend upon general economic conditions
and financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control. We may not be able to
maintain a level of cash flow from operating activities sufficient to permit us to pay the principal and interest on the
Notes or our other indebtedness.
If our cash flow and capital resources are insufficient to meet our indebtedness service obligations or to fund our other
liquidity needs, we may need to refinance all or a portion of our debt, including the Notes, before maturity, seek
additional equity capital, reduce or delay scheduled expansions and capital expenditures or sell material assets or
operations. We cannot assure you that we would be able to refinance or restructure our indebtedness, obtain equity
capital or sell assets or operations on commercially reasonable terms or at all. In addition, the terms of existing or
future debt instruments, including the Indenture governing the Notes, may limit or prevent us from taking any of these
actions. Our inability to take these actions and to generate sufficient cash flow to satisfy our debt service and other
obligations could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operation, prospects
and our ability to satisfy our obligations under the Notes or our other indebtedness.
You generally will be required to accrue taxable income attributable to original issue discount on the Notes
before you receive cash attributable to such original issue discount. You may be required to continue to
accrue such taxable income even if we become unable to satisfy our payment obligations under the Notes.
Additionally, in the event we enter into bankruptcy, you may not have a claim for all or a portion of any
unamortized amount of the original issue discount on the Notes.
The Restricted Notes were issued with original issue discount for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, if
you are an individual or entity subject to U.S. tax, you will be required to accrue interest in the form of original issue
discount on a current basis in respect of the Notes, including such accrued interest in income and pay tax accordingly,
even before you receive cash attributable to that income and regardless of your method of accounting. Additionally, a
bankruptcy court may not allow a claim for all or a portion of any unamortized amount of the original issue discount on
the Notes.
We are a holding company, and therefore our ability to repay our indebtedness, including the Notes, is
dependent on the cash flow generated by our subsidiaries and their ability to make distributions to us.
We are a holding company with no significant operations or material assets other than the capital stock of our
subsidiaries. As a result, our ability to repay our indebtedness, including the Notes, is dependent on the generation of
cash flow by our subsidiaries and their ability to make such cash available to us, by dividend, debt repayment or
otherwise.
The Indenture governing the Notes contains various covenants limiting the discretion of our management in
operating our business and could prevent us from capitalizing on business opportunities and taking some
corporate actions.
The Indenture governing the Notes imposes significant operating and financial restrictions on us. These restrictions
limit or restrict, among other things, our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to:
•   incur additional indebtedness;
•   issue certain preferred stock or redeemable stock;
•   pay dividends on, repurchase or make distributions in respect of our capital stock or make other restricted
payments;
•   make certain investments;
•   sell, transfer or otherwise convey certain assets;
•   create or incur liens;
•   designate our subsidiaries as unrestricted subsidiaries;
•   consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets;
•   enter into a new or different line of business; and
•   enter into certain transactions with our affiliates.
A breach of any of the foregoing covenants under our Indenture could result in a default. In addition, any debt
agreements we enter into in the future may further limit our ability to enter into certain types of transactions.
The covenants described above are subject to important exceptions and qualifications and, with respect to the Notes,
are described under the heading “Description of the Exchange Notes” in this prospectus. Our ability to comply with
these covenants may be affected by events beyond our control, including those described in this “Risk Factors”
section. As a result, we cannot assure you that we will be able to comply with these covenants.
Table of Contents
14
Notwithstanding our current indebtedness levels and restrictive covenants, we may still be able to incur
substantial additional debt or make certain restricted payments, which could exacerbate the risks described
above.
We may be able to incur additional debt in the future. Although the Indenture governing the Notes contains restrictions
on our ability to incur indebtedness, those restrictions are subject to a number of exceptions. In particular, we are
permitted under the Indenture to borrow up to $100 million from time to time under the Revolving Credit Facility. Also,
under certain circumstances the Indenture allows us to issue additional Notes thereunder, and we expect we may
issue such additional Notes in the future. In addition, if we are able to designate some of our restricted subsidiaries
under the Indenture as unrestricted subsidiaries, those unrestricted subsidiaries would be permitted to borrow beyond
the limitations specified in the Indenture and engage in other activities in which restricted subsidiaries may not
engage. We may also consider investments in joint ventures or acquisitions that may increase our indebtedness.
Additionally, although the Indenture contains restrictions on our ability to make restricted payments, we will be able to
make those payments in certain circumstances. Adding new debt to current debt levels or making certain restricted
payments could intensify the related risks that we and our subsidiaries now face.
Certain of our assets are subject to senior priority security interests on collateral that secure the Notes on a
junior basis. Therefore, your ability to receive payments on the Notes would be subject to the prior satisfaction
of all such obligations, to the extent of the value of such collateral.
Our Revolving Credit Facility, which is secured by a first-priority lien in favor of the lender on our, the Co-Issuer’s, the
guarantors’ and Absaloka Coal’s inventory, accounts receivable, certain other assets and proceeds thereof, permits us
to borrow up to $60 million (which we may increase to $100 million in our discretion). The liens on that same collateral
securing the Notes are subordinate to the first-priority lien in favor of the lender under the Revolving Credit Facility.
See “Description of the Exchange Notes – Security.” Any rights to payment and claims by the holders of the Notes is
subject to the rights to payment or claims by our lender under the Revolving Credit Facility with respect to distributions
of such collateral upon a default under the Revolving Credit Facility or the Notes. As a result, the Notes are effectively
subordinated in right of payment to indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Facility, to the extent of the realizable
value of such collateral. Furthermore, the collateral securing the Notes and the guarantees of the Notes will be subject
to liens permitted under the terms of the Indenture governing the Notes, whether arising before or after the date the
Notes are issued. The existence of any permitted liens could adversely affect the value of the collateral securing the
Notes and the guarantees, as well as the ability of the Notes collateral agent to realize or foreclose on such collateral.
There may not be sufficient collateral to pay all or any of the Notes.
The Notes, including the Exchange Notes, and the guarantees are secured by (i) first-priority liens on substantially all
of our, the guarantors’ and Absaloka Coal’s tangible and intangible assets (excluding the assets described in (ii)), (ii) a
second-priority lien on our, the guarantors’ and Absaloka Coal’s inventory, accounts receivable, certain other assets
and proceeds thereof, and (iii) a first-priority lien on the equity of Westmoreland Risk Management, Inc., or WRM, in
each case subject to permitted liens and certain exclusions. Our Revolving Credit Facility is secured by a first-priority
lien on our, the Co-issuer’s, the guarantors’ and Absaloka Coal’s inventory, accounts receivable, certain other assets
and proceeds thereof (the “Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral”).
In the event of a foreclosure on the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral (or a distribution in respect thereof in a
bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding), the proceeds from such Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral on which the
Notes have a second priority lien may not be sufficient to satisfy the Notes because such proceeds would first be
applied to satisfy our obligations under the Revolving Credit Facility. Only after all of our obligations under the
Revolving Credit Facility have been satisfied will proceeds from the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral on
which the Notes have a second priority lien be applied to satisfy our obligations under the Notes. To prevent
foreclosure, we may be motivated to commence voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, or the holders of the Notes or
various other lenders or interested persons may be motivated to institute bankruptcy proceedings against us. The
commencement of any bankruptcy proceedings would expose the holders of the Notes to additional risks, including
additional restrictions on exercising rights against the collateral and the possibility that statutory claims could be given
priority over the holders of the Notes in such a bankruptcy proceeding. In particular, we are required to make payments
to certain benefit multi-employer funds established pursuant to the Coal Act that fund health and death benefits for
certain retired miners. Payments to the Coal Act funds are statutorily required, and are therefore significantly more
difficult to discharge or restructure in bankruptcy proceedings than other liabilities we may have, including the Notes,
and our obligations to make such payments could be given priority over our obligations under the Notes in a
bankruptcy proceeding. If our liabilities under the Coal Act are given priority over the liens of the Note holders in a
bankruptcy proceeding, certain of the proceeds from the foreclosure of the collateral securing the Notes may be
applied to satisfy our Coal Act liability, and the amount of the proceeds available to satisfy our obligations under the
Notes would be reduced by the amount of the proceeds applied to satisfy such Coal Act liability.
Furthermore, the collateral securing the Notes is subject to liens permitted under the terms of the Revolving Credit
Facility and the Indenture governing the Notes. The existence of any permitted liens (whether senior to or on parity
with the liens securing the Notes) could adversely affect the value of the collateral securing the Notes, as well as the
ability of the Notes collateral agent to realize or foreclose on such collateral. In addition, not all of our and the
guarantors’ assets secure the Notes. See “Description of the
Table of Contents
15
Exchange Notes – Security.” To the extent that the claims of the holders of the Notes exceed the value of the assets
securing those Notes and other liabilities, those claims will rank equally with the claims of the holders of our
outstanding unsecured indebtedness and other obligations ranking pari passu with the Notes. As a result, if the value
of the assets pledged as security for the Notes and other liabilities is less than the value of the claims of the holders of
the Notes and other liabilities, those claims may not be satisfied in full.
The collateral may be subject to exceptions, defects, encumbrances, liens and other imperfections. Further, we have
not conducted appraisals of all of our or the guarantors’ assets constituting collateral securing the Notes to determine if
the value of such collateral upon foreclosure or liquidation equals or exceeds the amount of the Notes or such other
obligations secured by such collateral. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that the proceeds from the sale of the
collateral (including the proceeds from the sale of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral that would remain after
the proceeds from the sale of that collateral had been applied to the debt under the Revolving Credit Facility) would be
sufficient to repay holders of Notes all amounts owed under the Notes. The fair market value of the collateral is subject
to fluctuations based on factors that include, among others, the condition of our industry, the ability to sell the collateral
in an orderly sale, general economic conditions, the availability of buyers, our failure to implement our business
strategy and similar factors. The amount received upon a sale of the collateral would be dependent on numerous
factors, including but not limited to the actual fair market value of the collateral at such time and the timing and the
manner of the sale. By its nature, portions of the collateral may be illiquid and may have no readily ascertainable
market value. In the event of a foreclosure, liquidation, bankruptcy or similar proceeding, we cannot assure you that
any amount of proceeds from any sale or liquidation of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral will remain to be
applied to our obligations under the Notes, in full or at all, after such proceeds are applied to first satisfying our
obligations in full under the Revolving Credit Facility. In such an event, we cannot assure you that the collateral
securing our obligations with respect to the Notes on a first priority basis, either alone or with any remaining collateral
securing our obligations under the Revolving Credit Facility after satisfying the obligations thereunder, will be
sufficient to pay our obligations under the Notes in full. There also can be no assurance that the collateral will be
saleable, and, even if saleable, the timing of its liquidation would be uncertain. Accordingly, there may not be sufficient
collateral to pay all or any of the amounts due on the Notes.
We may be unable to repay or repurchase the Notes at maturity.
At maturity, the entire then outstanding principal amount of the Notes, currently $675.5 million, together with accrued
and unpaid interest, will become due and payable. We may not have the ability to repay or refinance these obligations.
If the maturity date occurs at a time when other arrangements prohibit us from repaying the Notes, we would try to
obtain waivers of such prohibitions from the lenders and holders under those arrangements, or we could attempt to
refinance the borrowings that contain the restrictions. If we could not obtain the waivers or refinance these borrowings,
we would be unable to repay the Notes.
Some of our indebtedness is subject to floating interest rates, which would result in our interest expense
increasing if interest rates rise.
Indebtedness under our Revolving Credit Facility bears interest at floating interest rates. Accordingly, we may
experience a negative impact on earnings as a result of interest rate fluctuations. The actual impact of those
fluctuations would depend on the amount of floating rate debt outstanding and our borrowing needs, which will vary
from time to time. Changes in economic conditions could result in higher interest rates, thereby increasing our interest
expense and reducing funds available for operations or other purposes.
Reduction in the borrowing base under our Revolving Credit Facility could adversely affect our liquidity.
Our borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility could be reduced if the value of our borrowing base
(which is calculated based on a percentage of our inventory, accounts receivable and certain other assets) declines.
The borrowing base could decline if the value of our inventory or accounts receivable declines due to economic or
market conditions, working capital practices or otherwise. If our borrowing availability under the Revolving Credit
Facility is reduced such that it is less than our outstanding borrowings thereunder, we could be required to repay
borrowings to eliminate the deficit. Such a reduction in the borrowing base under the Revolving Credit Facility would
adversely affect our liquidity. Our liquidity would also be adversely affected if the lender under the Revolving Credit
Facility became unwilling or unable to fund amounts under that facility.
U.S. federal and state fraudulent transfer laws may permit a court to void, subordinate or limit the Notes, the
guarantees or the grant of collateral and, if that occurs, you may not receive any payments on the Notes.
U.S. federal and state fraudulent transfer and conveyance statutes may apply to the issuance of the Notes and the
incurrence of the guarantees of the Notes. Under U.S. federal bankruptcy law and comparable provisions of state
fraudulent transfer or conveyance laws, which may vary from state to state, the Notes or the guarantees thereof (or the
grant of collateral securing any such obligations) could be voided, subordinated or limited as a fraudulent transfer or
conveyance if we or any of the guarantors, as applicable, (i) issued the Notes or incurred the guarantees with the intent
of hindering, delaying or defrauding creditors, or (ii) received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair
consideration in return for either issuing the Notes or incurring the guarantees and, in the case of (ii) only, one of the
following is also true at the time thereof:
•   we or any of the guarantors, as applicable, were insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of the issuance of
the Notes or the incurrence of the guarantees;
Table of Contents
16
•   the issuance of the Notes or the incurrence of the guarantees left us or any of the guarantors, as applicable,
with an unreasonably small amount of capital or assets to carry on its business;
•   we or any of the guarantors intended to, or believed that we or such guarantor would, incur debts beyond our
or such guarantor’s ability to pay as they mature; or
•   we or any of the guarantors were a defendant in an action for money damages, or had a judgment for money
damages docketed against us or such guarantor if, in either case, after final judgment, the judgment is
unsatisfied.
As a general matter, value is given for a transfer or an obligation if, in exchange for the transfer or obligation, property
is transferred or a valid antecedent debt is secured or satisfied. A court would likely find that a subsidiary guarantor did
not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for its guarantee to the extent such guarantor did not
obtain a reasonably equivalent tangible benefit directly or indirectly from the issuance of the Notes.
We cannot be certain as to the standards a court would use to determine whether or not we or the guarantors were
insolvent at the relevant time or, regardless of the standard that a court uses, whether the Notes or the guarantees
would be subordinated to our or any of our guarantors’ other debt. In general, however, a court would deem an entity
insolvent if:
•   the sum of its debts, including contingent and unliquidated liabilities, was greater than the fair saleable value
of all of its assets;
•   the present fair saleable value of its assets was less than the amount that would be required to pay its
probable liability on its existing debts, including contingent liabilities, as they become absolute and
mature; or
•   it could not pay its debts as they became due.
If a court were to find that the issuance of the Notes, the incurrence of a guarantee or the grant of security was a
fraudulent transfer or conveyance, the court could void the payment obligations under the Notes or such guarantee or
void the grant of collateral or subordinate or limit the Notes or such guarantee to presently existing and future
indebtedness of ours or of the related guarantor, or require the holders of the Notes to repay any amounts received
with respect to such guarantee. In the event of a finding that a fraudulent transfer or conveyance occurred, you may not
receive any repayment on the Notes or guarantees. Further, the avoidance of the Notes could result in an event of
default with respect to our and our subsidiaries’ other debt that could result in acceleration of such debt.
Each guarantee will contain a provision intended to limit the guarantor’s liability to the maximum amount that it could
incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent transfer. This provision may
not be effective to protect the guarantees from being avoided under applicable fraudulent transfer laws or may reduce
the guarantor’s obligation to an amount that effectively makes the guarantee worthless.
Finally, as a court of equity, a bankruptcy court may subordinate the claims in respect of the Notes to other claims
against us under the principle of equitable subordination, if the court determines that: (i) the holder of Notes engaged
in some type of inequitable conduct, (ii) such inequitable conduct resulted in injury to our other creditors or conferred
an unfair advantage upon the holder of Notes and (iii) equitable subordination is not inconsistent with the provisions of
the bankruptcy code.
We may not be able to repurchase the Notes upon a change of control.
Upon the occurrence of specific kinds of change of control events, we are required to offer to repurchase all of the
Notes at 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the purchase date. The Revolving Credit
Facility contains, and other future debt agreements may contain, restrictions on our ability to comply with this
requirement. In addition, we may have insufficient financial resources to allow us to repurchase the Notes at the
required time. Any failure to comply with the repurchase requirement would constitute a default under the Indenture,
which, in turn, would give the trustee and holders of the Notes the right to accelerate our debt owing under the Notes
and could result in amounts outstanding under other debt agreements being declared due and payable. If a change of
control occurs at a time when we are prohibited from, or otherwise unable to, offer to purchase the Notes, we could
seek consent to offer to purchase the Notes or attempt to refinance the borrowings that contain the relevant prohibition,
but such efforts may be unsuccessful. To avoid triggering our obligation to repurchase the Notes, we may have to
avoid certain change of control transactions that would otherwise be beneficial to us.
In addition, certain important corporate events, such as acquisitions, reorganizations and leveraged recapitalizations,
may not, under the Indenture, constitute a “change of control” that would require us to repurchase the Notes,
notwithstanding the fact that such corporate events could increase the level of our indebtedness or otherwise
adversely affect our ability to satisfy our obligations under the Notes. Also, the Chancery Court of Delaware has raised
the possibility that a change of control put right occurring as a result of a failure to have “continuing directors”
comprising a majority of a board of directors might be unenforceable on public policy grounds.
Table of Contents
17
Holders of the Notes may not be able to determine when a change of control giving rise to their right to have
the Notes repurchased has occurred following a sale of “substantially all” of our assets.
The definition of change of control in the Indenture includes a phrase relating to the sale of “all or substantially all” of
our assets. There is no precise, established definition of the phrase “substantially all” under applicable law.
Accordingly, the ability of a holder of Notes to require us to repurchase its Notes as a result of a sale of less than all
our assets to another person may be uncertain.
In the event of our bankruptcy or the bankruptcy of any of the guarantors, holders of the Notes may be
deemed to have an unsecured claim to the extent that our obligations in respect of the Notes exceed the fair
market value of the collateral securing the Notes.
In any bankruptcy proceeding with respect to us or any of the guarantors, it is possible that the bankruptcy trustee, the
debtor-in-possession, competing creditors or other parties in interest will assert that the fair market value of the
collateral with respect to the Notes is less than the then-current principal amount of the Notes. Upon a finding by the
bankruptcy court that the Notes are under-collateralized, the claims in the bankruptcy proceeding with respect to the
Notes would be bifurcated between a secured claim in an amount equal to the collateral and an unsecured claim in an
amount equal to the excess of the principal amount of the Notes over the value of the collateral, and the unsecured
claim would not be entitled to the benefits of security in the collateral. Other consequences of a finding of under-
collateralization would be, among other things, a lack of entitlement on the part of holders of the Notes to receive post-
petition interest and a lack of entitlement on the part of the unsecured portion of the Notes to receive certain or any
“adequate protection” under U.S. federal bankruptcy laws. In addition, if any payments of post-petition interest had
been made at the time of such a finding of under-collateralization, those payments could be recharacterized by the
bankruptcy court as a reduction of the principal amount of the secured claim with respect to the Notes.
The collateral securing the Notes may be diluted under certain circumstances.
The collateral securing the Exchange Notes also secures $250.5 million in aggregate principal amount of Existing
Notes. In addition, some of the collateral that secures the Notes also secures our obligations under the Revolving
Credit Facility. This and other collateral may also secure additional senior indebtedness, including additional Notes,
that we incur in the future, subject to restrictions on our ability to incur debt and liens under the Indenture and other
debt documents. Your rights to the collateral would be diluted by any increase in the indebtedness secured by this
collateral.
The rights of holders of the Notes to the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral, in which such holders have
a second-priority lien, are materially limited by the intercreditor agreement.
The rights of the holders of the Notes with respect to the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral are limited pursuant
to the terms of an intercreditor agreement between the Notes collateral agent and the lender under the Revolving
Credit Facility, or the intercreditor agreement. Under the intercreditor agreement, which is further described in
“Description of the Exchange Notes – Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered Into in Connection with the
Revolving Credit Facility,” any actions that could be taken in respect of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral
(including the ability to commence enforcement proceedings against the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral and
to control the conduct of such proceedings, and to approve amendments to, releases of that collateral from the lien of,
and waivers of past defaults under, the collateral documents) would be at the direction of the lender under the
Revolving Credit Facility. Under those circumstances, the Notes collateral agent, with limited exceptions, would not
have the ability to control or direct such actions, even if an event of default under the Indenture had occurred or if the
rights of the holders of the Notes were adversely affected.
Under the intercreditor agreement, any release by the lender under the Revolving Credit Facility of the Revolving
Facility First-Priority Collateral (other than a termination of the Revolving Credit Facility) in connection with the
lender’s exercise of its remedies, including the sale, transfer or other disposition of the Revolving First-Priority
Collateral, would also automatically release the Holders’ second-priority lien securing the Notes on the same
collateral (subject to the interest of the Holders of the Notes in the proceeds of that collateral), so long as prior written
notice of the lender’s release had been given to the Notes collateral agent. In such an instance, the Holders of the
Notes would have no control over such release. In addition, if an event of default occurs under the indenture, the Notes
collateral agent may only proceed to foreclose on the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral if the lender fails to do
so for 180 days after the Notes collateral agent has given the lender notice of the event of default. If the lender were to
proceed against the Revolving First-Priority Collateral within that 180-day period, the only remedies available to the
holders of the Notes would be recourse to collateral for the Notes which are secured on a first-priority basis,
application of proceeds available from the sale of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral after those proceeds
had been applied to pay the debt under the Revolving Credit Facility in full, and to sue for payment on the Notes and
the related guarantees.
The waiver in the intercreditor agreement of rights of marshaling may adversely affect the recovery rates of
holders of the Notes in a bankruptcy or foreclosure scenario.
The Notes and the guarantees are secured on a second-priority lien basis by the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral. The intercreditor agreement provides that, at any time holders of the Notes hold a second-priority lien on the
Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral where a first-priority lien on such collateral exists, the trustee under the
Indenture and the Notes collateral agent may not assert
Table of Contents
18
or enforce any right of marshaling accorded to a junior lienholder as against the holders of such indebtedness secured
by first-priority liens in the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral. Without this waiver of the right of marshaling,
holders of the indebtedness secured by first-priority liens in the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral would likely
be required to liquidate collateral on which the Notes did not have a lien, if any, prior to liquidating the Revolving
Facility First-Priority Collateral, which would thereby maximize the proceeds of the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral that would be available to repay our obligations under the Notes. As a result of this waiver, the proceeds of
sales of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral could be applied to repay any indebtedness secured by first-
priority liens in the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral before applying proceeds of other collateral securing
such indebtedness, and the holders of Notes may recover less than they would have if such proceeds were applied in
the order most favorable to the holders of the Notes. At this time, however, the lender does not have a security interest
in any collateral other than the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral, so the waiver of marshaling would not have
the effect described above unless the lender is granted a security interest on our property other than the Revolving
Facility First-Priority Collateral.
Your rights in the collateral may be adversely affected by the failure to perfect security interests in certain
collateral acquired in the future.
Applicable law requires that certain property and rights acquired after the grant of a general security interest, such as
rights in real property, can only be perfected at the time such property and rights are acquired and identified. There can
be no assurance that the Trustee or the Notes collateral agent will monitor, or that we will never fail to inform the
Trustee or the Notes collateral agent of, the future acquisition of property and rights that constitute collateral, and that
the necessary action will be taken to properly perfect the security interest in such after-acquired collateral. The Notes
collateral agent has no obligation to monitor the acquisition of additional property or rights that constitute collateral or
the creation or perfection of any security interest in favor of the Notes against third parties. Failure to create or perfect
any such security interest could result in the lack of any such security interest or the loss of the priority of such security
interest in favor of the Notes against third parties. In addition, under certain circumstances, we may not be required to
grant or perfect security interests in assets acquired after the issue date that are excluded from the collateral securing
the Notes as described under “Description of the Exchange Notes – Security.”
Your rights in the collateral may be adversely affected by the failure to create or perfect security interests in
certain collateral on a timely basis, and a failure to create or perfect such security interests on a timely basis or
at all may result in a default under the Indenture and other agreements governing the Notes. Furthermore,
certain liens may be avoidable by a trustee in bankruptcy.
We have agreed to secure the Notes and the guarantees by granting first-priority liens, subject to permitted liens and
certain excluded property, on our, Absaloka Coal’s and the subsidiary guarantors’ principal assets, and to take other
steps to assist in perfecting the security interests granted in the collateral. See “Description of the Exchange Notes –
Security.” A failure, for any reason that is not permitted or contemplated under the security agreement and related
documents, to perfect the security interest in the properties included in the collateral package may result in a default
under the Indenture and other agreements governing the Notes. Additionally, if we, Absaloka Coal or any subsidiary
guarantor were to become subject to a bankruptcy proceeding, any liens recorded or perfected after the issue date of
the Restricted Notes would face a greater risk of being invalidated than if they had been recorded or perfected on the
issue date of the Restricted Notes.
There are circumstances other than repayment or discharge of the Notes under which the collateral securing
the Notes and guarantees will be released automatically, without your consent or the consent of the trustee.
Under various circumstances, collateral securing the Notes will be released automatically, including:
•   a sale, transfer or other disposal or liquidation of such collateral in a transaction not prohibited under the
Indenture;
•   with respect to collateral held by a guarantor, upon the release of such guarantor from its guarantee (and its
guarantee of any other indebtedness secured equally and ratably with the Notes) in accordance with the
Indenture, and
•   with respect to collateral that secures the Revolving Credit Facility on a first-priority basis, upon any release,
sale or disposition (other than in connection with a cancellation or termination of the Revolving Credit
Facility) of such collateral pursuant to the terms of the Revolving Credit Facility resulting in the release of the
lien on such collateral securing the Revolving Credit Facility.
19
Table of Contents
In addition, the guarantee of a subsidiary guarantor will be automatically released in connection with a sale of such
subsidiary guarantor in a transaction permitted under the Indenture. The Indenture also permits us to designate one or
more of our restricted subsidiaries that is a guarantor of the Notes as an unrestricted subsidiary, on certain conditions
set forth in the Indenture. If we designate a subsidiary guarantor as an unrestricted subsidiary for purposes of the
Indenture, all of the liens on any collateral owned by such subsidiary or any of its subsidiaries and any guarantees of
the Notes by such subsidiary or any of its subsidiaries will be automatically released under the Indenture. Designation
of an unrestricted subsidiary will reduce the aggregate value of the collateral securing the Notes to the extent that liens
on the assets of the unrestricted subsidiary and its subsidiaries are released. In addition, the creditors of the
unrestricted subsidiary and its subsidiaries will have a senior claim on the assets of such unrestricted subsidiary and
its subsidiaries. See “Description of the Exchange Notes.”
We will in most cases have control over the collateral, and the sale of particular assets by us could reduce the
pool of assets securing the Notes and the guarantees.
The Indenture or the security documents will allow us to remain in possession of, retain exclusive control over, and to
freely operate the collateral securing the Notes and the guarantees. Furthermore, so long as no default or event of
default under the Indenture or other loan agreement to which we may become a party would result therefrom and such
transaction would not violate the Trust Indenture Act, we may, among other things, without any release or consent by
the collateral agents, conduct ordinary course activities with respect to collateral, such as selling, abandoning or
otherwise disposing of collateral and making ordinary course cash payments (including for the scheduled repayment
of indebtedness). With respect to such releases, we must deliver to the collateral agents from time to time an officers’
certificate to the effect that all releases and withdrawals occurring during the preceding six-month period were not
prohibited by the Indenture.
The collateral is subject to condemnation risks, which may limit the ability of the holders of the Notes to
recover as secured creditors for losses to the collateral consisting of real property, and which may have an
adverse impact on our operations and results.
It is possible that all or a portion of the real property securing the Notes and the guarantees may become subject to a
condemnation proceeding. In such event, we would expect to be compensated for any total or partial loss of property
but such compensation may be insufficient to fully compensate us for our losses. In addition, a total or partial
condemnation may interfere with our ability to use and operate all or a portion of the affected mine or other operation,
which may have an adverse impact on our operations and results.
The collateral is subject to casualty risks and potential environmental liabilities.
We maintain insurance and otherwise insure against hazards in a manner appropriate and customary for our business.
There are, however, certain losses that may be either uninsurable or not economically insurable, in whole or in part.
For example, some types of environmental losses are generally not insurable. In addition, insurance proceeds may not
compensate us fully for our losses. If there is a complete or partial loss of any of the pledged collateral, the insurance
proceeds may not be sufficient to satisfy all of the secured obligations, including the Notes and the guarantees.
Moreover, the Notes collateral agent may need to evaluate the impact of potential liabilities before determining to
foreclose on collateral consisting of real property because generally owners and operators of real property may be
held liable under environmental laws for the costs of remediating or preventing the release or threatened release of
hazardous substances at such real property. Consequently, the collateral agent may decline to foreclose on such
collateral or exercise remedies available in respect thereof if it does not receive indemnification to its satisfaction from
the holders of the Notes.
Rights of holders of the Notes in the collateral may be adversely affected by bankruptcy proceedings.
The ability of holders of the Notes to repossess, dispose of and realize upon the collateral securing the Notes will be
subject to certain bankruptcy law limitations in the event of our bankruptcy. Under applicable U.S. federal bankruptcy
laws, upon the commencement of a bankruptcy case, an automatic stay goes into effect which, among other things,
stays:
•   the commencement or continuation of any action or proceeding against the debtor that was or could have
been commenced before the commencement of the bankruptcy case to recover a claim against the debtor
that arose before the commencement of the bankruptcy case;
•   any act to obtain possession of, or control over, property of the bankruptcy estate or the debtor;
•   any act to create, perfect or enforce any lien against property of the bankruptcy estate; and
•   any act to collect or recover a claim against the debtor that arose before the commencement of the
bankruptcy case.
Thus, upon the commencement of a bankruptcy case, secured creditors are prohibited from, among other things,
repossessing their collateral from a debtor, or from disposing of such collateral repossessed from such a debtor,
without bankruptcy court approval. Moreover, applicable U.S. federal bankruptcy laws generally permit the debtor to
continue to use, sell or lease collateral (and the
20
Table of Contents
proceeds, products, rents or profits thereof) in the ordinary course of its business even though the debtor is in default
under the applicable debt instruments. Upon request from a secured creditor, the bankruptcy court will prohibit or
condition such use, sale or lease of collateral as is necessary to provide adequate protection of the secured creditor’s
interest in the collateral. Furthermore, as part of a bankruptcy plan, under certain circumstances, a bankruptcy court
may, over the objection of secured creditors, alter the post-bankruptcy timing of payments on account of creditors’
secured claims, and the rate of interest thereon, upon a finding that holders would realize the “indubitable equivalent”
of their secured claims and that such treatment would be fair and equitable and would not discriminate unfairly against
secured creditors.
The meaning of the term “adequate protection” may vary according to the circumstances, but is intended generally to
protect the value of the secured creditor’s interest in the collateral at the commencement of the bankruptcy case and
may include cash payments or the granting of additional security, if and at such times as the court in its discretion
determines any diminution in the value of the collateral occurs as a result of the debtor’s use, sale or lease of the
collateral during the pendency of the bankruptcy case. In view of the lack of a precise definition of the term “adequate
protection” and the broad discretionary powers of a U.S. bankruptcy court, we cannot predict whether payments under
the Notes would be made following commencement of and during a bankruptcy case, whether or when the trustee or
collateral agent under the Indenture could foreclose upon or sell the collateral or whether or to what extent holders of
Notes would be compensated for any delay in payment or loss of value as a result of the use, sale or lease of their
collateral through the requirement of adequate protection. Furthermore, in the event the bankruptcy court determines
that the value of the collateral is not sufficient to repay all amounts due on the Notes, the holders of the Notes would
have unsecured “deficiency claims” as to the difference. Upon a showing of “cause,” a creditor may seek relief from the
stay from the bankruptcy court to take any of the acts described above that would otherwise be prohibited by the
automatic stay. The U.S. bankruptcy court has broad discretionary powers in determining whether to grant a creditor
relief from the stay.
The value of the collateral securing the Notes may not be sufficient to secure post-petition interest.
In the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation, dissolution, reorganization or similar proceeding against us, holders of the
Notes will only be entitled to post-petition interest under the bankruptcy code to the extent that the value of their
security interest in the collateral is greater than their pre-bankruptcy claim. Holders of the Notes that have a security
interest in the collateral with a value equal to or less than their pre-bankruptcy claim will not be entitled to post-petition
interest under the bankruptcy code. We cannot assure you that the value of the holders’ interest in the collateral equals
or exceeds the principal amount of the Notes.
Risks Related to our Business and Operations
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of the Canadian Acquisition, including potential synergies, due to
challenges associated with integrating the Canadian Subsidiaries or other factors.
The long-term success of the Canadian Acquisition on our company will depend in part on the success of our
management in efficiently integrating the operations, technologies and personnel of the Canadian Subsidiaries. Our
management’s inability to meet the challenges involved in successfully integrating the Canadian Subsidiaries or to
otherwise realize the anticipated benefits of the transaction could harm our results of operations.
The challenges involved in the integration of the Canadian Subsidiaries include:
•   integrating the operations, processes, people and technologies relating to the Canadian Subsidiaries;
•   coordinating and integrating regulatory, benefits, operations and development functions;
•   demonstrating to customers that the Canadian Acquisition will not result in adverse changes in coal quality,
delivery schedules and other relevant deliverables;
•   managing and overcoming the unique characteristics of the Canadian Subsidiaries, such as the specific
mining conditions at each of the acquired mines;
•   retaining the personnel of the Canadian Subsidiaries and integrating the business cultures, operations,
systems and clients of the Canadian Subsidiaries with our own;
•   consolidating corporate and administrative infrastructures and eliminating duplicative operations and
administrative functions; and
•   identifying the potential unknown liabilities associated with the Canadian Subsidiaries and other Canadian
assets.
In addition, the overall integration of the Canadian Subsidiaries will require substantial attention from our
management, particularly in light of the geographically dispersed operations of the acquired mines relative to our other
mines and operations and the unique characteristics of the Canadian assets. If our senior management team is
required to devote considerable amounts of time to the integration process, it will decrease the time they will have to
manage our business, develop new strategies and grow our business. If our senior management is not able to manage
the integration process effectively, or if any significant business activities are interrupted as a result of the integration
process, our business could suffer.
Table of Contents
21
Furthermore, the anticipated benefits and synergies of the Canadian Acquisition are based on assumptions and
current expectations, with limited actual experience, and assume that we will successfully integrate and reallocate
resources without unanticipated costs and that our efforts will not have unforeseen or unintended consequences. In
addition, our ability to realize the benefits and synergies of the Canadian Acquisition could be adversely impacted to
the extent that relationships with existing or potential customers, suppliers or the workforce of the Canadian
Subsidiaries is adversely affected as a consequence of the Canadian Acquisition, as a result of further weakening of
global economic conditions, or by practical or legal constraints on our ability to successfully integrate the operations of
the Canadian assets.
We cannot assure you that we will successfully or cost-effectively integrate the Canadian assets into our operations in
a timely manner, or at all, and we may not realize the anticipated benefits of the acquisition, including potential
synergies or growth opportunities, to the extent or in the time frame anticipated. The failure to do so could have a
material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and business.
Risks associated with being highly leveraged.
At June 30, 2014, we had outstanding indebtedness of approximately $833.0 million, which includes the Restricted
Notes and the capital leases we assumed in the Canadian Acquisition. We may also incur additional indebtedness in
the future, including additional indebtedness under our revolving credit facility. Our leverage position may, among
other things:
•   limit our ability to obtain additional debt financing in the future for working capital, capital expenditures,
acquisitions, or other general corporate purposes;
•   require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to service our debt, reducing the
availability of cash flow for other purposes;
•   increase our vulnerability to economic downturns, limit our ability to capitalize on significant business
opportunities, and restrict our flexibility to react to changes in market or industry conditions; or
•   make it more difficult to pay our debts, including payment on the Notes, which will mature in 2018.
On January 23, 2014, Moody’s Investor Service, or Moody’s, concluded its review of our ratings which was initiated on
December 26, 2013, following the announcement of the Canadian Acquisition, and confirmed our existing credit
ratings. However, we cannot assure you that rating agencies will not downgrade the credit rating on the Notes in the
future. Any such downgrade, or any perceived decrease in our creditworthiness, could impede our ability to refinance
existing debt or secure new debt or otherwise increase our future cost of borrowing and could create additional
concerns on the part of our customers, partners, investors and employees about our financial condition and results of
operations.
If we fail to comply with certain covenants in our various debt arrangements, it could negatively affect our
liquidity and ability to finance our operations.
Our lending arrangements contain, among other terms, events of default and various affirmative and negative
covenants. Should we be unable to comply with any future debt-related covenant, we will be required to seek a waiver
of such covenant to avoid an event of default. Covenant waivers and modifications may be expensive to obtain, or,
potentially, unavailable. If we are in breach of any covenant and are unable to obtain covenant waivers and our
lenders accelerate our debt, we could attempt to refinance the debt or repay the debt by selling assets and applying
the proceeds from such sales to the debt. Sales of assets undertaken in response to such immediate needs may be
prohibited under our lending arrangements without the consent of our lenders, may be made at potentially unfavorable
prices, or asset sales may not be sufficient to refinance or repay the debt, and we may be unable to complete such
transactions in a timely manner, on favorable terms, or at all.
As a mine mouth operator, we provide coal to a small group of customers. This dependence could adversely
affect our revenues if such customers reduce or suspend their coal purchases or if they become unable to
pay for our coal.
In 2013, we derived approximately 67% of our total revenues from coal sales to five power plants: Colstrip Units 3&4
(17%), Naughton Power Station (17%), Limestone Generating Station (13%), Colstrip Units 1 & 2 (13%) and Coyote
Station (7%). Similarly, for full-year 2013, the Canadian Subsidiaries sold approximately 25% of their total aggregate
coal production to two customers, SaskPower (13%) and Capital Power (12%). Interruption in the purchases of coal by
our principal customers could significantly affect our revenues.
Unscheduled maintenance outages or other outages at our customers’ power plants, unseasonably moderate
weather, higher-than-anticipated hydro seasons or increases in the production of alternative clean-energy generation
such as wind power, or decreases in the price of competing fossil fuels such as natural gas, could cause our
customers to reduce their purchases. 11 of our 12 mines are dedicated to supplying customers located adjacent to or
near the mines, and these mines may have difficulty identifying alternative purchasers of their coal if their existing
customers suspend or terminate their purchases.
Additionally, certain of our long-term contracts are set to expire in the next several years. Our contracts with the
Sherburne County Station are three-year rolling contracts, with one-third of the tonnage expiring on an annual basis.
Our contract with Coyote
Table of Contents
22
Station, located adjacent to our Beulah Mine, and averaging approximately 2.5 million tons of coal sold per year,
expires in May 2016 and is not expected to be renewed. Our contract with Colstrip Units 3 & 4 expires in December
2019. Should we be unable to successfully renew any or all of these expiring contracts, the reduction in the sale of our
coal would adversely affect our operating results and liquidity and could result in significant impairments to the
affected mine should the mine be unable to execute a new long-term coal supply agreement. The long term
agreements we acquired in connection with the Canadian Acquisition have long-remaining terms with the exception of
the contract applicable to Poplar River Mine, which is set to expire in 2015. Coal supply agreements also typically
contain force majeure provisions allowing temporary suspension of performance by us or the customer during the
duration of specified events beyond the control of the affected party. Additionally, many of our coal supply agreements
contain provisions allowing customers to suspend acceptance of coal shipments if coal delivered does not meet
certain quality thresholds.
Our ability to collect payments from our customers could be impaired if their creditworthiness deteriorates.
Our ability to receive payment for coal sold and delivered depends on the continued creditworthiness of our customers.
If we determine that a customer is not creditworthy, we may not be required to deliver coal under the customer’s coal
sales contract. If this occurs, we may decide to sell the customer’s coal on the spot market, which may be at prices
lower than the contracted price, or we may be unable to sell the coal at all. Furthermore, the bankruptcy of any of our
customers could materially and adversely affect our financial position. In addition, competition with other coal suppliers
could cause us to extend credit to customers and on terms that could increase the risk of payment default.
Volatility in the equity markets or interest rate fluctuations could substantially increase our pension funding
requirements and negatively impact our financial position.
At December 31, 2013, the projected benefit obligation under our defined benefit pension plans was $155.1
million and the fair value of plan assets was $134.1 million. The difference between plan obligations and assets, or the
funded status of the plans, significantly affects the net periodic benefit cost and ongoing funding requirements of those
plans. Among other factors, changes in interest rates, mortality rates, early retirement rates, investment returns and the
market value of plan assets can affect the level of plan funding, cause volatility in the net periodic benefit cost and
increase our future funding requirements. During the fiscal year ended 2013, we made $0.6 million in contributions to
these pension plans and accrued $3.2 million in expenses related thereto.
If our assumptions regarding our future expenses related to employee benefit plans are incorrect, then
expenditures for these benefits could be materially higher than we have assumed. In addition, we may have
exposure under those plans that extend beyond what our obligations would be with respect to our own
employees.
We provide various postretirement medical benefits and workers’ compensation benefits to current and former
employees and their dependents. We calculate the total accumulated benefit obligations according to guidance
provided by GAAP. We estimate the present value of our postretirement medical, black lung and workers’
compensation benefit obligations to be $284.3 million, $14.1 million and $7.5 million, respectively, at December 31,
2013. In addition, in connection with the Canadian Acquisition, we assumed the obligation to provide postretirement
health coverage for eligible current union employees, as described in greater detail below. We have estimated these
unfunded obligations based on actuarial assumptions and if our assumptions do not materialize as expected, cash
expenditures and costs that we incur could be materially different.
Moreover, regulatory changes could increase our obligations to provide these or additional benefits. We participate in
defined benefit multi-employer funds that were established in connection with the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit
Act of 1992, or Coal Act, which provides for the funding of health and death benefits for certain UMWA retirees. Our
contributions to these funds totaled $2.2 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012,
respectively. Our contributions to these funds could increase as a result of a shrinking contribution base as a result of
the insolvency of other coal companies that currently contribute to these funds, lower than expected returns on fund
assets or other funding deficiencies.
We could also have obligations under the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, or 2006 Act. The 2006 Act
authorized up to a maximum of $490 million in federal contributions to pay for certain benefits, including the healthcare
costs under certain funds created by the Coal Act for “orphans,” i.e. retirees from companies that subsequently ceased
operations, and their dependents. However, if Congress were to amend or repeal the 2006 Act or if the $490 million
authorization were insufficient to pay for these healthcare costs, we, along with other contributing employers and
certain affiliates, would be responsible for the excess costs.
We also contribute to a multi-employer defined benefit pension plan, the Central Pension Fund of the Operating
Engineers, or Central Pension Fund, on behalf of employee groups at our Rosebud, Absaloka and Savage mines that
are represented by the International Union of Operating Engineers. The Central Pension Fund is subject to certain
funding rules contained in the Pension Protection Act of 2006, or PPA. Under the PPA, if the Central Pension Plan
fails to meet certain minimum funding requirements, it would be required to adopt a funding improvement plan or
rehabilitation plan. If the Central Pension Fund adopted a funding improvement plan or rehabilitation plan, we could
be required to contribute additional amounts to the fund. As of January 31, 2013, its last completed fiscal year, the
Central Pension Fund reported that it was underfunded. If we were to partially or completely withdraw from the fund at
a time when the Central Pension Fund were underfunded, we would be liable for a proportionate share of the fund’s
unfunded vested benefits, and this liability could have a material adverse effect on our financial position.
Table of Contents
23
In connection with the Canadian Acquisition, we assumed responsibility for and accepted obligations under certain
pension plans related to certain of the acquired operations. We have evaluated these plans, and believe that certain of
them may be underfunded by immaterial amounts. Our Arrangement Agreement with Sherritt requires Sherritt to adjust
the purchase price if such underfunded amount exceeds $3.0 million.
We are obligated to make contributions to these plans based upon agreement with the plan members and collective
bargaining agreements with the representative unions. Our future contributions to these defined benefit plans are
made in accordance with GAAP pursuant to applicable pension legislation and the Income Tax Act (Canada). Further
contributions to the pension plans could be required based on actuarial valuations, agreements, the plan asset
investment performance, and future legislated requirements.
Under Canadian provincial Workers’ Compensation legislation, we remain obligated to fund workers’ compensation
benefits arising from workplace injuries, disease and death of current and former employees. This obligation is based
on premiums assessed by the applicable Workers’ Compensation Board which may vary based on the claims
experience of the employer. We may be required to contribute additional premiums in the future depending on the
number and amount of claims.
Our reserve estimates may prove to be incorrect.
The coal reserve estimates in this prospectus supplement are estimates based on the interpretation of limited
sampling and subjective judgments regarding the grade, continuity and existence of mineralization, as well as the
application of economic assumptions, including assumptions as to operating costs, foreign exchange rates and future
commodity prices. The sampling, interpretations or assumptions underlying any reserve estimate may be incorrect,
and the impact on the amount of reserves ultimately proven to be recoverable may be material. Should the
mineralization or configuration of a deposit ultimately turn out to be significantly different from that currently envisaged,
then the proposed mining plan may have to be altered in a way that could affect the tonnage and grade of
the reserves mined and rates of production and, consequently, could adversely affect the profitability of the mining
operations. In addition, short term operating factors relating to the reserves, such as the need for orderly development
of ore bodies or the processing of new or different ores, may cause reserve estimates to be modified or operations to
be unprofitable in any particular fiscal period. There can be no assurance that our projects or operations will be, or will
continue to be, economically viable, that the indicated amount of minerals will be recovered or that they will be
recovered at the prices assumed for purposes of estimating reserves.
Any inaccuracies in our estimates of our coal reserves could result in decreased profitability from lower than
expected revenues or higher than expected costs.
Our future performance depends on, among other things, the accuracy of our estimates of our proven and probable
coal reserves. Our reserve estimates are prepared by our engineers and geologists or by third-party engineering firms
and are updated periodically. There are numerous factors and assumptions inherent in estimating the quantities and
qualities of, and costs to mine, coal reserves, including many factors beyond our control, including the following:
•   quality of the coal;
•   geological and mining conditions, which may not be fully identified by available exploration data or may differ
from our experiences in areas where we currently mine;
•   the percentage of coal ultimately recoverable;
•   the assumed effects of regulation, including the issuance of required permits, taxes, including severance and
excise taxes and royalties, and other payments to governmental agencies;
•   economic assumptions, including assumptions as to foreign exchange rates and future commodity prices;
•   assumptions concerning the timing for the development of the reserves; and
•   assumptions concerning equipment and productivity, future coal prices, operating costs, including for critical
supplies such as fuel, tires and explosives, capital expenditures and development and reclamation costs.
As a result, estimates of the quantities and qualities of economically recoverable coal attributable to any particular
group of properties, classifications of reserves based on risk of recovery, estimated cost of production, and estimates of
future net cash flows expected from these properties may vary materially due to changes in the above factors and
assumptions. Any inaccuracy in our estimates related to our reserves could result in decreased profitability from lower
than expected revenues or higher than expected costs.
If the assumptions underlying our reclamation and mine closure obligations are materially inaccurate, we
could be required to expend greater amounts than anticipated.
We are subject to stringent reclamation and closure standards for our mining operations. We calculated the total
estimated reclamation and mine-closing liabilities according to the guidance provided by GAAP and current industry
practice. Estimates of our total reclamation and mine-closing liabilities are based upon permit requirements and our
engineering expertise related to these requirements. If our estimates are incorrect, we could be required in future
periods to spend materially different amounts on
Table of Contents
24
reclamation and mine-closing activities than we currently estimate. Likewise, if our customers, some of whom are
contractually obligated to pay certain reclamation costs, default on the unfunded portion of their contractual obligations
to pay for reclamation, we could be forced to make these expenditures ourselves and the cost of reclamation could
exceed any amount we might recover in litigation.
We estimate that our gross reclamation and mine-closing liabilities, which are based upon projected mine lives,
current mine plans, permit requirements and our experience, were $389.4 million (on a present value basis) at
June 30, 2014. Of these June 30, 2014 liabilities, our customers have assumed $101.9 million by contract. In addition,
we held final reclamation deposits, received from customers, of approximately $75.9 million at June 30, 2014 to
provide for these obligations. We estimate that our obligation for final reclamation that was not the contractual
responsibility of others or covered by offsetting reclamation deposits was $211.6 million at June 30, 2014. We must
recover this $211.6 million from revenues generated by coal sales. Based on the conversion to GAAP of Sherritt’s
historical IFRS financial statements, we estimate that in connection with the Canadian Acquisition we assumed
approximately $123.1 million of additional reclamation and mine-closing liabilities, which is included in our total
reclamation liability of $211.6 million.
Although we update our estimated costs annually, our recorded obligations may prove to be inadequate due to
changes in legislation or standards and the emergence of new restoration techniques. Furthermore, the expected
timing of expenditures could change significantly due to changes in commodity costs or prices that might curtail the life
of an operation. These recorded obligations could prove insufficient compared to the actual cost of reclamation. Any
underestimated or unidentified close down, restoration or environmental rehabilitation costs could have an adverse
effect on our reputation as well as our asset values, results of operations and liquidity.
If the cost of obtaining new reclamation bonds and renewing existing reclamation bonds increases or if we are
unable to obtain additional bonding capacity, our operating results could be negatively affected.
We are required to provide bonds to secure our obligations to reclaim lands used for mining. We must post a bond
before we obtain a permit to mine any new area. These bonds are typically renewable on a yearly basis. Bonding
companies are requiring that applicants collateralize increasing portions of their obligations to the bonding company.
In 2013, we paid approximately $6.4 million in premiums for reclamation bonds. We anticipate that, as we permit
additional areas for our mines, our bonding and collateral requirements could increase. Any cash that we provide to
collateralize our obligations to our bonding companies is not available to support our other business activities. Our
results of operations could be negatively affected if the cost of our reclamation bonding premiums and collateral
requirements were to increase. Additionally, if we are unable to obtain additional bonding capacity due to cash flow
constraints, we will be unable to begin mining operations in newly permitted areas, which would hamper our ability to
efficiently meet our current customer contract deliveries, expand operations, and increase revenues. We used
approximately $48.1 million to collateralize new bonds in connection with the Canadian Acquisition.
Our coal mining operations are subject to external conditions that could disrupt operations and negatively
affect our results of operations.
Our coal mining operations are all surface mines. These mines are subject to conditions or events beyond our control
that could disrupt operations, affect production, and increase the cost of mining at particular mines for varying lengths
of time. These conditions or events include: unplanned equipment failures; geological, hydrological or other conditions
such as variations in the quality of the coal produced from a particular seam; variations in the thickness of coal seams
and variations in the amounts of rock and other natural materials that overlie the coal that we are mining; weather
conditions; and competition and/or conflicts with other natural gas resource extraction activities and production within
our operating areas. For example, in our recent past, we have endured poor rail performance at the Absaloka Mine, a
major blizzard at the Beulah Mine, a trestle fire at the Beulah Mine, and an unanticipated replacement of boom
suspension cables on one of our draglines, all of which interrupted deliveries. Major disruptions in operations at any of
our mines over a lengthy period could adversely affect the profitability of our mines.
In addition, unplanned outages of draglines and extensions of scheduled outages due to mechanical failures or other
problems occur from time-to-time and are an inherent risk of our coal mining business. Unplanned outages typically
increase our operation and maintenance expenses and may reduce our revenues because of selling fewer tons of
coal. As of June 30, 2014, five of our 30 owned or operated draglines were not in use due to either equipment
servicing or because the dragline was scheduled to be down based on the operational needs of our mines. If properly
maintained, a dragline can operate for 40 years or longer. As of December 31, 2013, the average age of
Westmoreland’s dragline fleet (including the Canadian Subsidiaries) was 33 years. In addition, at our Kemmerer Mine
we use shovels instead of draglines. If properly maintained, a shovel can last for 30 years or longer. As of
December 31, 2013, the average age of our shovels was 16 years. As our draglines, shovels and other major
equipment ages, we may experience unscheduled maintenance outages or increased maintenance costs, which
would adversely affect our operating results.
Unplanned outages and extensions of scheduled outages due to mechanical failures or other problems occur from
time-to-time at our power plant customers and are an inherent risk of our business. Unplanned outages typically
increase our operation and maintenance expenses and may reduce our revenues because of selling fewer tons of
coal. For example, in November 2011, the Sherburne County station experienced an explosion and fire that caused an
extended outage. As a result, we lost approximately 50% of our coal sales in 2012 and 2013 at our Absaloka Mine.
While Sherburne County station initially indicated a start-up date of March
25
Table of Contents
2013, it did not ultimately resume operations until October 2013, resulting in additional lost coal sales during 2013. We
maintain business interruption insurance coverage to lessen the impact of events such as this, and have received a
total of approximately $33.6 million of cash proceeds in insurance compensation for lost sales to the Sherburne
County station. While we believe our insurance did not fully compensate us for the impact of lost sales, we believe the
shortfall was not material. However, business interruption insurance may not always provide adequate compensation
for lost coal sales, and significant unanticipated outages at our power plant customers which result in lost coal sales
could result in significant adverse effects on our operating results.
Our operations are vulnerable to natural disasters, operating difficulties and infrastructure constraints, not all
of which are covered by insurance, which could have an impact on our productivity.
Mining and power operations are vulnerable to natural events, including blizzards, earthquakes, drought, floods, fire,
storms and the possible effects of climate change. Operating difficulties such as unexpected geological variations
could affect the costs and viability of our operations. Our operations also require reliable roads, rail networks, power
sources and power transmission facilities, water supplies and IT systems to access and conduct operations. The
availability and cost of infrastructure affects our capital expenditures, operating costs, and planned levels of production
and sales.
We maintain insurance for some, but not all, of the potential risks and liabilities associated with our business. For
some risks, we may not obtain insurance if we believe the cost of available insurance is excessive relative to the risks
presented. As a result of market conditions, premiums and deductibles for certain insurance policies can increase
substantially, and in some instances, certain insurance may become unavailable or available only for reduced
amounts of coverage. As a result, we may not be able to renew our existing insurance policies or procure other
desirable insurance on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. Although we maintain insurance at levels we believe
are appropriate and consistent with industry practice, we are not fully insured against all risks. In addition, pollution
and environmental risks and consequences of any business interruptions such as equipment failure or labor disputes
generally are not fully insurable. Losses and liabilities from uninsured and underinsured events and delay in the
payment of insurance proceeds could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations
and cash flows.
Long-term sales and revenues could be significantly affected by environmental regulations and the effects of
the environmental lobby.
A consortium of environmental activists is actively pushing to shut down one-third of the nation’s coal plants by
2020. They are taking particular interest in Colstrip Units 1 and 2 and are actively lobbying the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or EPA, to require cost-prohibitive pollution control equipment. In litigation filed in 2012, the
activists stated that the EPA’s Best Available Retrofit Technology (“BART”) analysis for regional haze provides
support for a determination that additional controls or upgrades to controls to improve regional haze are necessary to
achieve BART. A decision in the case is pending. In 2013, environmental groups also filed a citizen suit complaint in
Montana district court asserting that the owners and operators of Colstrip are in violation of Clean Air Act
requirements. Trial in the case is set for late in 2014. If environmental groups are successful, Colstrip would be
required to undergo new permitting and comply with more stringent emission limits applicable to a number of
pollutants. If additional emissions controls and upgrades are required at Colstrip Units 1 and 2, it is possible the
owners could elect to shut down the units in lieu of making the large capital expenditures required to comply. If such a
decision were made, we could lose coal sales of approximately 3.0 million tons per year starting in approximately
2015. The loss of the sale of this tonnage at our Rosebud Mine could have a material adverse effect on the mine’s
revenues and profitability.
Additionally, Rocky Mountain Power, the owner of the Naughton Power Station located adjacent to our Kemmerer
Mine, which is our Kemmerer Mine’s primary customer, has sought regulatory approval to convert Unit 3 at Naughton
to 100% natural gas fueling. When complete, the conversion of Unit 3 to natural gas will result in the loss of coal sales
at our Kemmerer Mine. However, Rocky Mountain Power recently announced the conversion of Naughton Unit 3 will
not occur until 2018. In addition, price protections built into the contract that are in effect from 2017 to 2021 will partially
offset the effects of lowered volume following the conversion of Unit 3. Despite these price protections, the lost sales at
the Kemmerer Mine could have a material adverse effect on the mine’s revenues and profitability and on our operating
results.
In September 2013, the EPA reproposed new source performance standards for greenhouse gases (“GHG”) that
would require new fossil-fuel fired power plants to install carbon capture and sequestration systems. The EPA stated
that it intends to finalize the rule by January of 2015. The EPA also is developing GHG standards for existing and
modified power plants, initial draft proposals of which the EPA released on June 2, 2014. The proposed rule sets the
standard for existing sources as state-specific carbon emission rates that, if finalized, would be phased in between
2020 and 2030. The proposed rule would give states the discretion to use a variety of approaches—including cap-
and-trade programs—to meet the standard. The EPA estimates that the proposed existing source rule would reduce
CO2 emissions from the power sector by 30 percent by 2030, with a focus on emissions from coal-fired generation.
The EPA plans to finalize the rule by June 2015, with state plans due by June 2016, with one- to two-year extensions
available. It is difficult to predict at this time the effect these proposed rules would have on our revenues and
profitability.
Following the Canadian Acquisition, we are also affected by Canadian GHG emissions regulations. On September 12,
2012, the federal government of Canada released final regulations for reducing GHG emissions from coal-fired
electricity generation: “Reduction of Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Coal-Fired Generation of Electricity” (the
“Canadian CO2 Regulations”). The Canadian CO2 Regulations will require certain Canadian coal-fired electricity
generating plants, effective July 1, 2015, to achieve an
Table of Contents
26
average annual emissions intensity performance standard of 420 tons of CO2 per gigawatt hour. The impact of the
Canadian CO2 Regulations on existing plants will vary by province and specific location. PMRL’s long-term sales
could be reduced unless certain existing plants that it supplies or new plants built to replace such existing plants are
equipped with carbon capture and sequestration or other technology that achieves the prescribed performance
standard, the impact of the Canadian CO2 Regulations is altered by equivalency agreements, or the Canadian CO2
Regulations are changed to lower the performance standard.
In addition, various Canadian provincial governments and other regional initiatives are moving ahead with GHG
reduction and other initiatives designed to address climate change. As it is unclear at this time what shape additional
regulation in Canada will ultimately take, it is not yet possible to reliably estimate the extent to which such regulations
will impact the operations we acquired in the Canadian Acquisition. However, our Canadian operations involve large
facilities, so the setting of emissions targets (whether in the manner described above or otherwise) may well affect
some or all of our Canadian customers, and may in turn have a material adverse effect on our business, results of
operations and financial performance. In addition to directly emitting GHGs, the operations we acquired in the
Canadian Acquisition require large quantities of power. Future taxes on or regulation of power producers or an
increase in cost of the fuels used in power production (including coal, oil and gas or other products) may also add to
our operating costs.
A defect in title or the loss of a leasehold interest in certain property could limit our ability to mine our coal
reserves or result in significant unanticipated costs.
We conduct a significant part of our coal mining operations on properties that we lease. A title defect or the loss of a
lease could adversely affect our ability to mine the associated coal reserves. We may not verify title to our leased
properties or associated coal reserves until we have committed to developing those properties or coal reserves. We
may not commit to develop property or coal reserves until we have obtained necessary permits and completed
exploration. As such, the title to property that we intend to lease or coal reserves that we intend to mine may contain
defects prohibiting our ability to conduct mining operations. Similarly, our leasehold interests may be subject to
superior property rights of other third parties. In order to conduct our mining operations on properties where these
defects exist, we may incur unanticipated costs. In addition, some leases require us to produce a minimum quantity of
coal and require us to pay minimum production royalties. Our inability to satisfy those requirements may cause the
leasehold interest to terminate.
We are dependent on information technology and our systems and infrastructure face certain risks, including
cybersecurity risks and data leakage risks.
We are dependent on information technology systems and infrastructure. Any significant breakdown, invasion,
destruction or interruption of these systems by employees, others with authorized access to our systems, or
unauthorized persons could negatively impact operations. There is also a risk that we could experience a business
interruption, theft of information, or reputational damage as a result of a cyber-attack, such as an infiltration of a data
center, or data leakage of confidential information either internally or at our third-party providers. While we have
invested in the protection of our data and information technology to reduce these risks and periodically test the security
of our information systems network, there can be no assurance that our efforts will prevent breakdowns or breaches in
our systems that could adversely affect our business.
Our Absaloka Mine benefited from Indian Coal Production Tax Credits, or ICTC, the permanent loss of which
will adversely affect the financial condition of the operation.
The ICTC, which our Absaloka Mine historically benefited from, expired in December 2013 and has not been
extended or renewed. There is no assurance that a renewal, if any is enacted, would be enacted with retroactive effect.
The provisions regarding any future renewal may not be as favorable as those that previously existed. Additionally, the
investment in Absaloka Coal LLC by our partner did not continue after December 31, 2013. We expect to seek a new
partner in the event of a future renewal, but our results of operations will continue to be negatively affected during the
interim period and for any period for which the ICTC is not renewed with retroactive effect. From 2009 through 2013,
we experienced a yearly average of $3.1 million of income and $6.1 million of cash receipts from Absaloka Coal LLC’s
participation in ICTC transactions.
Our future success depends upon our ability to continue acquiring and developing coal reserves that are
economically recoverable and to raise the capital necessary to fund our expansion.
Our recoverable reserves decline as we produce coal. We have not yet applied for the permits to use all of the coal
deposits under our mineral rights, and the government agencies may not grant those permits in a timely manner or at
all. Furthermore, we may not be able to mine all of our coal deposits as efficiently as we do at our current operations.
Our future success depends upon conducting successful exploration and development activities and acquiring
properties containing economically recoverable coal deposits. Our current strategy includes increasing our coal
reserves through acquisitions of other mineral rights, leases, or producing properties and continuing to use our existing
properties. Our ability to expand our operations may be dependent on our ability to obtain sufficient working capital,
either through cash flows generated from operations, or financing activities, or both. As we mine our coal and deplete
our existing reserves, replacement reserves may not be available when required or, if available, we may not be
capable of mining the coal at costs comparable to those characteristic of the depleting mines. These factors could
have a material adverse effect on our mining operations and costs, and our customers’ ability to use the coal we mine.
Table of Contents
27
We may not be able to successfully replace our reserves or grow through future acquisitions.
In recent years, we have expanded our operations by adding new mines and reserves through strategic acquisitions,
and we intend to continue expanding our operations and coal reserves through additional future acquisitions. Our
future growth could be limited if we are unable to continue making acquisitions, or if we are unable to successfully
integrate the companies, businesses or properties we acquire. We may not be successful in consummating any
acquisitions and the consequences of undertaking these acquisitions are unknown. Our ability to make acquisitions in
the future could be limited by restrictions under our existing or future debt agreements, competition from other coal
companies for attractive properties or the lack of suitable acquisition candidates.
Transportation impediments may hinder our current operations or future growth.
Certain segments of our current business, principally our Absaloka Mine and Coal Valley Mine, rely on rail
transportation for the delivery of coal product to customers and ports. Our ability to deliver our product in a timely
manner could be adversely affected by the lack of adequate availability of rail capacity, whether because of work
stoppages, union work rules, track conditions or otherwise. In 2011, flooding conditions disrupted rail service to the
Absaloka Mine, resulting in lost revenue. Rail or shipping transportation costs represent a significant portion of the
total cost of coal for our customers, and the cost of transportation is a key factor in a customer’s purchasing decision. In
addition, the Coal Valley Mine exports the majority of its production to the global seaborne market through port
facilities in western Canada.
The unavailability of rail capacity and port capacity could also hinder our future growth as we seek to sell coal into new
markets. The current availability of rail cars is limited and at times unavailable because of repairs or improvements, or
because of priority transportation agreements with other customers. Port capacity is also restricted in certain markets. If
transportation is restricted or is unavailable, we may be unable to sell into new markets and, therefore, the lack of rail
or port capacity would hamper our future growth. We currently have sufficient committed port capacity to operate our
export business, and additional port capacity is expected to be constructed in western Canada in the future. However,
increases in transportation costs or the lack of sufficient rail or port capacity or availability could make our coal less
competitive, or could result in coal becoming a less competitive source of energy in general, which could lead to
reduced coal sales or reduced prices we receive for the coal. Our inability to timely deliver product or fuel switching
due to rising transportation costs could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results
of operations.
Decreased availability or increased costs of key equipment and materials could impact our cost of production
and decrease our profitability.
We depend on reliable supplies of mining equipment, replacement parts and materials such as explosives, diesel fuel,
tires and magnetite. The supplier base providing mining materials and equipment has been relatively consistent in
recent years, although there continues to be consolidation, which has resulted in a limited number of suppliers for
certain types of equipment and supplies. Any significant reduction in availability or increase in cost of any mining
equipment or key supplies could adversely affect our operations and increase our costs, which could adversely affect
our operating results and cash flows.
In addition, the prices we pay for these materials are strongly influenced by the global commodities market. Coal
mines consume large quantities of commodities such as steel, copper, rubber products, explosives and diesel and
other liquid fuels. Some materials, such as steel, are needed to comply with regulatory requirements. A rapid or
significant increase in the cost of these commodities could increase our mining costs because we have limited ability
to negotiate lower prices, and in some cases, do not have a ready substitute.
Union represented labor creates an increased risk of work stoppages and higher labor costs.
Approximately 70% of our total U.S. workforce is represented by two labor unions, the International Union of Operating
Engineers and the UMWA. Our unionized workforce is spread out amongst the majority of our surface mines. As a
majority of our workforce is unionized, there may be an increased risk of strikes and other labor disputes, and our
ability to alter labor costs is subject to collective bargaining. The collective bargaining agreement relating to the
represented workforce at the Absaloka Mine expired in mid-2011. We were successful in negotiating a new agreement
without any work stoppages or other disruptions. In 2012, we were successful in entering into agreements with our
workforce at Savage, Kemmerer and Rosebud. If our Jewett Mine operations were to become unionized, we could be
subject to additional risk of work stoppages, other labor disputes and higher labor costs, which could adversely affect
the stability of production and our results of operations. While strikes are generally a force majeure event in long-term
coal supply agreements, thereby exempting the mine from its delivery obligations, the loss of revenue for even a short
time could have a material adverse effect on our financial results.
Congress has proposed legislation to enact a law allowing workers to choose union representation solely by signing
election cards, which would eliminate the use of secret ballots to elect union representation. While the impact is
uncertain, if the government enacts this proposal into law, which would make it administratively easier to unionize, it
may lead to more coal mines becoming unionized.
Table of Contents
28
Approximately 65% of our total Canadian workforce is represented by a labor union. There are labor agreements in
place with one or more unions at each of the producing mines we acquired in the Canadian Acquisition, other than the
Genesee Mine. Our collective bargaining agreement related to the Estevan Mine will expire on June 30, 2015. If we
are not successful in negotiating new labor agreements as they expire with any of the Canadian workforce unions or
otherwise maintaining strong partnerships with them, it could result in labor disputes, work stoppages or higher labor
costs, any of which could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
We face intense competition to attract and retain employees.
We are dependent on retaining existing employees and attracting additional qualified employees to meet current and
future needs. We face intense competition for qualified employees, and there can be no assurance that we will be able
to attract and retain such employees or that such competition among potential employers will not result in increasing
salaries. We rely on employees with unique skill sets to perform our mining operations, including engineers,
mechanics and other highly skilled individuals. An inability to retain existing employees or attract additional
employees, especially with mining skills and background, could have a material adverse effect on our business, cash
flows, financial condition and results of operations.
Following the Canadian Acquisition, we are subject to foreign exchange risk as a result of exposures to
changes in currency exchange rates between the U.S. and Canada.
Following the Canadian Acquisition, we face increased exposure to exchange rate fluctuations between the Canadian
dollar and U.S. dollar. We realize a large portion of our revenues from sales made from the Canadian assets in
Canadian dollars, and many of the expenses incurred by the Canadian assets are recognized in Canadian dollars.
The exchange rate of the Canadian dollar to the U.S. dollar has been at or near historic highs in recent years. In the
event that the Canadian dollar weakens in comparison to the U.S. dollar, earnings generated from Canadian
operations will translate into reduced earnings in our consolidated statements of operations reported in U.S. dollars. In
addition, our Canadian Subsidiaries also record certain accounts receivable and accounts payable, which are
denominated in Canadian dollars. Foreign currency transactional gains and losses are realized upon settlement of
these assets and obligations.
Following the Canadian Acquisition, fluctuations in the U.S. dollar relative to the Canadian dollar may make it more
difficult to perform period-to-period comparisons of our reported results of operations. For purposes of accounting, the
assets and liabilities of our Canadian operations will be translated using period-end exchange rates, and the revenues
and expenses of our Canadian operations will be translated using average exchange rates during each period.
Translation gains and losses are reported in accumulated other comprehensive loss as a component of stockholders’
equity.
Risks Related to the Coal and Power Industries
The risk of prolonged recessionary conditions could adversely affect our financial condition and results of
operations.
Because we sell substantially all of our coal to electric utilities, our business and results of operations remain closely
linked to demand for electricity. Recent economic uncertainty has raised the risk of prolonged recessionary conditions.
Historically, global demand for basic inputs, including electricity production, has decreased during periods of
economic downturn. If demand for electricity production decreases, our financial condition and results of operations
could be adversely affected.
Competition in the North American coal industry may adversely affect our revenues and results of operations.
Many of our competitors in the North American coal industry are major coal producers who have significantly greater
financial resources than we do. The intense competition among coal producers may impact our ability to retain or
attract customers and may therefore adversely affect our future revenues and results of operations. Among other
things, competitors could develop new mines that compete with our mines, have higher quality coal than our mines or
build or obtain access to rail lines that would adversely affect the competitive position of our mines.
Any change in consumption patterns by utilities away from the use of coal could affect our ability to sell the
coal we produce or the prices that we receive.
In addition to competing with other coal producers, we compete generally with producers of other fuels. In 2013, the
electric utility industry accounted for approximately 93% of coal consumption in the U.S. and 80% of coal consumption
in Canada. The demand for electricity, environmental and other governmental regulations, and the price and
availability of competing fuels for power plants such as nuclear, hydro, natural gas and fuel oil as well as alternative
sources of energy affects the amount of coal consumed by the electric utility industry. A decrease in coal consumption
by the electric utility industry could adversely affect the demand for, and price of, coal, which could negatively impact
our results of operations and liquidity. We do not have contracts guaranteeing the purchase of fixed quantities of coal,
so revenue can fall even though we have long-term contracts.
Some power plants are fueled by natural gas because of the relatively lower construction costs of such plants
compared to coal-fired plants and because natural gas is a cleaner burning fuel. In addition, some states have adopted
or are considering legislation that encourages domestic electric utilities to switch from coal-fired power generation
plants to natural gas powered plants. Similar
Table of Contents
29
legislation has been implemented or is under consideration in several Canadian provinces. Passage of these and
other state, provincial or federal laws or regulations limiting carbon dioxide emissions could result in fuel switching,
from coal to other fuel sources, by purchasers of our coal. Such laws and regulations could also mandate decreases in
carbon dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants, impose taxes on carbon emissions or require certain
technology to capture and sequester carbon dioxide from coal-fired power plants. If these or similar measures are
ultimately imposed by federal, state or provincial governments or pursuant to international treaty, our reserves and
operating costs may be materially and adversely affected. Similarly, alternative fuels (non-fossil fuels) could become
more attractive than coal in order to reduce carbon emissions, which could result in a reduction in the demand for coal
and, therefore, our revenues.
Recently, the supply of natural gas has reached record highs and the price of natural gas has remained at depressed
levels for sustained periods due to extraction techniques involving horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing that have
led to economic access to large quantities of natural gas in the United States and Canada, making it an attractive
competing fuel. A continuing decline in the price of natural gas, or continuing periods of sustained low natural gas
prices, could cause demand for coal to decrease, result in fuel switching and decreased coal consumption by
electricity-generating utilities and adversely affect the price of our coal. Sustained low natural gas prices may cause
utilities to phase-out or close existing coal-fired power plants or reduce construction of any new coal-fired power
plants, which could have a material adverse effect on demand and prices received for our coal.
Changes in the export and import markets for coal products could affect the demand for our coal, our pricing
and our profitability.
Although our mines and the majority of our customers are located in North America, we compete in a worldwide
market for coal and coal products. The pricing and demand for our products is affected by a number of global
economic factors that are beyond our control and difficult to predict. These factors include:
•   currency exchange rates;
•   growth of economic development;
•   price of alternative sources of electricity or steel;
•   worldwide demand for coal and other sources of energy; and
•   ocean freight rates.
Any decrease in the aggregate amount of coal exported from the United States and Canada, or any increase in the
aggregate amount of coal imported into the United States and Canada, could have a material adverse impact on the
demand for our coal, our pricing and our profitability. Ongoing uncertainty in European economies and slowing
economies in China, India and Brazil have reduced and may continue to reduce near-term pricing and demand for
coal exported from the United States and Canada. The operations we acquired in the Canadian Acquisition include a
mine in western Canada that primarily supplies premium thermal coal to the Asian export market. Ownership of this
mine will increase our exposure to price fluctuations in the international coal market, and a substantial downturn in
demand in the Asian market could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Extensive government regulations impose significant costs on our mining operations, and future regulations
could increase those costs or limit our ability to produce and sell coal.
The coal mining industry is subject to increasingly strict regulation by federal, state and local authorities with respect to
matters such as:
•   limitations on land use;
•   employee health and safety;
•   mandated benefits for retired coal miners;
•   mine permitting and licensing requirements;
•   reclamation and restoration of mining properties after mining is completed;
•   air quality standards;
•   discharges to water;
•   construction and permitting of facilities required for mining operations, including valley fills and other
structures constructed in water bodies and wetlands;
•   protection of human health, plant life and wildlife;
•   management of the materials generated by mining operations and discharge of these materials into the
environment;
•   effects of mining on groundwater quality and availability; and
•   remediation of contaminated soil, surface and groundwater.
Table of Contents
30
We are required to prepare and present to governmental authorities data concerning the potential effects of any
proposed exploration or production of coal on the environment and the public has statutory rights to submit objections
to requested permits and approvals. The costs, liabilities and requirements associated with these and other
regulations may be costly and time-consuming and may delay commencement or continuation of exploration or
production operations. Failure to comply with these regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil
and criminal penalties, the imposition of cleanup and site restoration costs and liens, the issuance of injunctions to
limit or cease operations, the suspension or revocation of permits and other enforcement measures that could have the
effect of limiting production from our operations. We may also incur costs and liabilities resulting from claims for
damages to property or injury to persons arising from our operations. We must compensate employees for work-related
injuries. If we do not make adequate provision for our workers’ compensation liabilities, it could harm our future
operating results. If we are pursued for any sanctions, costs and liabilities, our mining operations and, as a result, our
results of operations, could be adversely affected.
New legislation or regulations and orders may be adopted that may materially adversely affect our mining operations,
our cost structure or our customers’ ability to use coal. New legislation or administrative regulations (or new judicial
interpretations or administrative enforcement of existing laws and regulations), including proposals related to the
protection of the environment that would further regulate and tax the coal industry, may also require us or our
customers to change operations significantly or incur increased costs. These regulations, if proposed and enacted in
the future, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. For additional
information regarding specific regulations that impact our operations, see Item 1 of our 2013 Form 10-K under “Coal
Segment-Material Effects of Regulation,” which is incorporated by reference herein.
Concerns regarding climate change are, in many of the jurisdictions in which we operate, leading to increasing
interest in, and in some cases enactment of, laws and regulations governing greenhouse gas emissions,
which affect the end-users of coal and could reduce the demand for coal as a fuel source and cause the
volume of our sales or the prices we receive to decline. These laws and regulations also have imposed, and
will continue to impose, costs directly on us.
GHG emissions have increasingly become the subject of international, national, state, provincial and local attention.
Coal-fired power plants can generate large amounts of carbon and other GHG emissions. Accordingly, legislation or
regulation intended to limit GHGs will likely indirectly affect our coal operations by limiting our customers’ demand for
our products or reducing the prices we can obtain, and also may directly affect our own power operations. In the United
States, the EPA has issued a notice of finding and determination that emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide and other GHGs present an endangerment to human health and the environment, which allows the EPA to
begin regulating emissions of GHGs under existing provisions of the federal Clean Air Act. The EPA implemented
GHG-related reporting and permitting rules. Portions of the EPA’s GHG permitting rules, which were the subject of
litigation by some industry groups and states, were recently struck down in part by the U.S. Supreme Court, but the
EPA’s authority to impose GHG permitting requirements on a majority of large emissions sources, including coal-fired
electric utilities, remain in place. President Obama in June 2013 announced a Climate Action Plan, which included a
Presidential Memorandum directing the EPA to issue standards for GHG emissions from existing, modified and
reconstructed fossil-fuel fired power plants. The EPA issued a revised proposal with standards for new fossil fuel-fired
plants, including coal-fired plants, in September 2013, which the EPA plans to finalize by January 2015. The EPA also
has released its “Clean Power Plan” in June 2014, which includes proposed standards for existing and modified
sources. Under the Clean Power Plan as currently proposed, the EPA would set standards for existing sources as
stringent state-specific carbon emission rates that, if finalized, would be phased in between 2020 and 2030. The
proposed rule would give states the discretion to use a variety of approaches—including cap-and-trade programs—to
meet the standard. The EPA estimates that the proposed existing source rule would reduce CO2 emissions from the
power sector by 30 percent by 2030, with a focus on emissions from coal-fired generation. The EPA plans to finalize
the rule by June 2015, with state plans due by June 2016, with one- to two-year extensions available. The U.S.
Congress has considered, and in the future may again consider, legislation governing GHG emission, including “cap
and trade” legislation that would establish a cap on emissions of GHGs covering much of the economy in the United
States and would require most sources of GHG emissions to obtain GHG emission “allowances” corresponding to their
annual emissions of GHGs. In addition, coal-fired power plants, including new coal-fired power plants or capacity
expansions of existing plants, have become subject to opposition by environmental groups seeking to curb the
environmental effects of GHG emissions. It is difficult to predict at this time the effect these proposed rules would have
on our revenues and profitability. For additional information, see “Business - Material Effects of Regulation” in our
2013 Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference herein.
In Canada, in September 2012 the federal government released final regulations for reducing GHG emissions from
coal-fired electricity generation through the Canadian CO2 Regulations. The Canadian CO2 Regulations will require
certain Canadian coal-fired electricity generating units, effective July 1, 2015, to achieve an average annual emissions
intensity performance standard of 420 tons of CO2 per gigawatt hour. According to Sherritt’s public filings, this
performance standard represents approximately one-half of the annual average CO2 emissions intensity of the
customer generating assets currently served by the Prairie Operations. The performance standard will apply to new
units commissioned after July 1, 2015 and to units that are considered to have reached the end of their useful life,
generally between 45 and 50 years from the unit’s commissioning date. New and end-of-life units that incorporate
technology for carbon capture and sequestration may apply for a temporary exemption from the performance standard
that would remain in effect until 2025, provided that certain implementation milestones are met. Provincial equivalency
agreements, under which the Canadian CO2 Regulations would stand down, are being negotiated or discussed with
the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. The Prairie coal production in the long-term could be reduced unless
certain existing units or new units of the customers served by the Prairie operations are equipped with carbon capture
and storage or other technology that achieves the prescribed performance standard, the impact of the Regulations is
altered by equivalency agreements, or the Canadian CO2 Regulations are changed to lower the performance
standard. The impact of the Canadian CO2 Regulations on existing units will vary by location and province.
Table of Contents
31
In addition, various Canadian provincial governments and other regional initiatives are moving ahead with GHG
reduction and other initiatives designed to address climate change. For example, under the Climate Change and
Emissions Management Act (the “CCEM”), the Province of Alberta enacted the “Specified Gas Emitters Regulation.”
As of January 1, 2008, this enactment requires certain existing facilities with direct emissions of 100,000 tons or more
of certain specified gases to ensure that the net emissions intensity for a year for an established facility must not
exceed 88% of the baseline emissions intensity for the facility. For the 2011 compliance period, CVRI’s Coal Valley
operations exceeded the 100,000 ton emissions threshold established under the Specified Gas Emitters Regulation,
and Coal Valley was required to contribute to the Climate Change and Emissions Management Fund. According to
Sherritt’s public filings, for the 2012 compliance period, the preliminary calculations indicate Coal Valley will be
required to purchase fund credits. It is anticipated that for the next several years, emissions intensity at Coal Valley will
increase as the distance between the coal being mined and the processing plant increases. The Government of
Alberta has also introduced a complementary Specified Gas Reporting Regulation, which came into force on
October 20, 2004. This legislation requires all industrial emitters emitting 50,000 tons or more of CO2 to report their
annual GHG emissions in accordance with the specified Gas Reporting Standard published by the Government of
Alberta. In Saskatchewan, Bill 126, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act, was passed in 2010
but is not yet proclaimed in force. The legislation provides a framework for the control of GHG emissions by regulated
emitters and will be proclaimed once accompanying draft regulations are finalized.
As it is unclear at this time what shape additional regulation in Canada will ultimately take, it is not yet possible to
estimate the extent to which such regulations will impact the operations we acquired in the Canadian Acquisition.
However, those operations involve large facilities, so the setting of emissions targets (whether in the manner
described above or otherwise) may well affect them and may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of
operations and financial performance. These developments in both Canada and the United States could have a
variety of adverse effects on demand for the coal we produce. For example, laws or regulations regarding GHGs could
result in fuel switching from coal to other fuel sources by electricity generators, or require us, or our customers, to
employ expensive technology to capture and sequester carbon dioxide. Political and environmental opposition to
capital expenditure for coal-fired facilities could affect the regulatory approval required for the retrofitting of existing
power plants. For example, the Naughton power facility, which is located adjacent to the Kemmerer Mine, announced
in April 2012 that it is seeking regulatory approval to switch Unit 3 to natural gas from coal. The conversion of
Naughton Unit 3 to natural gas would result in significant reduction in coal sales from our Kemmerer Mine, and could
have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. However, Rocky Mountain Power, the owner of the
Naughton facility, recently announced that the conversion will not take place until at least 2018. Political opposition to
the development of new coal-fired power plants, or regulatory uncertainty regarding future emissions controls, may
result in fewer such plants being built, which would limit our ability to grow in the future.
In addition to directly emitting GHGs, the operations we acquired in the Canadian Acquisition require large quantities
of power. Future taxes on or regulation of power producers or the production of coal, oil and gas or other products may
also add to our operating costs. And many of the developments in the U.S. discussed above that may affect our
customers and demand for our coal could also affect us directly through adverse impacts on ROVA.
Depending on how they evolve, such developments, individually or in the aggregate, may have a material adverse
effect on our business, results of operations and financial performance.
Extensive environmental laws, including existing and potential future legislation, treaties and regulatory
requirements relating to air emissions other than GHGs, affect our customers and could reduce the demand
for coal as a fuel source and cause coal prices and sales of our coal to materially decline, and could impose
additional costs on ROVA.
Our customers, as well as ROVA, are subject to extensive environmental regulations particularly with respect to air
emissions other than GHG. Coal contains impurities, including but not limited to sulfur, mercury, chlorine and other
elements or compounds, many of which are released into the air when coal is burned. The emission of these and other
substances is extensively regulated at the federal, state, provincial and local level, and these regulations significantly
affect our customers’ ability to use the coal we produce and, therefore, the demand for that coal. For example, the
purchaser of coal produced from the Jewett Mine blends our lignite with compliance coal from Wyoming. Tightened
nitrogen oxide and new mercury emission standards could result in the customer purchasing an increased blend of the
Wyoming coal in order to reduce emissions. Further, increased market prices for sulfur dioxide emissions allowances
and increased coal ash management costs could also favor an increased blend of the lower ash Wyoming compliance
coal. In such a case, the customer has the option to increase its purchases of other coal and reduce purchases of our
coal or terminate our contract. A termination of the contract or a significant reduction in the amount of our coal that is
purchased by the customer could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
The EPA intends to issue or has issued a number of significant regulations that will impose more stringent
requirements relating to air, water and waste controls on electric generating units. These rules include the EPA’s
pending new requirements for coal combustion residue (“CCR”) management that may further regulate the handling of
wastes from the combustion of coal. In addition, in February 2012, the EPA signed a rule to reduce emissions of
mercury and toxic air pollutants from new and existing coal- and oil-fired electric utility steam generating units, often
referred to as the MATS Rule. This rule was upheld by the Federal Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit in April 2014.
In April 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the EPA’s Cross-State Air Pollution Rule
Table of Contents
32
(“CSAPR”), which would require stringent reductions in emissions of nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide from power
plants in much of the Eastern United States, including Texas and North Carolina. The EPA has filed a motion to have
the D.C. Circuit lift its stay on the CSAPR. In May 2014, the EPA Administrator signed a final rule that establishes
requirements for cooling water intake structures for the withdrawal of cooling water by electric generating plants; the
rule is anticipated to affect over 500 power plants.
Considerable uncertainty is associated with air emissions initiatives. New regulations are in the process of being
developed, and many existing and potential regulatory initiatives are subject to review by federal or state agencies or
the courts. Stringent air emissions limitations are either in place or are likely to be imposed in the short to medium
term, and these limitations will likely require significant emissions control expenditures for many coal-fired power
plants. For example, the owners of Units 3 and 4 at Colstrip, adjacent to our Rosebud Mine, are getting considerable
pressure from environmental groups to install Selective Catalytic Reduction (“SCR”) technology. Should the owners
be forced by the EPA to install such technology, the capital requirements could make the continued operation of the
two units unsustainable. As a result, Colstrip and other similarly-situated power plants may switch to other fuels that
generate fewer of these emissions or may install more effective pollution control equipment that reduces the need for
low-sulfur coal. Any switching of fuel sources away from coal, closure of existing coal-fired power plants, or reduced
construction of new coal-fired power plants could have a material adverse effect on demand for, and prices received
for, our coal. Alternatively, less stringent air emissions limitations, particularly related to sulfur, to the extent enacted,
could make low-sulfur coal less attractive, which could also have a material adverse effect on the demand for, and
prices received for, our coal.
The regulation of air emissions in Canada may also reduce the demand for the products of the operations we acquired
in the Canadian Acquisition. Specifically, the Alberta Environmental Protection and Enhancement Act (“EPEA”) and
the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (“CEPA, 1999”) and the provision for the reporting of pollutants via
the National Pollutant Release Inventory (“NPRI”), could also have a significant effect on the customers of our
Canadian mines, which in turn could, over time, significantly reduce the demand for the coal produced from those
mines.
The customers of our Canadian mines must comply with a variety of environmental laws that regulate and restrict air
emissions, including the EPEA and its regulations, and the CEPA, 1999. Because many of these customers’ activities
generate air emissions from various sources, compliance with these laws requires our customers in Canada to make
investments in pollution control equipment and to report to the relevant government authorities if any emissions limits
are exceeded or are made in contravention of the applicable regulatory requirements.
These laws restrict the amount of pollutants that our Canadian customer’s facilities can emit or discharge into the
environment. The NPRI, for example, is created under authority of the CEPA, 1999 and is a Canada-wide, legislated,
and publicly accessible inventory of specific substances that are released into the air, water, and land. The purpose of
the NPRI was to provide comprehensive national data on releases of specified substances, and assists with,
identifying priorities for action, encouraging voluntary action to reduce releases, tracking the progress of reductions in
releases, improving public awareness and understanding of substances released into the environment, and
supporting targeted initiatives for regulating the release of substances.
Regulatory authorities can enforce these and other environmental laws through administrative orders to control,
prevent or stop a certain activity; administrative penalties for violating certain environmental laws; and judicial
proceedings. If environmental regulatory burdens continue to increase for our Canadian customers, as a result of
policy changes or increased regulatory reform relating to the substances reported, it could potentially affect customer
operations and future demand for coal.
Table of Contents
33
USE OF PROCEEDS
We are making the exchange offer to satisfy our obligations under the registration rights agreement. We will not
receive any cash proceeds from the exchange of the Exchange Notes for the Restricted Notes pursuant to the
exchange offer. In consideration of issuing the Exchange Notes in the exchange offer, we will receive an equal
principal amount of Restricted Notes. We will cancel and retire all Restricted Notes surrendered in exchange for
Exchange Notes. Therefore, the issuance of the Exchange Notes will not result in any increase or decrease in our
indebtedness.
Table of Contents
34
THE EXCHANGE OFFER
The following summary of the registration rights agreement and letter of transmittal is not complete and is subject to,
and is qualified in its entirety by, all of the provisions of the registration rights agreement and the letter of transmittal,
each of which is incorporated as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus is part. We urge you
to read the entire registration rights agreement carefully.
Purpose and Effect of the Exchange Offer
We issued the Restricted Notes in a private placement on April 28, 2014. The Restricted Notes were issued, and the
Exchange Notes will be issued, under an indenture, dated as of February 4, 2011, between us, the guarantors, and
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee (the “Indenture”). In connection with the private placement, we entered into a
registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers of the Restricted Notes, BMO Capital Markets Corp. and
Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. Pursuant to the registration rights agreement, we and the subsidiary guarantors agreed
that we will, subject to certain exceptions,
•   by August 6, 2014 (5 days after the first interest payment date of August 1, 2014), file a registration statement
(the “exchange offer registration statement”), with the SEC with respect to a registered exchange offer to
exchange each Restricted Note for a new Exchange Note having terms substantially identical in all material
respects to such Restricted Note;
•   use our commercially reasonable efforts to cause the exchange offer registration statement to be declared
effective under the Securities Act by December 24, 2014 (240 days after April 28, 2014);
•   promptly after the effectiveness of the exchange offer registration statement, offer the Exchange Notes in
exchange for the Restricted Notes; and
•   keep the exchange offer open for not less than 20 days or more than 45 days (or longer if required by
applicable law) after the date notice of the exchange offer is mailed to the holders of the Restricted Notes.
We have also agreed to include in the exchange offer registration statement a prospectus for use in any resales by any
holder of Restricted Notes that is a broker-dealer and to keep such exchange offer registration statement effective for a
period beginning when Exchange Notes are first issued in the exchange offer and ending upon the earlier of 180 days
from the completion date of this exchange offer or such time as such broker-dealers no longer hold any Restricted
Notes.
In the event that:
•   any change in law or in applicable interpretations thereof by the staff of the SEC does not permit us to effect
the exchange offer; or
•   if for any reason the exchange offer is not consummated within 275 days after April 28, 2014,
then, we will, as promptly as practicable, cause to be filed a shelf registration statement under the Securities Act on or
prior to the earliest to occur of:
•   the later of (in the case of change in law or interpretation) (x) the 60th day after the date on which we are no
longer permitted to file the exchange offer registration statement and (y) October 25, 2014; and
•   in the case such holder is prohibited from participating in the exchange offer, such holder may not resell the
Exchange Notes acquired by it in the exchange offer to the public without delivering a prospectus and that
the prospectus contained in the exchange offer registration statement is not appropriate or available for such
resales, or such holder is a broker-dealer and holds Restricted Notes acquired directly from us, the 45th day
after the date on which we receive notice from a holder.
We will use our commercially reasonable efforts to cause the shelf registration statement to be declared effective
under the Securities Act on or prior to the later of the 75th day after the shelf registration statement filing obligation
arises and December 24, 2014. In addition, we will use our commercially reasonable efforts to keep the shelf
registration statement effective until one year from April 28, 2014 (or such shorter period that will terminate when all the
Notes covered thereby have been sold pursuant thereto or in certain other circumstances).
We will pay, as liquidated damages, additional cash interest on the applicable Restricted Notes and Exchange Notes,
subject to certain exceptions:
•   if the exchange offer registration statement is not filed with the SEC on or prior to August 6, 2014; or
•   if the exchange offer registration statement is not declared effective on or prior to December 24, 2014; or
•   if the exchange offer is not consummated on or prior to January 28, 2015; or
Table of Contents
35
•   if a shelf registration statement is not filed or declared effective when required; or
•   if a registration statement is declared effective as required but thereafter fails to remain effective or usable in
connection with resales for more than 30 calendar days; or
•   holders are unable to sell under Rule 144 as a result of our failure to meet the adequate current public
information requirement of Rule 144(c)(1).
The additional interest will accrue at a per annum rate of 0.25% for the first 90 days of the registration default period, at
a per annum rate of 0.50% for the second 90 days of the registration default period, at a per annum rate of 0.75% for
the third 90 days of the registration default period and at a per annum rate of 1.0% thereafter for the remaining portion
of the registration default period. We will pay such additional interest on regular interest payment dates.
We may require each person requesting to be named as a selling security holder to furnish to us such information
regarding the person and the distribution of the Notes by the person as we may from time to time reasonably require for
the inclusion of the person in the shelf registration statement, including requiring the person to properly complete and
execute such selling security holder notice and questionnaires, and any amendments or supplements thereto, as we
may reasonably deem necessary or appropriate. We may refuse to name any person as a selling security holder who
fails to provide us with such information.
Terms of the Exchange Offer
Upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this prospectus and the accompanying letter of transmittal, for
each $2,000 principal amount of Restricted Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn before the expiration date of
the exchange offer, we will issue $2,000 principal amount of Exchange Notes. Holders may tender some or all of their
Restricted Notes pursuant to the exchange offer in denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 thereof.
The exchange offer is not conditioned upon any minimum aggregate principal amount of Restricted Notes being
tendered.
The form and terms of the Exchange Notes will be the same as the form and terms of the Restricted Notes except that:
•   the Exchange Notes will have a different CUSIP number from the Restricted Notes;
•   the Exchange Notes will be registered under the Securities Act and, therefore, the global securities
representing the Exchange Notes will not bear legends restricting the transfer of interests in the Exchange
Notes;
•   the Exchange Notes will not be subject to the registration rights relating to the Restricted Notes; and
•   the Exchange Notes will not contain provisions for payment of additional interest in case of non-registration.
The Exchange Notes will evidence the same indebtedness as the Restricted Notes they replace, and will be issued
under, and be entitled to the benefits of, the same indenture governing the issuance of the Restricted Notes. As a
result, the Restricted Notes and the Exchange Notes will be treated as a single series of Notes under the indenture.
Following the consummation of the exchange offer, the holders of Restricted Notes that are accepted for exchange will
receive accrued but unpaid interest on Restricted Notes on the first interest payment date after the expiration date.
Under existing SEC interpretations, the Exchange Notes would generally be freely transferable after the exchange
offer without further registration under the Securities Act, except that broker-dealers receiving the Exchange Notes in
the exchange offer will be subject to a prospectus delivery requirement with respect to their resale. This view is based
on interpretations by the staff of the SEC in no-action letters issued to other issuers in exchange offers like this one.
We have not, however, asked the SEC to consider this particular exchange offer in the context of a no-action letter.
Therefore, the SEC might not treat it in the same way it has treated other exchange offers in the past. You will be
relying on the no-action letters that the SEC has issued to third parties in circumstances that we believe are similar to
ours. Based on these no-action letters, you must meet the following conditions in order to receive freely transferable
Exchange Notes:
•   you are not an “affiliate” of ours, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act (or if you are such an “affiliate”,
you must comply with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act to the extent
applicable);
•   you are not engaged in and do not intend to engage in, and have no arrangement or understanding with any
person to participate in, a distribution of Exchange Notes to be issued in the exchange offer;
•   you acquired the Exchange Notes issued in the exchange offer in the ordinary course of your business;
•   you are not a broker-dealer that acquired the Restricted Notes from us or in market-making transactions or
other trading activities; and
•   you are not acting on behalf of any person who could not truthfully and completely make the foregoing
representations.
36
Table of Contents
By tendering your Restricted Notes as described in “—Procedures for Tendering,” you will be representing to us that
you satisfy all of the above listed conditions. If you do not satisfy all of the above listed conditions:
•   you cannot rely on the position of the SEC set forth in the no-action letters referred to above; and
•   you must comply with the applicable registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act
in connection with a resale of the Exchange Notes.
The SEC considers broker-dealers that acquired Restricted Notes directly from us, but not as a result of market-making
activities or other trading activities, to be making a distribution of the Exchange Notes if they participate in the
exchange offer. Consequently, these broker-dealers must comply with the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act in connection with a resale of the Exchange Notes.
A broker-dealer that has bought Restricted Notes for market-making or other trading activities must comply with the
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act in order to resell any Exchange Notes it receives for its own
account in the exchange offer. Broker-dealers may use this prospectus to fulfill their prospectus delivery requirements
with respect to the Exchange Notes if they indicate in the letter of transmittal that they will do so. We have agreed in
the registration rights agreement to send a prospectus to any broker-dealer that requests copies in the notice and
questionnaire included in the letter of transmittal accompanying the prospectus until the earlier of 180 days from the
completion date of this exchange offer or such time as such broker-dealers no longer hold any Restricted Notes.
Unless you are required to do so because you are a broker-dealer, you may not use this prospectus for an offer to
resell, resale or other retransfer of Exchange Notes. We are not making this exchange offer to, nor will we accept
tenders for exchange from, holders of Restricted Notes in any jurisdiction in which the exchange offer or the
acceptance of it would not be in compliance with the securities or blue sky laws of that jurisdiction.
Holders of Restricted Notes do not have appraisal or dissenters’ rights under state law or under the indenture in
connection with the exchange offer. We intend to conduct the exchange offer in accordance with the applicable
requirements of Regulation 14E under the Exchange Act.
Expiration Date
The exchange offer will expire at 5:00 p.m. New York City time on             , 2014, unless, in our sole discretion, we
extend the expiration date. If we so extend the expiration date, the term “expiration date” shall mean the latest date and
time to which we extend the exchange offer.
Extensions, Delays in Acceptance, Termination or Amendment
We reserve the right, in our sole discretion to:
•   delay accepting for exchange any Restricted Notes;
•   extend the exchange offer;
•   terminate the exchange offer; or
•   to amend the terms of the exchange offer in any way we determine.
We will give oral or written notice of any delay, extension or termination to the exchange agent. In addition, we will
give, as promptly as practicable, oral or written notice regarding any delay in acceptance, extension or termination of
the offer to the registered holders of Restricted Notes. If we amend the exchange offer in a manner that we determine
to constitute a material change, or if we waive a material condition, we will promptly disclose the amendment or waiver
in a manner reasonably calculated to inform the holders of Restricted Notes of the amendment or waiver, and extend
the offer if required by law.
We intend to make public announcements of any delay in acceptance, extension, termination, amendment or waiver
regarding the exchange offer prior to 9 a.m., Eastern time, on the next business day after the previously scheduled
expiration date.
Conditions to the Exchange Offer
We will not be required to accept for exchange, or to exchange Exchange Notes for, any Restricted Notes, and we may
terminate the exchange offer as provided in this prospectus at or before the expiration date, if:
•   any law, statute, rule or regulation shall have been proposed, adopted or enacted, or interpreted in a manner,
which, in our reasonable judgment, would impair our ability to proceed with the exchange offer;
•   any action or proceeding is instituted or threatened in any court or by or before the SEC or any other
governmental agency with respect to the exchange offer which, in our reasonable judgment, would impair our
ability to proceed with the exchange offer;
Table of Contents
37
•   we have not obtained any governmental approval which we, in our reasonable judgment, consider necessary
for the completion of the exchange offer as contemplated by this prospectus;
•   any change, or any condition, event or development involving a prospective change, shall have occurred or
be threatened in the general economic, financial, currency exchange or market conditions in the United
States or elsewhere that, in our reasonable judgment, would impair our ability to proceed with the exchange
offer;
•   any other change or development shall have occurred, including a prospective change or development, that,
in our reasonable judgment, has or may have a material adverse effect on us, the market price of the
Exchange Notes or the Restricted Notes or the value of the exchange offer to us; or
•   there shall have occurred (i) any suspension or limitation of trading in securities generally on the New York
Stock Exchange or the over-the-counter market; (ii) a declaration of a banking moratorium by United States
federal or New York authorities; or (iii) a commencement or escalation of a war or armed hostilities involving
or relating to a country where we do business or other international or national emergency or crisis directly or
indirectly involving the United States.
The conditions listed above are for our sole benefit and we may assert them regardless of the circumstances giving
rise to any of these conditions. We may waive these conditions in our sole discretion in whole or in part at any time
and from time to time. A failure on our part to exercise any of the above rights shall not constitute a waiver of that right,
and that right shall be considered an ongoing right which we may assert at any time and from time to time.
If we determine in our reasonable judgment that any of the events listed above has occurred, we may, subject to
applicable law:
•   refuse to accept any Restricted Notes and return all tendered Restricted Notes to the tendering holders and
terminate the exchange offer;
•   extend the exchange offer and retain all Restricted Notes tendered before the expiration of the exchange
offer, subject, however, to the rights of holders to withdraw these Restricted Notes; or
•   waive unsatisfied conditions relating to the exchange offer and accept all properly tendered Restricted Notes
which have not been withdrawn. If this waiver constitutes a material change to the exchange offer, we will
disclose this change by means of a prospectus supplement that will be distributed to the registered holders of
the Restricted Notes. If the exchange offer would otherwise expire, we will extend the exchange offer for five
to ten business days, depending on how significant the waiver is and the manner of disclosure to registered
holders.
Any determination by us concerning the above events will be final and binding.
In addition, we reserve the right in our sole discretion to:
•   purchase or make offers for any Restricted Notes that remain outstanding subsequent to the expiration date;
and
•   purchase Restricted Notes in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise.
The terms of any such purchases or offers may differ from the terms of the exchange offer.
Procedures for Tendering
Except in limited circumstances, only a participant with the DTC listed on a DTC securities position listing with respect
to the Restricted Notes may tender Restricted Notes in the exchange offer. To tender Restricted Notes in the exchange
offer:
•   you must instruct DTC and a DTC participant by completing the form “Instructions to DTC Participant From
Beneficial Owner” accompanying this prospectus of your intention to tender your Restricted Notes for
Exchange Notes; and
•   DTC participants in turn need to follow the procedures for book-entry transfer as set forth below under “—
Book-Entry Transfer” and in the letter of transmittal.
By tendering, you will make the representations described below under “— Representations on Tendering Restricted
Notes.” In addition, each broker-dealer that receives Exchange Notes for its account in the exchange offer, where the
Restricted Notes were acquired by such broker-dealer as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities,
must acknowledge that it will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale of the Exchange Notes. See “Plan of
Distribution.” The tender by a holder of Restricted Notes will constitute an agreement between that holder and us in
accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this prospectus and in the letter of transmittal.
Table of Contents
38
The method of delivery of the form “Instructions to DTC Participant From Beneficial Owner” or transmission of an
agent’s message and all other required documents, as described under “— Book-Entry Transfer,” to the exchange
agent is at the election and risk of the tendering holder of Restricted Notes. Instead of delivery by mail, we recommend
that holders use an overnight or hand delivery service. In all cases, sufficient time should be allowed to assure timely
delivery to the exchange agent prior to the expiration date. Delivery of documents to DTC in accordance with its
procedures does not constitute delivery to the exchange agent.
We will determine in our sole discretion all questions as to the validity, form, eligibility, including time of receipt, and
acceptance and withdrawal of tendered Restricted Notes, and our determination shall be final and binding on all
parties. We reserve the absolute right to reject any and all Restricted Notes not properly tendered or any Restricted
Notes whose acceptance by us would, in the opinion of our counsel, be unlawful. We also reserve the right to waive
any defects, irregularities or conditions of tender as to any particular Restricted Notes either before or after the
expiration date. Our interpretation of the terms and conditions of the exchange offer, including the instructions in the
letter of transmittal, will be final and binding on all parties. Unless waived, holders must cure any defects or
irregularities in connection with tenders of Restricted Notes within a period we determine. Although we intend to
request the exchange agent to notify holders of defects or irregularities relating to tenders of Restricted Notes, neither
we, nor the exchange agent nor any other person will have any duty or incur any liability for failure to give this
notification. We will not consider tenders of Restricted Notes to have been made until these defects or irregularities
have been cured or waived. The exchange agent will return any Restricted Notes that are not properly tendered and
as to which the defects or irregularities have not been cured or waived to the tendering holders, unless otherwise
provided in the letter of transmittal, promptly following the expiration date.
Book-Entry Transfer
We understand that the exchange agent will make a request promptly after the date of this prospectus to establish
accounts with respect to the Restricted Notes at DTC for the purpose of facilitating the exchange offer. Any financial
institution that is a participant in DTC’s system may make book-entry delivery of Restricted Notes by causing DTC to
transfer such Restricted Notes into the exchange agent’s DTC account in accordance with DTC’s electronic
Automated Tender Offer Program procedures for such transfer. The exchange of Exchange Notes for tendered
Restricted Notes will only be made after timely:
•   confirmation of book-entry transfer of the Restricted Notes into the exchange agent’s account; and
•   receipt by the exchange agent of an “agent’s message” and all other required documents specified in the
letter of transmittal.
The confirmation, agent’s message and any other required documents must be received at the exchange agent’s
address listed below under “— Exchange Agent” on or before 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the expiration date of
the exchange offer.
As indicated above, delivery of documents to DTC in accordance with its procedures does not constitute delivery to
the exchange agent.
The term “agent’s message” means a message, transmitted by DTC and received by the exchange agent and forming
part of the confirmation of a book-entry transfer, which states that DTC has received an express acknowledgment from
a participant in DTC tendering Restricted Notes stating:
•   the aggregate principal amount of Restricted Notes that have been tendered by the participant;
•   that such participant has received an appropriate letter of transmittal and agrees to be bound by the terms of
the letter of transmittal and the terms of the exchange offer; and
•   that we may enforce such agreement against the participant.
Delivery of an agent’s message will also constitute an acknowledgment from the tendering DTC participant that the
representations contained in the letter of transmittal and described below under “Representations on Tendering
Restricted Notes” are true and correct.
Representations on Tendering Restricted Notes
To exchange your Restricted Notes for transferable Exchange Notes in the exchange offer, you will be required to
represent to the effect that you:
•   are not an “affiliate” of ours, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act (or if you are such an “affiliate”, you
must comply with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act to the extent
applicable);
•   are not engaged in and do not intend to engage in, and have no arrangement or understanding with any
person to participate in, a distribution of Exchange Notes to be issued in the exchange offer;
•   acquired the Exchange Notes issued in the exchange offer in the ordinary course of your business;
Table of Contents
39
•   are not a broker-dealer that acquired the Restricted Notes from us or in market-making transactions or other
trading activities; and
•   are not acting on behalf of any person who could not truthfully and completely make the foregoing
representations.
If you are a broker-dealer and you will receive Exchange Notes for your own account in exchange for Restricted Notes
that were acquired as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities, you will be required to
acknowledge in the letter of transmittal that you will comply with the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities
Act in connection with any resale of the Exchange Notes. The letter of transmittal states that, by complying with their
obligations, a broker-dealer will not be deemed to admit that it is an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities
Act. See also “Plan of Distribution.” If you fail to indicate in the letter of transmittal or otherwise inform us that you are a
broker-dealer, you will be deemed to have represented to us that you are not a broker-dealer.
Withdrawal of Tenders
Your tender of Restricted Notes pursuant to the exchange offer is irrevocable except as otherwise provided in this
section. You may withdraw tenders of Restricted Notes at any time prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the
expiration date.
For a withdrawal to be effective for DTC participants, holders must comply with their respective standard operating
procedures for electronic tenders and the exchange agent must receive an electronic notice of withdrawal from DTC.
Any notice of withdrawal must specify the name and number of the account at DTC to be credited with the withdrawn
Restricted Notes and otherwise comply with the procedures of DTC. We will determine in our sole discretion all
questions as to the validity, form and eligibility, including time of receipt, for such withdrawal notices, and our
determination shall be final and binding on all parties. Any Restricted Notes so withdrawn will be deemed not to have
been validly tendered for purposes of the exchange offer and no Exchange Notes will be issued with respect to them
unless the Restricted Notes so withdrawn are validly re-tendered. Any Restricted Notes which have been tendered but
which are withdrawn or not accepted for exchange will be returned to the holder without cost to such holder promptly
after withdrawal, rejection of tender or termination of the exchange offer. Properly withdrawn Restricted Notes may be
re-tendered by following the procedures described above under “—Procedures For Tendering” at any time prior to the
expiration date.
Fees and Expenses
We will bear the expenses of soliciting tenders with respect to the exchange offer. The principal solicitation is being
made by mail; however, we may make additional solicitation by telephone or in person by our officers and regular
employees and those of our affiliates.
We have not retained any dealer manager in connection with the exchange offer and will not make any payments to
broker-dealers or others soliciting acceptances of the exchange offer. We will, however, pay the exchange agent
reasonable and customary fees for its services and reimburse it for its related reasonable out of pocket expenses.
We will pay the cash expenses to be incurred in connection with the exchange offer. They include:
•   SEC registration fees;
•   fees and expenses of the exchange agent and trustee;
•   accounting and legal fees and printing costs; and
•   related fees and expenses.
Transfer Taxes
Holders who tender their Restricted Notes for exchange will not be obligated to pay any transfer taxes. If, however, a
transfer tax is imposed for any reason other than the exchange of Restricted Notes in connection with the exchange
offer, then the tendering holder must pay the amount of any transfer taxes due, whether imposed on the registered
holder or any other persons. If the tendering holder does not submit satisfactory evidence of payment of these taxes or
exemption from them with the letter of transmittal, the amount of these transfer taxes will be billed directly to the
tendering holder.
Accounting Treatment
We will record the Exchange Notes in our accounting records at the same carrying value as the Restricted Notes. This
carrying value is the aggregate principal amount of the Restricted Notes including any bond premium, as reflected in
our accounting records on the date of exchange. Accordingly, we will not recognize any gain or loss for accounting
purposes in connection with the exchange offer.
Table of Contents
40
Consequences of Failure to Properly Tender Restricted Notes in the Exchange
We will issue the Exchange Notes in exchange for Restricted Notes under the exchange offer only after timely
confirmation of book-entry transfer of the Restricted Notes into the exchange agent’s account and timely receipt by the
exchange agent of an agent’s message and all other required documents specified in the letter of transmittal.
Therefore, holders of the Restricted Notes desiring to tender Restricted Notes in exchange for Exchange Notes should
allow sufficient time to ensure timely delivery. We are under no duty to give notification of defects or irregularities of
tenders of Restricted Notes for exchange or waive any such defects or irregularities. Restricted Notes that are not
tendered or that are tendered but not accepted by us will, following completion of the exchange offer, continue to be
subject to the existing restrictions upon transfer under the Securities Act.
Participation in the exchange offer is voluntary. In the event the exchange offer is completed, we will generally not be
required to register the remaining Restricted Notes. Remaining Restricted Notes will continue to be subject to the
following restrictions on transfer:
•   holders may resell Restricted Notes only if an exemption from registration is available or, outside the United
States, to non-U.S. persons in accordance with the requirements of Regulation S under the Securities Act;
and
•   the remaining Restricted Notes will bear a legend restricting transfer in the absence of registration or an
exemption.
To the extent that Restricted Notes are tendered and accepted in connection with the exchange offer, any trading
market for remaining Restricted Notes could be adversely affected.
Neither we nor our board of directors make any recommendation to holders of Restricted Notes as to whether
to tender or refrain from tendering all or any portion of their Restricted Notes pursuant to the exchange offer.
Moreover, no one has been authorized to make any such recommendation. Holders of Restricted Notes must
make their own decision whether to tender pursuant to the exchange offer and, if so, the aggregate amount of
Restricted Notes to tender, after reading this prospectus and the letter of transmittal and consulting with their
advisors, if any, based on their own financial position and requirements.
Table of Contents
41
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXCHANGE NOTES
You can find the definitions of certain terms used in this description under “— Certain Definitions” below. Certain
defined terms used in this description, but not defined below under the caption “— Certain Definitions” have the
meanings assigned to them in the Indenture. As used in this section, references to the “Issuer” mean Westmoreland
Coal Company and Westmoreland Partners, as “Co-Issuers,” but not any of their subsidiaries.
On April 28, 2014, we issued $425.0 million aggregate principal amount of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
(the “Restricted Notes”) in a private offering under an indenture (the “Indenture”), dated as of February 4, 2011, by and
among the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Guarantors and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (in such
capacity, the “Trustee”) and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as collateral agent (in such capacity, the “Note
Collateral Agent”), as supplemented by supplemental indentures in connection with the issuance of prior additional
notes and the Restricted Notes.
Previously, the Co-Issuers have issued $275.0 million aggregate principal amount of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes
due 2018, of which approximately $250.5 million in aggregate principal amount remained outstanding as of June 30,
2014 (the “Existing Notes”). The Restricted Notes and the Existing Notes are treated as a single series, and are equal
in right of payment, under the Indenture. Throughout this prospectus, the term “Existing Notes” refers to all of the
10.75% Senior Secured Notes outstanding prior to consummation of the exchange offer. The term “Notes” refers to,
collectively, the Exchange Notes, the Existing Notes and any Additional Notes (as defined herein), treated as a single
class of securities under the Indenture; provided, any such Additional Notes may have a different issue date, issue
price and first interest payment date than the Existing Notes and shall be subject to compliance with Section 4.10 and
Section 4.12 of the Indenture. The term “Restricted Notes” does not include the Existing Notes.
The following is a summary of the material terms and provisions of the Notes, the Indenture and the Security
Documents. The following summary does not purport to be a complete description of the Notes or such agreements
and is subject to the detailed provisions of, and qualified in its entirety by reference to, the Indenture and the Security
Documents. We urge you to read the Indenture and the Security Documents because they, not this description, define
your rights as Holders of the Restricted Notes. You may obtain a copy of each document from the Issuer as set forth
below in “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Principal, Maturity and Interest
The Notes will mature on February 1, 2018. The Exchange Notes will bear interest at the rate of 10.75% per annum,
payable on February 1st and August 1st of each year, commencing on February 1, 2015, to Holders of the Exchange
Notes of record at the close of business on January 15 or July 15, as the case may be, immediately preceding the
relevant interest payment date. Interest on the Notes will be computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day
months. Interest (including post-petition interest in any proceedings under bankruptcy law) on overdue principal and
(to the extent permitted by law) on overdue installments of interest and Additional Interest will accrue at 2% per annum
in excess of such rate without regard to any applicable grace period.
The Notes will be issued in registered form, without coupons, and in denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples of
$1,000 in excess thereof.
Exchange Notes in an aggregate principal amount of $425,000,000 million are being issued in this offering. The Issuer
and the Co-Issuer may issue additional Notes having identical terms and conditions to the Existing Notes and the
Exchange Notes being issued in this offering, except for issue date, issue price and first interest payment date, in an
unlimited aggregate principal amount (the “Additional Notes”), subject to compliance with the covenant described
under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock”; provided, that the Co-
Issuer is not permitted to issue Additional Notes independently of the Issuer. Any Additional Notes will be part of the
same issue as the Existing Notes and the Exchange Notes and will be treated as one class with the Existing Notes
and the Exchange Notes, including for purposes of voting, redemptions and offers to purchase. For purposes of this
“Description of the Exchange Notes,” except for references to Additional Notes in the covenant described under
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock,” references to the Notes include
Additional Notes, if any, and Exchange Notes when issued as described under the caption “– Exchange Offer;
Registration Rights.”
Methods of Receiving Payments on the Notes
If a Holder has given wire transfer instructions to the Issuer at least ten Business Days prior to the applicable payment
date, the Issuer will make all payments on such Holder’s Notes by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the
account specified in those instructions to an account in the United States. Otherwise, payments on the Notes will be
made at the office or agency of the paying agent (the “Paying Agent”) and registrar (the “Registrar”) for the Notes within
the City and State of New York unless the Issuer elects to make interest payments by check mailed to the Holders at
their addresses set forth in the register of Holders.
Table of Contents
Note Guarantees
42
The obligations of the Issuer and the Co-Issuer under the Existing Notes, the Indenture and other related documents
are, and such obligations under the Exchange Notes will be, jointly and severally guaranteed (the “Note Guarantees”),
on a senior secured basis, by each Restricted Subsidiary that the Issuer has caused, or will cause, to become a
Guarantor pursuant to the terms of the Indenture. The Guarantors consist of substantially all of our material
subsidiaries, including Westmoreland Resources Inc., Westmoreland Energy LLC and its direct and indirect
Subsidiaries other than the Co-Issuer, Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc. (formerly known as Westmoreland Mining, Inc.),
Westmoreland Coal Sales Co., WCC Land Holding Company, Inc., WRI Partners, Inc., Westmoreland Mining LLC
(“WML”) and its direct Subsidiaries, and Westmoreland Canada LLC and its direct and indirect Subsidiaries, which
include Prairie Mines & Royalty ULC and Coal Valley Resources Inc. The Note Guarantees are secured as described
in “– Security – General.” Absaloka and certain immaterial Subsidiaries will not guarantee the Notes.
The obligations of each Guarantor under its Note Guarantee are limited to the maximum amount as will result in those
obligations not constituting a fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer under federal or state law, after giving effect
to (i) all other contingent and fixed liabilities of the Guarantor (including, without limitation, any guarantees under any
future revolving credit agreement permitted under the Indenture) and (ii) any collections from or payments made by or
on behalf of any other Guarantor in respect of its contribution obligations under the Indenture. Each Guarantor that
makes a payment or distribution under its Note Guarantee is entitled to a contribution from each other Guarantor in a
pro rata amount based on adjusted net assets of each Guarantor (including the Guarantor that made such payment or
distribution) determined in accordance with GAAP for all payments, damages and expenses incurred by the Guarantor
that made such payment or distribution.
Any Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer, Co-Issuer or of a Guarantor created or acquired after the Initial Notes Issue
Date, or any Unrestricted Subsidiary that becomes a Restricted Subsidiary after the Initial Notes Issue Date, is
required to guarantee the Notes pursuant to a supplemental indenture on a senior secured basis.
A Guarantor will be automatically released from its obligations under its Note Guarantee and the Indenture, and any of
its assets that constitute Collateral will be released from the Liens created by the Security Documents:
(1) in the event of a sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of such Guarantor, by way of merger,
consolidation or otherwise, or a sale or other disposition of all of the Equity Interests of such Guarantor then held by
the Issuer, Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary; provided, that in the case of a sale or disposition constituting an
Asset Sale, the Net Available Proceeds of such sale or other disposition are applied in accordance with the provisions
under the heading “— Certain Covenants — Limitations on Asset Sales”;
(2) if such Guarantor is designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in accordance with the provisions of the Indenture,
upon effectiveness of such designation; or
(3) if the Notes are discharged or defeased in accordance with the procedures described below under “— Legal
Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance” and “— Satisfaction and Discharge” below.
Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries
The Existing Notes are, and the Exchange Notes will be, structurally subordinated to all existing and future liabilities of
the non-guarantor Subsidiaries. This means that in the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of
these entities, or if an event of default occurs under financing arrangements obtained by these entities, they will pay
the holders of their debts and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their assets to the Issuer.
Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
All of the Subsidiary Guarantors, including the Subsidiaries acquired in the Canadian Acquisition, WML and its
Subsidiaries, WRM and Absaloka are “Restricted Subsidiaries.” Our Subsidiary, Basin Resources Inc. is an
Unrestricted Subsidiary and does not guarantee the Existing Notes and will not guarantee the Exchange Notes. Under
the circumstances described below under the subheading “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Designation of
Unrestricted Subsidiaries,” the Issuer is permitted to designate certain other Subsidiaries as “Unrestricted
Subsidiaries.” The effect of designating a Subsidiary as an “Unrestricted Subsidiary” will be that:
•   an Unrestricted Subsidiary will not be subject to many of the restrictive covenants in the Indenture;
Table of Contents
43
•   a Subsidiary that has previously been a Guarantor and that is designated an Unrestricted Subsidiary will be
released from its Note Guarantee, the Indenture and the Security Documents, and any of its assets that
constitute Collateral will be released from the Liens of the Security Documents; and
•   the assets, expenses, income, indebtedness, cash flow and other financial results of an Unrestricted
Subsidiary will not be consolidated with those of the Issuer and Co-Issuer for purposes of calculating
compliance with the restrictive covenants contained in the Indenture.
Ranking
Senior Notes
The Existing Notes are, and the Exchange Notes will be, general senior secured obligations of the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors ranking equally in right of payment with all existing and future Senior
Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors. The Existing Notes effectively rank, and the
Exchange Notes will effectively rank, senior to all Unsecured Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary
Guarantors and Absaloka to the extent of the value of the Note Collateral securing such obligations. Under the terms of
the Indenture, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka are permitted to enter into and
guarantee, and have entered into and guaranteed, a Revolving Credit Facility that is secured by the Revolving Facility
First-Priority Liens on the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral. In addition, an amended and restated Intercreditor
Agreement has been entered into between the Note Collateral Agent and the collateral agent under the Revolving
Credit Facility providing: (i) that the Notes have a second-priority Lien in the accounts receivable and inventory, and
proceeds and products thereof, (ii) identifying the rights of the respective lenders in the event of default under either the
Notes or the Revolving Credit Facility or a bankruptcy, liquidation, reorganization or other winding up, or sale, of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor or Absaloka, and (iii) providing other terms of the intercreditor relationship. See
“– Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.” In any of such
events, the assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka that secure the Revolving
Credit Facility will only be available to pay obligations on the Notes and the Note Guarantees in accordance with the
terms and conditions of such intercreditor agreement.
Ranking of Note Guarantees
The Guarantors have, jointly and severally, fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior secured basis the due
and punctual payment of principal of, premium, if any, and interest on, the Existing Notes and will similarly guarantee
the Exchange Notes. See “– Security – General” for a description of the assets securing the guarantees.
Under certain circumstances described under “– Certain Covenants – Additional Note Guarantees,” we are required to
cause the execution and delivery of additional Note Guarantees by Restricted Subsidiaries.
Optional Redemption
General
Except as described under “– Redemption with Proceeds of Qualified Equity Offerings,” the Notes may not be
redeemed prior to February 1, 2015. At any time or from time to time on or after February 1, 2015, upon not less than
30 nor more than 60 days’ notice, the Issuer, at its option, may redeem the Notes, in whole or in part, at the redemption
prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth below, together with accrued and unpaid interest
thereon, if any, to the redemption date, if redeemed during the twelve-month period beginning February 1 of the years
indicated:
Year
2015
2016
2017 and thereafter
Optional
Redemption Price
103.583% 
101.792% 
100.000%
Redemption with Proceeds from Qualified Equity Offerings
At any time or from time to time prior to February 1, 2015, the Issuer, at its option, may redeem up to 35% of the
aggregate principal amount of the Notes issued under the Indenture (including the principal amount of any Additional
Notes issued under the Indenture but without duplication with respect to Exchange Notes) with the net cash proceeds
of one or more Qualified Equity Offerings at a redemption price equal to 110.75% of the principal amount of the Notes
to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any, to the date of redemption; provided, that (1) at least
65% of the aggregate principal amount of Notes (including the principal amount of any Additional Notes issued under
the Indenture but without duplication with respect to Exchange Notes) issued under the Indenture remains outstanding
immediately after the occurrence of such redemption and (2) the redemption occurs within 60 days of the date of the
closing of any such Qualified Equity Offering.
44
Table of Contents
The Issuer may acquire Notes by means other than a redemption, whether pursuant to an issuer tender offer, open
market purchase or otherwise, so long as the acquisition does not otherwise violate the terms of the Indenture.
Selection and Notice of Redemption
If the Issuer makes a partial redemption, selection of the Notes for redemption will be made by the Trustee on a pro
rata basis, by lot or by such method that complies with applicable legal and securities exchange requirements, if any
and in accordance with methods generally deemed fair and appropriate by the Trustee; provided, however, that no
Notes of a principal amount of $2,000 or less shall be redeemed in part. In addition, if a partial redemption is made
pursuant to the provisions described under “– Optional Redemption – Redemption with Proceeds from Qualified
Equity Offerings,” selection of the Notes or portions thereof for redemption shall be made by the Trustee only on a pro
rata basis or on as nearly a pro rata basis as is practicable (subject to the procedures of The Depository
Trust Company), unless that method is otherwise prohibited.
Notice of redemption will be sent at least 30 but not more than 60 days before the date of redemption to each Holder of
Notes to be redeemed at its registered address, except that redemption notices may be sent more than 60 days prior to
a redemption date if the notice is issued in connection with a defeasance of the Notes or a satisfaction and discharge
of the Indenture. Each notice for redemption will identify the Notes to be redeemed and state, among other things, that
if any Note is to be redeemed in part, the portion of the principal amount of the Note to be redeemed and that a new
Note in a principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the Note will be issued in the name of the Holder of the
Note upon surrender of the original Note. On and after the date of redemption, interest will cease to accrue on Notes or
portions thereof called for redemption and redeemed Notes will be cancelled as of the redemption date so long as the
Issuer has deposited with the paying agent for the Notes funds sufficient to pay the redemption price (including
accrued and unpaid interest on the Notes to be redeemed) pursuant to the Indenture.
Security
General
The Existing Notes and the existing Note Guarantees are, and the Exchange Notes and related Note Guarantees will
be, secured by:
(i) the Note Second-Priority Liens granted by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors on the accounts
and inventory, and any other property with respect to, evidencing or relating to such accounts and inventory of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka (whether now owned or subsequently arising or
acquired), and the proceeds and products thereof (the foregoing being the “Note Second Lien Collateral”), which had
been part of the First Lien Collateral but which became Note Second Lien Collateral pursuant to the terms of the
Intercreditor Agreement entered into in connection with the entry by the Issuer and other entities into the Revolving
Credit Facility;
(ii) the Note First-Priority Liens granted by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors on substantially all
of the tangible and intangible assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors (whether now owned
or subsequently arising or acquired) (other than the Note Second Lien Collateral) pursuant to one or more First Lien
Security Documents among the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and the Note Collateral Agent and,
with respect to assets consisting of Real Property and fixtures (whether now owned or hereinafter arising or acquired),
pursuant to mortgages, deeds of trust or deeds to secure debt (the foregoing being the “First Lien Collateral”);
(iii) the Note First-Priority Lien on 100% of all management fees, dividends, and distributions payable by WML to the
Issuer, subject to the prior Lien under the WML Credit Agreements and related WML Security Agreements, but only to
the extent that such Lien affects such management fees, dividends, and distributions (the foregoing being the “WML
Payments Collateral”);
(iv) the Note First-Priority Lien on all of the common shares of WRM held by the Issuer (the foregoing being the “WRM
Collateral”); and
(v) the Note First-Priority Lien on any assets owned by Absaloka (the “Absaloka Collateral”);
provided, that the Note Second Lien Collateral, the First Lien Collateral, the WML Payments Collateral, the WRM
Collateral and the Absaloka Collateral will be subject to Permitted Liens and will not include any Excluded Property.
The First Lien Collateral, the WML Payments Collateral, the WRM Collateral, the Absaloka Collateral and the Note
Second Lien Collateral, are, subject to Permitted Liens and the exclusion of Excluded Property, collectively, the “Note
Collateral.”
The Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka were required to perfect on the Initial Notes Issue
Date (or at the time that they became Subsidiary Guarantors, as applicable) the security interests in the Note Collateral
solely to the extent they could be perfected by the filing of UCC-1 financing statements or the delivery of capital stock
or instruments. To the extent any such security interest could not be perfected by filing or the delivery of capital stock,
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka were required to have all security interests and
Liens that are contemplated by the Indenture and the Security Documents to be in place and perfected as soon as
practicable following the Initial Notes Issue Date, but in any event no later than
Table of Contents
45
(A) 90 days after the Initial Notes Issue Date, (B) such later date as the Trustee agreed that the security interests and
Liens in favor of the Holders of the Notes are required to be in place or (C) 90 days after an asset ceases to be an
Excluded Property. If the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, any Subsidiary Guarantor or Absaloka were to become subject to a
bankruptcy proceeding, any Liens recorded or perfected after the Initial Notes Issue Date would face a greater risk of
being invalidated than if they had been recorded or perfected on the Initial Notes Issue Date. Security in real property
was granted as described in “– Security – General – Certain Covenants with Respect to the Note Collateral – Real
estate mortgages and filings.”
If the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, any Subsidiary Guarantor or Absaloka creates any additional Lien upon any property to
secure the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations, it must concurrently grant a Note Second-Priority Lien upon such
property (subject to Permitted Liens) as security for the Notes substantially concurrently with granting any such
additional Lien.
The Liens in the Note Collateral securing the Notes and the Note Guarantees under the Security Documents rank
(i) equally in priority with the security interest and Liens in and on the Note Collateral securing any Senior
Indebtedness other than the Revolving Credit Facility, (ii) senior to any Unsecured Indebtedness and (iii) junior to the
Revolving Facility First Priority Liens. In addition, the Notes will not be secured by any of the assets of any Subsidiary
that is not a Guarantor other than Absaloka. See “Risk Factors – Risks Relating to Our Indebtedness and the Notes –
The Notes will be structurally subordinated to all indebtedness of those of our existing or future subsidiaries that are
not, or do not become, guarantors of the Notes.”
Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility
As permitted by the Indenture, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors entered into a Revolving Credit
Facility, which is secured by the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral. Notwithstanding the time, order or method
of grant, creation, attachment or perfection of any Liens securing the Notes, the Liens of the Notes on the Revolving
Facility First-Priority Collateral rank junior to the Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens under the Revolving Credit
Facility. Concurrent with the Revolving Credit Facility, the Note Collateral Agent and PrivateBank and Trust Company,
the lender under the Revolving Credit Facility (the “Working Capital Lender” or the “Revolving Collateral Agent”)
entered into an amended and restated intercreditor agreement on the terms described in this section in all material
respects (the “Intercreditor Agreement”).
The parties agreed in the Intercreditor Agreement that notwithstanding the date, time, method, manner or order of
grant, attachment or perfection of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens or the Note Second-Priority Liens, and
notwithstanding any provision of the uniform commercial code or any other applicable law, the Indenture, the Security
Documents or any other documents delivered in connection with the Indenture or the Security Documents, the
Revolving Credit Facility, any loan documents or other documents delivered in connection with the Revolving Credit
Facility, or any defect or deficiencies in, or failure to perfect, the Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens or the Note
Second-Priority Liens, (a) any Revolving Facility First-Priority Lien will be first, prior, continuing and senior in right,
priority, operation, effect and all other purposes and respects to Note Second-Priority Lien, and (b) the Note Second
Priority-Lien will be junior and subordinate in right, priority, operation, effect and all other purposes and respects to all
Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens.
Prior to the discharge of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens, (a) the Note Collateral Agent will not exercise or
seek to exercise any remedies with respect to any Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral, contest, protest or object
to any foreclosure proceeding or action brought by the Working Capital Lender or any other exercise by the Working
Capital Lender of any rights and remedies relating to the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral under the
Revolving Credit Facility or any other related loan document, or object to, contest or oppose the forbearance by the
Working Capital Lender from bringing or pursuing any foreclosure proceeding or action or any other exercise of any
rights or remedies relating to the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral; and (b) the Working Capital Lender will
have the exclusive right to enforce any and all rights, exercise remedies and make determinations regarding the
release, management, enforcement, disposition, or restrictions with respect to the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral, in each case in the exercise of its sole and absolute discretion, without any consultation with, notice to or
the consent of the Note Collateral Agent, and such exercise and enforcement shall include, without limitation, the
rights of an agent appointed by the Working Capital Lender to sell or otherwise dispose of Revolving Facility First-
Priority Collateral upon foreclosure, to incur expenses in connection with such sale or disposition, and to exercise all
the rights and remedies of a secured creditor under the UCC and of a secured creditor under bankruptcy laws of any
applicable jurisdiction.
Notwithstanding the above, (a) in any insolvency Liquidation Proceeding commenced by or against the Issuer or any
other borrower under the Revolving Credit Facility, the Note Collateral Agent may file a claim or statement of interest
with respect to the obligations owing to the noteholders under the Indenture, (b) the Note Collateral Agent may take
such action (not adverse in any way to the priority status of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens or the rights of the
Working Capital Lender to exercise any remedies in respect thereof) solely necessary to preserve or protect its Note
Second-Priority Liens so long as such action is consistent with the terms and limitations on the Note Collateral Agent
imposed by the Intercreditor Agreement. In addition, the Note Collateral Agent may exercise rights and remedies with
respect to the security interests in the Note Second Lien Collateral after the passage of a period of 180 days from the
first date on which the Note Collateral Agent has notified the Working Capital Lender that (i) an Event of Default
consisting of nonpayment of any principal or interest then due under the Notes has been declared, or (ii) an Event of
Default other than an Event of Default consisting of nonpayment of any principal or interest then due under the Notes
has been declared and the repayment of all the principal amount under the Notes has been demanded. The Note
Collateral Agent is, however, only permitted
Table of Contents
46
to exercise remedies to the extent that the Working Capital Lender, or the secured parties under the Revolving Credit
Facility Obligations, are not diligently pursuing the exercise of its or their rights and remedies with respect to a material
portion of the Note Second Lien Collateral.
The rights of the Holders of the Notes with respect to the Note Second Lien Collateral securing the Notes and the Note
Guarantees will be materially limited pursuant to the terms of the Intercreditor Agreement. Under the terms of such
intercreditor agreement, the Note Second-Priority Liens in the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral securing the
Notes will rank junior to the Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens. Any proceeds received upon a realization of the
Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral securing the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations and the Notes will be
applied as follows:
(1) first, to the Working Capital Lender to be applied as required under the Revolving Credit Facility until the payment
and discharge of the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations has occurred; and
(2) second, to the Trustee to be applied ratably to the Holders of the Notes and in such order as specified in the
Indenture and the Security Documents (with the Note Collateral Agent entitled to apply any proceeds in respect of the
Notes to its costs and expenses prior to principal and interest being paid to the Holders of the Notes).
Upon the occurrence of any acceleration under the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations, the Holders shall have the
right to buy all of the Working Capital Lender’s right, title and interest in and to all of the Revolving Credit Facility
Obligations and the documentation evidencing the Revolving Credit Facility as described below. In addition, upon any
acceleration of the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations, no action to enforce remedies may be taken by the Working
Capital Lender with respect to the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations for a period of 15 days following date of the
acceleration notice given by the Working Capital Lender to the Issuer (the “Remedy/Acceleration Notice”) (such
period, the “Standstill Period”); provided, that actions to protect the Note Second Lien Collateral and the Revolving
Facility First Priority Liens, or prepare for sale of or other enforcement against the Collateral, including notifying
account debtors to make payments to the Revolving Lenders, that do not result in any disposition of the Collateral shall
be deemed not to violate the foregoing.
Upon the receipt by the Issuer of a Remedy/Acceleration Notice, each Holder shall have the right (but not the
obligation) to purchase (or to designate an Affiliate or other party to purchase) all of the rights and obligations of the
Working Capital Lender, including all of the commitments or Revolving Credit Facility Obligations owing to it (the
“Holder Buy-out Right”) for an aggregate purchase price equal to the sum of (x) the then outstanding principal amount
of such Revolving Credit Facility Obligations, plus (y) all accrued and unpaid interest thereon, plus (z) all other
amounts accrued and unpaid in respect thereof, including unreimbursed obligations in respect of or relating to the loan
documents evidencing the Revolving Credit Facility and all expenses owing in connection with such documents (the
“Revolving Buy-out Price”).
The Holder Buy-out Right may be exercised by Holders upon written notice thereof to the Working Capital Lender and
the Issuer within 10 days after receipt by the Issuer of the Remedy/Acceleration Notice, committing to the purchase of
100% of the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations; provided, that so long as 100% of the Revolving Credit Facility
Obligations are committed to be purchased, such Revolving Credit Facility Obligations shall be allocated as described
below. Such written notice shall identify the Holder or Holders exercising such Holder Buy-out Right and contain no
conditions other than the assignment of Revolving Credit Facility Obligations to a Holder purchasing such Revolving
Credit Facility Obligations. Such notice shall constitute an irrevocable commitment by the delivering Holders to the
Working Capital Lender to purchase the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations for the Revolving Buy-out Price no later
than the last day of the Standstill Period.
The Revolving Buy-out Price shall be paid by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the Working Capital
Lender. If the Revolving Buy-out Price is not received by the Working Capital Lender in accordance with the foregoing,
the Working Capital Lender may enforce such commitment and may exercise all other remedies under the Intercreditor
Agreement, including enforcement of all remedies against the Collateral.
In the event a bankruptcy proceeding shall be commenced by or against the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, or any Subsidiary
Guarantor, and the Working Capital Lender shall desire to permit the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary Guarantor
the use of cash collateral which constitutes Collateral or to enter into a debtor-in-possession financing (a “DIP
Financing”) in such proceeding, the Note Second-Priority Liens on the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral may,
in each case be made junior and subordinated to Liens granted to secure such DIP Financings. The use of cash
collateral or the provision of DIP Financing will require the approval of the governmental authority having jurisdiction
over such bankruptcy proceeding, to the extent required by law. To the extent the first-priority Liens securing the
Revolving Credit Facility Obligations are subordinated to or pari passu with such DIP Financing, the Note Collateral
Agent (a) will subordinate or make pari passu its Note Second-Priority Liens in the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral to the same extent that the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations are subordinated or pari passu to the Liens
securing such DIP Financing (and all obligations relating thereto) and (b) will not request adequate protection or any
other relief in connection with the Note Second-Priority Liens (other than as described below).
Table of Contents
47
The Intercreditor Agreement limits the right of the Note Collateral Agent and the Working Capital Lender to seek relief
from the “automatic stay” and provides that each of the Note Collateral Agent and the Working Capital Lender waives
its rights to assert the doctrine of marshalling under applicable law with respect to the Note Second Lien Collateral or
the Note Collateral, respectively.
Sufficiency of collateral in the event of foreclosure
In the event of foreclosure on the Note Collateral, there can be no assurance that the proceeds from the sale of the
Note Collateral in whole or in part pursuant to the Security Documents would be sufficient to satisfy payments due on
the Notes. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Intercreditor Agreement, if any event of default has occurred under
the Revolving Credit Facility, the proceeds of the foreclosure of the Note Second Lien Collateral would be applied, first
to the obligations under the Revolving Credit Facility before the remaining proceeds, if any, would be available to
apply to the obligations under the Notes. The fair market value of the Note Collateral is subject to fluctuations based
on factors that include, among others, the ability to sell the Note Collateral in an orderly sale, general economic
conditions, the availability of buyers and similar factors. The amount to be received upon a sale of the Note Collateral
would also be dependent on numerous factors, including, but not limited to, the actual fair market value of the Note
Collateral at such time and the timing and the manner of the sale. By its nature, portions of the Note Collateral may be
illiquid and may have no readily ascertainable market value or may require consents or approvals to transfer that are
not obtainable. In particular, some assets constituting Note Collateral (including contracts and intellectual property) are
more illiquid than other assets constituting Note Collateral (such as accounts receivable and inventory, which is Note
Second Lien Collateral). Accordingly, there can be no assurance that all of the Note Collateral can be sold in a short
period of time or in an orderly manner. See “Risk Factors – Risks Relating to Our Indebtedness and the Notes – The
value of the collateral in the event of liquidation will depend on market and economic conditions, the availability of
buyers and other factors. Liquidating the collateral securing the Notes may not produce proceeds in an amount
sufficient to pay any amounts due on the Notes.” In addition, in the event of a bankruptcy, the ability of the holders to
realize upon any of the Note Collateral may be subject to certain bankruptcy law limitations as described below under
“– Certain bankruptcy limitations.”
Certain Covenants with Respect to the Note Collateral
The Note Collateral has been pledged pursuant to the Security Documents, which contain provisions relating to the
administration, preservation and disposition of the Note Collateral. The following is a summary of some of the
covenants and provisions set forth in the Security Documents and the Indenture as they relate to the Note Collateral.
Maintenance of collateral
The Indenture and/or the Security Documents will provide that the Issuer and the Co-Issuer will, and will cause each of
the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka to (i) at all times maintain, preserve and protect all property material to the
conduct of its business and keep such property in good repair, working order and condition (other than wear and tear
occurring in the ordinary course of business); (ii) from time to time make, or cause to be made, all needful and proper
repairs, renewals, additions, improvements and replacements thereto necessary in order that the business carried on
in connection therewith may be properly conducted at all times; (iii) maintain adequate insurance at all times on all its
property by companies rated A-, VII or better by A.M. Best; and (iv) obtain such other insurance against risks as the
Note Collateral Agent may from time to time reasonably require.
Permitted ordinary course activities with respect to collateral
Notwithstanding the foregoing, so long as no Default or Event of Default under the Indenture would result therefrom
and such transaction would not violate the Trust Indenture Act, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary
Guarantors and Absaloka may, among other things, without any release or consent by the Trustee or the Agents,
conduct ordinary course activities with respect to Collateral, including, without limitation, (i) selling or otherwise
disposing of, in any transaction or series of related transactions, any property subject to the Lien of the Security
Documents which has become worn out, defective or obsolete or not used or useful in the business; (ii) abandoning,
terminating, canceling, releasing or making alterations in or substitutions of any leases or contracts subject to the Lien
of the Indenture or any of the Security Documents; (iii) surrendering or modifying any license or permit subject to the
Lien of the Indenture or any of the Security Documents which it may own or under which it may be operating;
(iv) granting a license of any intellectual property; (v) selling, transferring or otherwise disposing of inventory in the
ordinary course of business; (vi) selling, collecting, liquidating, factoring or otherwise disposing of accounts receivable
in the ordinary course of business; (vii) making cash payments (including for the scheduled repayment of
Indebtedness) from cash that is at any time part of the Note Collateral in the ordinary course of business that are not
otherwise prohibited by the Indenture and the Security Documents; and (viii) abandoning any intellectual property
which is no longer used or useful in the Issuer’s, the Co-Issuer’s or Subsidiary Guarantor’s business. The Issuer and
the Co-Issuer must deliver to the Agents, within thirty (30) calendar days following the end of each six month period
beginning on January 1 and July 1 of any year, an officers’ certificate to the effect that none of the releases and
withdrawals occurring during the preceding six month period (or since the Initial Notes Issue Date, in the case of the
first such certificate) were prohibited by the Indenture.
48
Table of Contents
After-acquired property
If the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, a Subsidiary Guarantor or Absaloka acquires property that is not automatically subject to a
perfected security interest or Lien under the Security Documents and such property would be of the type that would
constitute Collateral, or a Subsidiary becomes a Guarantor, then the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, such Guarantor or Absaloka
will provide security interests in and Liens on such property (or, in the case of a new Guarantor, all of its assets
constituting Collateral) in favor of the Agents for their benefit and the benefit of the Trustee, the Holders of the Notes
and the holders of the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations (with respect to the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral) and deliver certain joinder agreements and certificates in respect thereof as required by the Indenture and
the Security Documents; provided, however, that any Guarantor that joins the Indenture after the Third Supplemental
Indenture became effective, is not be obligated to deliver until 90 days after the 2014 Additional Notes Issue Date any
(A) account control agreements that are required to be put in place to perfect the security interest of the Note Collateral
Agent in such Guarantor’s relevant accounts that are part of the Collateral or (B) any pledge agreement or other
arrangements necessary to grant or perfect a security interest in any equity in any Guarantor that is organized in the
Netherlands, or in the assets of such Guarantor.
Further assurances
Subject to the limitations described above under “– General,” the Security Documents and the Indenture provide that
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka shall, at their expense, duly execute and deliver, or
cause to be duly executed and delivered, such further agreements, documents and instruments, and do or cause to be
done such further acts as may be reasonably necessary or proper to evidence, perfect, maintain and enforce the
security interests and the priority thereof in the Note Collateral for the benefit of the Holders of the Notes, the Trustee
and the holders of the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations (with respect to the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral) and to otherwise effectuate the provisions or purposes of the Indenture and the Security Documents.
Real estate mortgages and filings
Subject to the limitations described above under “– General,” and provided that the following does not grant any real
estate security interests beyond that which is required pursuant to the Indenture, the Issuers and each Guarantor shall
execute and deliver Mortgages, in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Note Collateral Agent, which
Mortgages shall cover (i) any fee interest in Real Property owned by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Subsidiary
Guarantor on the Initial Notes Issue Date and identified on a schedule to the Indenture, (ii) any fee interest in Real
Property acquired by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Subsidiary Guarantor after the Initial Notes Issue Date; provided,
however, that the Guarantors that own Real Property in Canada on the 2014 Additional Notes Issue Date shall not be
obligated to deliver Mortgages on such Real Property to the Note Collateral Agent until 90 days after the 2014
Additional Notes Issue Date, and (iii) any interest in mineral rights related to WRI’s and/or Absaloka’s mining
operations in Big Horn County, Montana, together with evidence that such Mortgages have been delivered to the title
insurance company insuring the Lien of such Mortgage for recording. Any Guarantor that leases Real Property in
Canada shall use its commercially reasonable efforts to deliver to the Note Collateral Agent within 180 days after the
2014 Additional Notes Issue Date (or within 180 days after such Guarantor acquires such an interest subsequent to
the 2014 Additional Notes Issue Date) a Mortgage on such leasehold interest (it being understood that the consent of
any landlord of such leasehold interest will be required in connection with such Mortgage).
(1) Within forty-five (45) days following the recordation of any Mortgage on any Mortgaged Property, the Note
Collateral Agent shall have received each of the following documents, which shall be reasonably satisfactory in form
and substance to the Note Collateral Agent, the Trustee and each of their respective counsel with respect to each
Mortgaged Property, as appropriate:
(A) Title Insurance. With respect to each Mortgage encumbering any Mortgaged Property, a policy of title insurance (or
commitment to issue such a policy having the effect of a policy of title insurance insuring (or committing to insure) the
lien of such Mortgage as a valid and enforceable mortgage or deed of trust lien on the Mortgaged Property described
therein, having a policy limit not to exceed 110% of the then fair market value of such Mortgaged Property (such
policies collectively, the “Mortgage Policies”) issued by a title insurance company, which reasonably assures the Note
Collateral Agent that the Mortgages on such Mortgaged Properties are valid and enforceable mortgage liens on the
respective Mortgaged Properties, free and clear of all Liens, defects and encumbrances (other than Permitted Liens)
and such Mortgage Policies shall include such title endorsements to the extent available at commercially reasonably
rates;
(B) Survey. The Issuers and the appropriate Guarantors shall deliver to the Note Collateral Agent and the title
insurance company insuring the Lien of each Mortgage any and all surveys, opinions of special counsel, or opinions
or reports from architects, engineers or zoning report companies as may be reasonably necessary to cause such title
insurance company to issue the Mortgage Policies required pursuant to clause (A) above;
(C) Fixture filings. Proper fixture filings under the Uniform Commercial Code on Form UCC-1 or any applicable
document under applicable Canadian or provincial law for filing under the Uniform Commercial Code or under
applicable Canadian or provincial in the appropriate jurisdiction in which the Mortgaged Properties are located,
desirable to perfect the security interests in fixtures purported to be created by the Mortgages in favor of the Note
Collateral Agent for its benefit and the benefit of the Trustee and the Holders of the Notes;
Table of Contents
49
(D) Consents. With respect to the Mortgaged Property, such consents, approvals, amendments, supplements,
estoppels, tenant subordination agreements or other instruments as necessary to consummate the transactions in
order for the owner or holder of the fee interest constituting such Mortgaged Property to grant the lien contemplated by
the Mortgage with respect to such Mortgaged Property, including, without limitation, the Mineral Consents;
(E) Mortgaged Property Indemnification. With respect to each Mortgaged Property, such affidavits, certificates,
instruments of indemnification and other items (including a so-called “gap” indemnification) as shall be reasonably
required to induce the title insurance company insuring the Lien of each Mortgage to issue the Mortgage Policies and
endorsements contemplated above;
(F) Collateral Fees and Expenses. Evidence of payment by the Issuers of all Mortgage Policy premiums, search and
examination charges, mortgage recording taxes, fees, charges, costs and expenses required for the recording of the
Mortgages, fixture filings and issuance of the Mortgage Policies referred to above; and
(G) Necessary Amendments. If necessary, amendments to the Mortgages duly authorized, executed and
acknowledged, in recordable form and otherwise in form reasonably acceptable to the Trustee and Note Collateral
Agent with respect to each Mortgaged Property sufficient for the owner of such Mortgaged Property to (x) grant to the
Note Collateral Agent and/or confirm the Note Collateral Agent’s Mortgage lien on and security interests in such
Mortgaged Property, (y) confirm such owner’s right and indefeasible title thereto and (z) confirm the Mortgaged
Property to be encumbered thereby.
Foreclosure
In the event of foreclosure on the Note Collateral, the proceeds from the sale of the same may not be sufficient to
satisfy the Issuer’s and the Co-Issuer’s obligations under the Notes, either in whole or in part. The amount to be
received upon such a sale would be dependent on numerous factors (including those described in “– Sufficiency of
collateral in the event of foreclosure”). By its nature, portions of the Note Collateral may be illiquid and may have no
readily ascertainable market value or may require consents that cannot be obtained. In particular, Note Collateral
consisting of contracts and intellectual property is generally more illiquid than the Revolving Facility First-Priority
Collateral consisting of receivables and inventory. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the Note Collateral can
be sold in a short period of time in an orderly manner. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Intercreditor Agreement,
if any event of default has occurred under the Revolving Credit Facility, the proceeds of the foreclosure of the Note
Second Lien Collateral would be applied, first to the obligations under the Revolving Credit Facility before the
remaining proceeds, if any, would be available to apply to the obligations under the Notes.
Certain bankruptcy limitations
The right of the Agents to repossess and dispose of the Note Collateral upon the occurrence of an Event of Default
would be significantly impaired by applicable bankruptcy law in the event that a bankruptcy case were to be
commenced by or against the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary Guarantor prior to the Agents having
repossessed and disposed of the Note Collateral. Upon the commencement of a case for relief under the Bankruptcy
Code, secured creditors such as the Agents are prohibited from repossessing security from a debtor in a bankruptcy
case, or from disposing of security repossessed from the debtor or any other Collateral, without bankruptcy court
approval.
In view of the broad equitable powers of a U.S. bankruptcy court, it is impossible to predict how long payments under
the Notes or any Guarantees could be delayed following commencement of a bankruptcy case, whether or when the
Agents could repossess or dispose of the Note Collateral, the value of the Note Collateral at the time of the bankruptcy
petition or whether or to what extent Holders of the Notes would be compensated for any delay in payment or loss of
value of the Note Collateral. The Bankruptcy Code only permits the payment and/or accrual of post-petition interest,
costs and attorneys’ fees to a secured creditor during a debtor’s bankruptcy case to the extent the value of the Note
Collateral is determined by the bankruptcy court to exceed the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the
obligations secured by the Note Collateral.
Furthermore, in the event a bankruptcy court determines that the value of the Note Collateral is not sufficient to repay
all amounts due on the Notes after payment of any priority claims, the Holders of the Notes would hold secured claims
only to the extent of the value of the Note Collateral to which the Holders of the Notes are entitled (and subject to the
rights in the Revolving Facility First-Priority Lien Collateral of holders of the Revolving Credit Facility Obligations), and
unsecured claims with respect to such shortfall.
Table of Contents
Release
50
The Liens on the Note Collateral will be released with respect to the Notes and the Note Guarantees, as applicable:
(1) in whole, upon payment in full of the principal of, accrued and unpaid interest, and premium, if any, on the Notes;
(2) in whole, upon satisfaction and discharge of the Indenture;
(3) in whole, upon a legal defeasance or a covenant defeasance as set forth under “– Legal Defeasance and
Covenant Defeasance” below;
(4) as to any asset constituting Note Collateral (A) that is sold or otherwise disposed of by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer,
any of the Subsidiary Guarantors or Absaloka (to a person that is not an Issuer, Co-Issuer, a Subsidiary Guarantor or
Absaloka) in a transaction permitted by “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales” and by the Security
Documents (to the extent of the interest sold or disposed of) or otherwise permitted by the Indenture and the Security
Documents, if all Liens on that asset then securing the Notes and the Note Guarantees then secured by that asset
(including all commitments thereunder) are released or (B) that is otherwise released in accordance with, and as
expressly provided for in accordance with, the Indenture, the Intercreditor Agreement and the Security Documents;
(5) as set forth under “– Amendment, Supplement, Waiver and Entry into Intercreditor Agreement,” as to property that
constitutes less than all or substantially all of the Note Collateral, with the consent of holders of at least a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the Notes (or, in the case of a release of all or substantially all of the Note Collateral,
with the consent of the holders of at least seventy-five percent (75%) in aggregate principal amount of the Notes),
including consents obtained in connection with a tender offer or exchange offer for, or purchase of, Notes; or
(6) with respect to assets of a Guarantor upon release of such Guarantor from its Note Guarantee as set forth under
“– Note Guarantees,” above.
Upon compliance by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, any Subsidiary Guarantor or Absaloka, as the case may be, with the
conditions precedent required by the Indenture, the release of the liens described in item (4) immediately above will
occur automatically, and the Note Collateral Agent will execute and deliver appropriate instruments or releases to
evidence such release as the applicable Issuer or Guarantor requests, and such documents or instruments as
necessary to release other Liens described above, as relevant, and shall promptly cause to be released and
reconveyed to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantor or Absaloka, as the case may be, the released
Collateral. Prior to each proposed release, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, each Subsidiary Guarantor and Absaloka will
furnish to the Trustee and the Agents all documents required by the Indenture, the Security Documents and the
Trust Indenture Act.
Change of Control
If a Change of Control occurs, each Holder will have the right to require that the Issuer purchase (a “Change of Control
Offer”) pursuant to the procedure required by the Indenture, all or any part (equal to $2,000 or an integral multiple of
$1,000 in excess thereof) of that Holder’s Notes for a cash price (the “Change of Control Purchase Price”) equal to
101% of the principal amount of the Notes to be purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon and Additional
Interest, if any, to the date of purchase, on a date specified in the notice specified below (which shall be a Business
Day not earlier than 30 days nor later than 60 days from the date the notice is sent) (a “Change of Control Payment
Date”). A Change of Control Offer may be made in advance of a Change of Control or conditional upon the occurrence
of a Change of Control, if a definitive agreement is in place for the Change of Control at the time the Change of Control
Offer is made.
Within 30 days following any Change of Control, or at an earlier date if the Issuer makes a Change of Control Offer in
advance of, or conditioned on the occurrence of, a Change of Control, the Issuer will send, or cause to be sent, to the
Holders a notice describing the transaction or transactions that constitute a change of control and offering to purchase
Notes on the Change of Control Payment Date. Such notice shall state:
(1) the circumstances and relevant facts regarding such Change of Control;
(2) that the Change of Control Offer is being made pursuant to the relevant section of the Indenture and that all Notes
properly tendered and not withdrawn will be accepted for payment;
(3) the Change of Control Purchase Price (including the amount of accrued interest) and the Change of Control
Payment Date;
(4) that any Note not tendered shall continue to accrue interest;
(5) that, unless the Issuer defaults in making payment therefor, any Note accepted for payment pursuant to the Change
of Control Offer shall cease to accrue interest after the Change of Control Payment Date;
(6) that Holders electing to have a Note purchased pursuant to a Change of Control Offer shall be required to
surrender the Note, with the form entitled “Option of Holder to Elect Purchase” on the reverse of the Note completed, to
the Paying Agent at the address specified in the notice prior to the close of business on the third Business Day prior to
the Change of Control Payment Date;
Table of Contents
51
(7) that Holders will be entitled to withdraw their election if the Paying Agent receives, not later than the second
Business Day prior to the Change of Control Payment Date, an email, facsimile transmission or letter setting forth the
name of the Holder, the principal amount of the Notes the Holder delivered for purchase and a statement that such
Holder is withdrawing such Holder’s election to have such Note purchased; and
(8) that Holders whose Notes are purchased only in part shall be issued new Notes in a principal amount equal to the
unpurchased portion of the Notes surrendered.
The Change of Control Offer is required to remain open for at least 20 Business Days or for such longer period as is
required by law. The Issuer will post on its website the results of the Change of Control Offer on the date of purchase.
If a Change of Control Offer is made, there can be no assurance that the Issuer and the Co-Issuer will have available
funds sufficient to pay for all or any of the Notes of Holders seeking to accept the Change of Control Offer. In addition,
we cannot assure you that in the event of a Change of Control the Issuer and the Co-Issuer will be able to obtain the
consents necessary to consummate a Change of Control Offer from the parties to agreements governing other
outstanding Indebtedness which may prohibit the offer.
Any future credit agreement or other agreement to which the Issuer becomes a party may prohibit us from purchasing
any Notes, subject to certain exceptions, and may also provide that some change of control events with respect to us
would constitute a default thereunder. If a Change of Control occurs at a time when the Issuer is prohibited from
purchasing Notes, the Issuer could seek the consent from the lenders under such other agreements to the purchase of
Notes or could attempt to refinance the credit facilities that contain the prohibition. If the Issuer is unsuccessful in
obtaining a consent or refinancing the credit facilities, the Issuer will remain prohibited from purchasing Notes. In that
case, the Issuer’s failure to purchase tendered Notes would constitute an Event of Default under the Indenture which
could, in turn, constitute a default under such other agreement.
The provisions described above that require the Issuer to make a Change of Control Offer following a Change of
Control will be applicable regardless of whether any other provisions of the Indenture are applicable to the transaction
giving rise to the Change of Control. Except as described above with respect to a Change of Control, the Indenture
does not contain provisions that permit the Holders of the Notes to require that the Issuer purchase or redeem the
Notes in the event of a takeover, recapitalization or similar transaction.
The obligation of the Issuer to make a Change of Control Offer will be satisfied if a third party makes the Change of
Control Offer (an “Alternate Offer”) in the manner and at the times and otherwise in compliance with the requirements
set forth in the Indenture applicable to a Change of Control Offer made by the Issuer and purchases all Notes validly
tendered and not withdrawn under the Change of Control Offer. The Alternate Offer must comply with all the other
provisions applicable to the Change of Control Offer, shall remain, if commenced prior to the Change of Control, open
for acceptance until at least the consummation of the Change of Control (and otherwise in accordance with the time
specified as set forth above) and must permit Holders to withdraw any tenders of Notes made into the Alternate Offer
until the final expiration or consummation thereof. An Alternate Offer may be made in advance of a Change of Control
or conditional upon the occurrence of a Change in Control, if a definitive agreement is in place for the Change of
Control at the time the Alternate Offer is made.
With respect to any disposition of assets, the phrase “all or substantially all” as used in the Indenture (including as set
forth under the definition of “Change of Control” and “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations,
Etc.” below) varies according to the facts and circumstances of the subject transaction, has no clearly established
meaning under New York law (which governs the Indenture) and is subject to judicial interpretation. Accordingly, in
certain circumstances there may be a degree of uncertainty in ascertaining whether a particular transaction would
involve a disposition of “all or substantially all” of the assets of the Issuer, and therefore it may be unclear as to whether
a Change of Control has occurred and whether the Holders have the right to require the Issuer to purchase Notes. In
addition, it may be unclear whether certain transactions constitute a Change of Control. Under a recent Delaware
Chancery Court interpretation of a change of control repurchase requirement with a continuing director provision, a
Board of Directors may approve a slate of shareholder nominated directors without endorsing them or while
simultaneously recommending and endorsing its own slate instead. The foregoing interpretation would permit the
Issuer’s Board of Directors to approve a slate of directors that included a majority of dissident directors nominated
pursuant to a proxy contest, and the ultimate election of such dissident slate would not constitute a “Change of Control”
that would trigger a Holder’s right to require the Issuer to make an Change of Control Offer as described above.
The Issuer shall when making a Change of Control Offer comply, and will cause any third party making a Change of
Control Offer to comply, with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other securities laws
and regulations thereunder to the extent such laws and regulations are applicable in connection with a Change of
Control Offer. To the extent that the provisions of any applicable securities laws or regulations conflict with the Change
of Control provisions of the Indenture, the Issuer will not be deemed to have breached its obligations under the
Indenture by virtue of complying with such laws or regulations.
Table of Contents
Certain Covenants
52
The Indenture contains, among others, the following covenants:
Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and the Issuer will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly,
incur any Indebtedness (including Acquired Indebtedness), and the Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not issue any
Disqualified Equity Interests or Preferred Stock and the Issuer shall not permit any Restricted Subsidiaries to issue any
Disqualified Equity Interests or Preferred Stock (other than Preferred Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary held by the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor, so long as it is so held); provided, that the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Guarantor may incur additional Indebtedness or issue Disqualified Equity Interests and the Issuer may issue
Designated Preferred Stock if, in each case, after giving effect thereto, the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio would have
been at least 2.00 to 1.00 (the “Coverage Ratio Exception”) provided, further, that the Issuer may issue Preferred Stock
under the Issuer’s Rights Plan.
Notwithstanding the above, each of the following shall be permitted (the “Permitted Indebtedness”):
(1) Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, any Guarantor and Absaloka under the Revolving Credit Facility together
with the incurrence by any Restricted Subsidiary of the guarantees thereunder and the issuance and creation of letters
of credit and bankers’ acceptances thereunder (with letters of credit and bankers’ acceptances being deemed to have
a principal amount equal to the face amount thereof), up to an aggregate principal amount outstanding at any one time
not to exceed the greater of (x) $100.0 and (y) 85% of the aggregate book value of accounts receivable plus 50% of the
aggregate book value of inventory of the Issuer, Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries;
(2) (x) the Initial Notes issued on the Initial Notes Issue Date (excluding any Additional Notes) and the Note
Guarantees thereof and (y) any Exchange Notes issued in exchange for the Initial Notes (excluding any Additional
Notes) and any Note Guarantees thereof pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement related to the Initial Notes;
(3) Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries to the extent outstanding on the Initial
Notes Issue Date (other than Indebtedness referred to in clauses (1) and (2) above), after giving effect to the intended
use of proceeds of the Notes;
(4) Indebtedness under Hedging Obligations in the ordinary course of business that are designed to protect against
fluctuations in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices; provided, that if such Hedging
Obligations are of the type described in clause (1) of the definition thereof, (a) such Hedging Obligations relate to
payment obligations on Indebtedness otherwise permitted to be incurred by this covenant, and (b) the notional
principal amount of such Hedging Obligations at the time incurred does not exceed the principal amount of the
Indebtedness to which such Hedging Obligations relate;
(5) Indebtedness of the Issuer or the Co-Issuer owed to a Restricted Subsidiary and Indebtedness of any Restricted
Subsidiary owed to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any other Restricted Subsidiary; provided, however, that (A) if the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor is the obligor with respect to such Indebtedness and the payee is not the Issuer,
the Co-Issuer or a Guarantor, such Indebtedness must be subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash of all
obligations of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Guarantor with respect to the Notes and (B) upon any such Restricted
Subsidiary ceasing to be a Restricted Subsidiary or such Indebtedness being owed to any Person other than the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary, as applicable,
in each case, shall be deemed to have incurred Indebtedness not permitted by this clause (5);
(6) (x) any guarantee by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Guarantor of Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Guarantor so long as the incurrence of such Indebtedness by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantor is
permitted under the terms of the Indenture and (y) any guarantee by a Restricted Subsidiary that is not a Guarantor of
Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary so long as the incurrence of such Indebtedness is
permitted under the terms of the Indenture;
(7) (a) Indebtedness incurred by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary constituting reimbursement
obligations with respect to any letters of credit, bankers’ acceptance warehouse receipt or similar facility issued in the
ordinary course of business, including without limitation letters of credit or Indebtedness in respect of workers’
compensation claims, health, disability or other employee benefits or property, casualty or liability insurance or self-
insurance or other Indebtedness with respect to reimbursement-type obligations regarding workers’ compensation
claims and (b) Obligations in respect of performance, surety, reclamation and similar bonds and performance and
completion guarantees provided by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary or Obligations in respect of
letters of credit related thereto, in each case incurred in the ordinary course of business or consistent with past
practice, and any guarantees or letters of credit functioning as so supporting any of the foregoing bonds or obligations
(in the case of clauses (a) and (b), other than for an obligation for money borrowed);
(8) Purchase Money Indebtedness incurred by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, in an aggregate
amount not to exceed at any time outstanding $40.0 million;
53
Table of Contents
(9) Indebtedness arising from the honoring by a bank or other financial institution of a check, draft or similar instrument
inadvertently (except in the case of daylight overdrafts) drawn against insufficient funds in the ordinary course of
business; provided, however, that such Indebtedness is extinguished within five Business Days of incurrence;
(10) Indebtedness arising in connection with endorsement of instruments for deposit in the ordinary course of
business;
(11) Refinancing Indebtedness with respect to Indebtedness incurred or outstanding pursuant to the Coverage Ratio
Exception or clause (2), (3) or (8) immediately above, this clause or clauses (15) or (18) immediately below;
(12) Indebtedness supported by one or more letters of credit issued under the Revolving Credit Facility in accordance
with clauses (1) immediately above, respectively; provided, that the amount of Indebtedness permitted to be incurred
under this clause (12) supported by any such letter(s) of credit shall not exceed the amount of such letter(s) of credit;
provided, further, that upon any reduction, cancellation or termination of such letter(s) of credit, there shall be deemed
to be an incurrence of Indebtedness under the Indenture that must be otherwise permitted to be incurred under the
Indenture equal to the excess of the amount of such Indebtedness outstanding immediately after such reduction,
cancellation or termination over the remaining stated amount, if any, of such letter(s) of credit or the stated amount of
any letter(s) of credit issued in a contemporaneous replacement of such letter(s) of credit;
(13) Attributable Indebtedness incurred by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in an aggregate
amount not to exceed $10.0 million at any one time outstanding;
(14) Indebtedness incurred by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor in an aggregate principal amount (or
accreted value, as applicable) at any one time outstanding, including all Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew,
refund, refinance, replace, defease or discharge any Indebtedness incurred pursuant to this clause (14), not to exceed
$20.0 million;
(15) Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of Acquired Indebtedness (except to the
extent such Acquired Indebtedness was incurred in connection with or in contemplation of such acquisition); provided,
that after giving effect to such incurrence of Indebtedness either (A) the Issuer would be permitted to incur at least
$1.00 of additional Indebtedness pursuant to the Coverage Ratio Exception immediately following such transaction or
(B) such Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio would have been greater than immediately prior to such acquisition;
(16) Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary under any Cash Management Obligations;
(17) Customary indemnification, adjustment of purchase price or similar obligations, including title insurance, of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each case, incurred in connection with the disposition of any
assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any such Restricted Subsidiary (other than guarantees incurred by any Person
acquiring all or any portion of such assets for the purpose of financing such acquisition); and
(18) Indebtedness represented by Additional Notes and Note Guarantees thereof and any Exchange Notes issued in
exchange for the Additional Notes pursuant to a Registration Rights Agreement and any Note Guarantee thereof in
connection with or in contemplation of, or to provide all or any portion of the funds or credit support utilized to
consummate, the acquisition by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor of assets used or useful in a Permitted
Business (whether through the direct purchase of assets or the purchase of capital stock of, or merger or consolidation
with, any Person owning such assets); provided, that the Issuer would, on the date of such issuance of Additional
Notes after giving pro forma effect thereto and any related financing transactions as if the same had occurred at the
beginning of the applicable Four-Quarter Period, have had a Total Leverage Ratio for the Four-Quarter Period
immediately preceding the date of such transaction, of no more than 4.0 to 1.0.
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not incur, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to incur, any Indebtedness
(including Permitted Indebtedness) that is contractually subordinated in right of payment to any other Indebtedness of
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary unless such Indebtedness is also contractually subordinated in
right of payment to the Notes and the applicable Note Guarantees on substantially identical terms; provided, however,
that no Indebtedness will be deemed to be contractually subordinated in right of payment to any other Indebtedness of
the Issuer or the Co-Issuer solely by virtue of being unsecured or by virtue of being secured on a junior priority basis.
For purposes of determining compliance with this covenant, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the criteria
of more than one of the categories of Permitted Indebtedness described in clauses (1) through (18) immediately above
or is entitled to be incurred pursuant to the Coverage Ratio Exception, the Issuer shall classify and may reclassify, in
each case in its sole discretion, such item of Indebtedness and may divide, classify and reclassify such Indebtedness
in more than one of the types of Indebtedness described, except that Indebtedness incurred under the Revolving
Credit Facility after the Initial Notes Issue Date must be incurred under clause (1) above. In addition, for purposes of
determining any particular amount of Indebtedness under this covenant, guarantees, Liens or letter of credit
obligations supporting Indebtedness otherwise included in the determination of such particular amount shall not be
included so long as incurred by a Person that could have incurred such Indebtedness. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this covenant, the maximum amount of Indebtedness that the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted
Subsidiary may incur pursuant to this covenant shall not be deemed to be exceeded solely as a result of fluctuations in
exchange rates or currency values.
Table of Contents
54
We are seeking consents from the holders of the Existing Notes to amend certain provisions of the Indenture, including
portions of the definition of Permitted Indebtedness above, to permit us to amend our Revolving Credit Facility to
increase the amount of borrowings available thereunder. See “– Proposed Indenture Amendments.”
Limitations on Restricted Payments
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, make any
Restricted Payment unless, at the time of and after giving effect to such Restricted Payment:
(1) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing or would occur as a consequence of such
Restricted Payment;
(2) the Issuer would, at the time of such Restricted Payment and after giving pro forma effect thereto as if such
Restricted Payment had been made at the beginning of the applicable Four-Quarter Period, have been permitted to
incur at least $1.00 of additional Indebtedness pursuant to the Coverage Ratio Exception; or
(3) such Restricted Payment, when added to the aggregate amount of all other Restricted Payments made by the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries after the Initial Notes Issue Date (other than Restricted Payments
made pursuant to clauses (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) or (9) of the next succeeding paragraph), is less than the sum (the
“Restricted Payments Basket”) of (without duplication):
(a) 50% of Consolidated Net Income of the Issuer for the period (taken as one accounting period) commencing on the
first day of the first full fiscal quarter commencing after the Initial Notes Issue Date to and including the last day of the
fiscal quarter ended immediately prior to the date of such calculation for which consolidated financial statements are
available (or, if such Consolidated Net Income shall be a deficit, minus 100% of such aggregate deficit), plus
(b) 100% of the aggregate net cash proceeds and the fair market value, as determined in good faith by the Board of
Directors of the Issuer, of property and marketable securities, received by the Issuer either (x) as contributions to the
common equity of the Issuer after the Initial Notes Issue Date (other than (i) by a Restricted Subsidiary, (ii) any
Disqualified Equity Interests, (iii) Designated Preferred Stock and (iv) cash proceeds applied to Restricted Payments
made in accordance with clause (4) of the next succeeding paragraph) or (y) from the issuance and sale of Qualified
Equity Interests after the Issue Date, in each case, other than any such proceeds which are used (x) to redeem Notes
in accordance with “– Optional Redemption – Redemption with Proceeds from Qualified Equity Offerings” or (y) to
make Restricted Payments in reliance on clause (3) or clause (4) of the next succeeding paragraph, plus
(c) the aggregate amount by which Indebtedness (other than any Subordinated Indebtedness) of the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary is reduced on the Issuer’s balance sheet upon the conversion or exchange
subsequent to the Initial Notes Issue Date (other than by a Subsidiary of the Issuer) into Qualified Equity Interests (less
the amount of any cash, or the fair value of assets, distributed by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary
upon such conversion or exchange), plus
(d) without duplication of any amounts included in clause (4) of the next succeeding paragraph, (x) in the case of the
disposition or repayment of or return on any Investment that was treated as a Restricted Payment made after the Initial
Notes Issue Date, an amount (to the extent not included in the computation of Consolidated Net Income) equal to the
lesser of (i) the aggregate amount received in cash and the fair market value, as determined by the Board of Directors
of the Issuer in good faith, of property and marketable securities received after the Initial Notes Issue Date and
representing the return of capital with respect to such Investment and (ii) the amount of such Investment that was
treated as a Restricted Payment, in either case, less the cost of the disposition of such Investment and net of taxes or
(y) the sale (other than to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary) of the Equity Interests of an Unrestricted
Subsidiary, plus
(e) upon a Redesignation of an Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary, the lesser of (i) the Fair Market
Value of the Issuer’s proportionate interest in such Subsidiary immediately following such Redesignation, and (ii) the
aggregate amount of the Issuer’s Investments in such Subsidiary to the extent such Investments reduced the
Restricted Payments Basket and were not previously repaid or otherwise reduced.
The foregoing provisions will not prohibit:
(1) the payment by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of any dividend or other distribution within
60 days after the date of declaration thereof, if on the date of declaration the payment would have complied with the
provisions of the Indenture;
(2) the redemption, repurchase, retirement or other acquisition of any Equity Interests of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or
any Restricted Subsidiary in exchange for, or out of the proceeds of the substantially concurrent issuance and sale of,
Qualified Equity Interests;
(3) the redemption, repurchase, retirement or other acquisition of Subordinated Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (a) in exchange for, or out of the proceeds of the substantially concurrent issuance
and sale of, Qualified Equity Interests or (b) in exchange for, or out of the proceeds of the substantially concurrent
incurrence of,
Table of Contents
55
Refinancing Indebtedness permitted to be incurred under the “Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred
Stock” covenant and the other terms of the Indenture; provided, that the amount of any such net cash proceeds that are
utilized for any such Restricted Payment will not be considered to be net proceeds of Qualified Equity Interests for
purposes of clause (3)(b) of the immediately preceding paragraph and will not be considered to be net cash proceeds
from a Qualified Equity Offering for purposes of the provisions described above under the caption “– Optional
Redemption – Redemption with Proceeds from Qualified Equity Offerings”;
(4) payments to redeem Equity Interests of the Issuer, held by officers, directors or employees or former officers,
directors or employees (or their transferees, estates or beneficiaries under their estates) thereof, upon their death,
disability, retirement, severance or termination of employment or service pursuant to any employee benefit plan or
agreement or awarded to an employee to pay for the taxes payable by such employee upon such grant or award or the
vesting thereof; provided, that the aggregate amount of Restricted Payments under this clause (4) shall not exceed
(A) $2.0 million during any calendar year plus (B) the amount of any net cash proceeds received by or contributed to
the Issuer from the issuance and sale since the Initial Notes Issue Date of Qualified Equity Interests of the Issuer to its
officers, directors or employees that have not been applied to the payment of Restricted Payments pursuant to the
terms of clause 3(b) of the immediately preceding paragraph or this clause (4), plus (C) the net cash proceeds of any
“key-man” life insurance policies that have not been applied to Restricted Payments pursuant to this clause (4), less
(D) the amount of any Restricted Payments previously made from cash proceeds received pursuant to clauses (B) and
(C) of this clause (4); provided, further, that the cancellation of Indebtedness owing to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Restricted Subsidiary in connection with the repurchase of Qualified Equity Interests will not be deemed to constitute a
Restricted Payment;
(5) (a) the declaration and payment of regularly scheduled or accrued dividends to holders of the Series A Preferred
Stock to the extent such dividends are included in the definition of Consolidated Interest Expense, (b) the declaration
and payment of regularly scheduled or accrued dividends to holders of any class or series of Disqualified Equity
Interests of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary outstanding on the Initial Notes Issue Date or issued
on or after the Initial Notes Issue Date in accordance with the Coverage Ratio Exception described above under the
caption “– Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock” to the extent such dividends are included in
the definition of Consolidated Interest Expense and (c) the declaration and payment of accrued and unpaid dividends
to holders of the Series A Preferred Stock outstanding as of the Initial Notes Issue Date with the proceeds of the sale of
the Existing Notes;
(6) the declaration and payment of dividends or distributions to holders of any class or series of Designated Preferred
Stock (other than Disqualified Equity Interests) issued by the Issuer after the Initial Notes Issue Date in accordance
with the Coverage Ratio Exception described under the caption “– Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and
Preferred Stock” to the extent such dividends are included in the definition of Consolidated Interest Expense; provided,
however, that (A) for the most recently ended four full fiscal quarters for which consolidated financial statements are
available immediately preceding the date of issuance of such Designated Preferred Stock, after giving effect to such
issuance (and the payment of dividends or distributions thereon) on a pro forma basis, the Issuer would have had a
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of at least 2.0 to 1.0 and (B) the aggregate amount of dividends declared and paid
pursuant to this clause (6) does not exceed the net cash proceeds actually received by the Issuer from any such sale
of Designated Preferred Stock (other than Disqualified Equity Interests) issued after the Issue Date;
(7) repurchases of Equity Interests deemed to occur upon the exercise or conversion of stock options or other Equity
Interests, if such repurchased or converted Equity Interests represent a portion of the exercise price thereof;
(8) the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement for value of any Subordinated Indebtedness pursuant
to the provisions in documentation governing such Subordinated Indebtedness similar to those described under
“– Change of Control,” “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales,” “– Certain Covenants – Excess Cash
Flow” and “– Certain Covenants – Event of Loss”; provided, that prior to such repurchase, redemption or another
acquisition, the Issuer and the Co-Issuer (or a third party to the extent permitted by the Indenture) shall have made any
required Change of Control Offer, Net Proceeds Offer or Loss Proceeds Offer, as the case may be, with respect to the
Notes and shall have repurchased all Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn in connection with such Change of
Control Offer, Net Proceeds Offer or Loss Proceeds Offer; or
(9) additional Restricted Payments of $10.0 million.
provided, that (a) in the case of any Restricted Payment pursuant to clause (3), (4), (5)(b), (6), (8) or (9) immediately
above, no Default shall have occurred and be continuing or occur as a consequence thereof and (b) no issuance and
sale of Qualified Equity Interests used to make a payment pursuant to clause (2), (3) or (4) immediately above shall
increase the Restricted Payments Basket.
In the event that a Restricted Payment meets the criteria of more than one of the exceptions described in clauses (1)
through (9) immediately above or is entitled to be made pursuant to the first paragraph above, the Issuer shall, in its
sole discretion, classify or reclassify such Restricted Payment into one or more exceptions.
Table of Contents
56
Limitations on Dividend and Other Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or
otherwise cause or permit to exist or become effective any consensual encumbrance or consensual restriction on the
ability of any Restricted Subsidiary to:
(a) pay dividends or make any other distributions on or in respect of its Equity Interests to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or
any Restricted Subsidiary, or with respect to any other interest or participation in, or measured by, its profits, or pay any
Indebtedness owed to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(b) make loans or advances or pay any Indebtedness or other obligation owed to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any other
Restricted Subsidiary; or
(c) sell, lease or transfer any of its assets to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any other Restricted Subsidiary;
except for:
(1) encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of applicable law or any applicable rule, regulation or
order;
(2) encumbrances or restrictions existing under the Indenture, the Notes and the Note Guarantees (including any
Exchange Notes and guarantees thereof), the Intercreditor Agreement and the Security Documents;
(3) customary non-assignment provisions of any contract or any lease or license entered into in the ordinary course of
business;
(4) encumbrances or restrictions existing under agreements existing on the date of the Indenture (including, without
limitation, agreements relating to Absaloka) as in effect on that date;
(5) restrictions on transfers of assets subject to any Lien permitted under the Indenture imposed by the holder of such
Lien;
(6) restrictions on transfers of assets imposed under any agreement to sell such assets permitted under the Indenture
to any Person pending the closing of such sale;
(7) any instrument governing Acquired Indebtedness, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any
Person, or the properties or assets of any Person, other than the Person or the properties or assets of the Person so
acquired, so long as such Acquired Indebtedness or encumbrance or restriction was not incurred in connection with, or
in contemplation of, such acquisition;
(8) any other agreement governing Indebtedness entered into after the Initial Notes Issue Date that contains
encumbrances and restrictions that are not materially more restrictive with respect to any Restricted Subsidiary than
those in effect on the Initial Notes Issue Date with respect to that Restricted Subsidiary pursuant to agreements in
effect on the Initial Notes Issue Date;
(9) customary provisions in partnership agreements, limited liability company organizational governance documents,
joint venture agreements and other similar agreements entered into in the ordinary course of business that restrict the
transfer of ownership interests in such partnership, limited liability company, joint venture or similar Person;
(10) Purchase Money Indebtedness and Attributable Indebtedness incurred in compliance with the covenant
described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock” that impose
restrictions of the nature described in clause (c) immediately above on the assets acquired;
(11) restrictions on cash or other deposits or net worth imposed by suppliers or landlords under contracts and bonding
requirements entered into in the ordinary course of business; and
(12) any encumbrances or restrictions imposed by any amendments or refinancings of the contracts, instruments or
obligations referred to in clauses (1) through (11) immediately above; provided, that such amendments or refinancings
are, in the good faith judgment of the Issuer’s Board of Directors, no more materially restrictive with respect to such
encumbrances and restrictions than those prior to such amendment or refinancing.
Limitations on Transactions with Affiliates
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, in one
transaction or a series of related transactions, sell, lease, transfer or otherwise dispose of any of its assets to, or
purchase any assets from, or enter into any contract, agreement, understanding, loan, advance or guarantee with, or
for the benefit of, any Affiliate (an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless:
(1) such Affiliate Transaction is on terms that are no less favorable to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the relevant
Restricted Subsidiary than those that would have been obtained in a comparable transaction at such time on an arm’s-
length basis by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or that Restricted Subsidiary from a Person that is not an Affiliate of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or that Restricted Subsidiary; and
57
Table of Contents
(2) the Issuer delivers to the Trustee:
(a) with respect to any Affiliate Transaction involving aggregate value in excess of $10.0 million, an Officers’ Certificate
certifying that such Affiliate Transaction complies with clause (1) above and a Secretary’s Certificate which sets forth
and authenticates a resolution that has been adopted by a majority of the disinterested members of the Board of
Directors of the Issuer approving such Affiliate Transaction and affirming the determination set forth in clause (1)
above; and
(b) with respect to any Affiliate Transaction involving aggregate value of $20.0 million or more, the certificates
described in the preceding clause (a) and a written opinion as to the fairness of such Affiliate Transaction to the Issuer,
the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary from a financial point of view issued by an Independent Financial Advisor
to the Board of Directors of the Issuer.
The foregoing restrictions shall not apply to:
(1) transactions exclusively between or among (a) the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and one or more Guarantors,
(b) Guarantors or (c) Restricted Subsidiaries that are not Guarantors;
(2) the payment of reasonable and customary director, officer, employee and consultant compensation (including
bonuses), reimbursement of expenses and other benefits (including retirement, health, stock option and other benefit
plans) and indemnification arrangements;
(3) the issuance of Equity Interests (other than Disqualified Equity Interests) of the Issuer to any director, officer,
employee or consultant of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or its Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business;
(4) Restricted Payments which are made in accordance with the covenant described under “– Certain Covenants
– Limitations on Restricted Payments”;
(5) transactions with customers, clients, suppliers, joint venture partners or purchasers or sellers of goods and
services, in each case in the ordinary course of business and otherwise not prohibited by the Indenture that are fair to
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or its Restricted Subsidiaries, in the reasonable determination of the members of the Board of
Directors of the Issuer or the senior management of the Issuer, or are on terms at least as favorable as would
reasonably have been entered into at such time with an unaffiliated party;
(6) (x) any agreement in effect on the Initial Notes Issue Date and disclosed in the offering memorandum covering the
Existing Notes, as in effect on the Initial Notes Issue Date or as thereafter amended or replaced in any manner, that,
taken as a whole, is not more disadvantageous to the Holders or the Issuer in any material respect than such
agreement as it was in effect on the Initial Notes Issue Date or (y) any transaction pursuant to any agreement referred
to in the immediately preceding clause (x);
(7) the existence of, and the performance by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of its obligations
under the terms of, any limited liability company, limited partnership or other organizational document or security
holders agreement (including any registration rights agreement or purchase agreement related thereto) to which it is a
party on the Initial Notes Issue Date and which is described in the offering memorandum covering the Existing Notes,
as in effect on the Initial Notes Issue Date, and similar agreements that it may enter into thereafter; provided, however,
that the existence of, or the performance by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of obligations
under, any amendment to any such existing agreement or any such similar agreement entered into after the date of the
Indenture shall only be permitted by this clause (7) to the extent not more disadvantageous to the Holders in any
material respect, when taken as a whole, than any of such documents and agreements as in effect on the Initial Notes
Issue Date;
(8) the Transactions and the payment of all transaction, underwriting commitment and other fees and expenses
incurred in connection with the Transactions;
(9) sales of Qualified Equity Interests to Affiliates of the Issuer not otherwise prohibited by the Indenture and the
granting of registration and other customary rights in connection therewith;
(10) loans or advances to employees in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice; or
(11) Permitted Investments made in accordance with clause (19) of the definition thereof.
Limitations on Liens
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer shall not, and shall not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create,
incur, assume or permit or suffer to exist any Lien of any nature whatsoever against any properties or assets of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (including Equity Interests of a Restricted Subsidiary), whether
owned at the Initial Notes Issue Date or thereafter acquired, or any proceeds therefrom, or assign or otherwise convey
any right to receive income or profits therefrom (other than Permitted Liens and Liens on the collateral securing the
Revolving Credit Facility Obligations).
Table of Contents
Limitations on Asset Sales
58
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly,
consummate any Asset Sale unless:
(1) the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary receives consideration at the time of such Asset Sale at
least equal to the Fair Market Value of the assets included in such Asset Sale; and
(2) at least 75% of the total consideration received in such Asset Sale consists of cash or Cash Equivalents.
For purposes of clause (2) immediately above, the following shall be deemed to be cash:
(a) the amount (without duplication) of any Indebtedness (other than Subordinated Indebtedness) of the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary that is expressly assumed by the transferee in such Asset Sale and with respect
to which the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, is unconditionally released by
the holder of such Indebtedness,
(b) the amount of any securities, Notes or other obligations received from such transferee that are within 90 days
converted by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary to cash (to the extent of the cash actually so
received), and
(c) the Fair Market Value of (i) any assets (other than securities) received by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted
Subsidiary to be used by it in a Permitted Business, (ii) Equity Interests in a Person that is a Restricted Subsidiary or in
a Person engaged in a Permitted Business that shall become a Restricted Subsidiary immediately upon the
acquisition of such Person by the Issuer or the Co-Issuer or (iii) a combination of (i) and (ii).
If at any time any non-cash consideration received by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, as the
case may be, in connection with any Asset Sale is repaid or converted into or sold or otherwise disposed of for cash
(other than interest received with respect to any such non-cash consideration), then the date of such repayment,
conversion or disposition shall be deemed to constitute the date of an Asset Sale hereunder and the Net Available
Proceeds thereof shall be applied in accordance with this covenant.
If the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary engages in an Asset Sale, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such
Restricted Subsidiary shall, no later than 365 days following the consummation thereof, apply amounts equal to all or
any of the Net Available Proceeds therefrom to:
(1) If such Net Available Proceeds are proceeds of an Asset Sale of any asset, prepay permanently or repay
permanently any Indebtedness which was secured by the Collateral sold in such Asset Sale; provided, that if such Net
Available Proceeds are proceeds of an Asset Sale of the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral, such Net
Available Proceeds shall be applied as required under the Revolving Credit Facility;
(2) If such Net Available Proceeds are proceeds of any Asset Sale, to permanently reduce any Pari Passu
Indebtedness; provided, however, that if any Pari Passu Indebtedness is so reduced, the Issuer and the Co-Issuer will
equally and ratably reduce Indebtedness under the Notes by making an offer to all Holders of the Notes to purchase at
a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, the pro rata
principal amount of the Notes; or
(3) invest all or any part of the Net Available Proceeds thereof in (A) the purchase of assets (other than securities) to be
used by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in a Permitted Business, (B) capital expenditures to be
used by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in a Permitted Business, (C) acquisition of Qualified
Equity Interests in a Person that is a Restricted Subsidiary or in a Person engaged in a Permitted Business that shall
become a Restricted Subsidiary immediately upon the consummation of such acquisition or (D) a combination of (A),
(B) and (C).
The amount of Net Available Proceeds not applied or invested as provided in this paragraph will constitute “Excess
Proceeds.”
When the aggregate amount of Excess Proceeds equals or exceeds $10.0 million, the Issuer will be required to make
an offer to purchase from all Holders and, if applicable, redeem (or make an offer to do so) any Pari Passu
Indebtedness of the Issuer the provisions of which require the Issuer to redeem such Indebtedness with the proceeds
from any Asset Sales (or offer to do so), in an aggregate principal amount of Notes and such Pari Passu Indebtedness
equal to the amount of such Excess Proceeds as follows:
(1) the Issuer will (a) make an offer to purchase (a “Net Proceeds Offer”) to all Holders in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Indenture, and (b) redeem (or make an offer to do so) any such other Pari Passu
Indebtedness, pro rata in proportion to the respective principal amounts of the Notes and such other Indebtedness
required to be redeemed, the maximum principal amount of Notes and Pari Passu Indebtedness that may be
redeemed out of the amount (the “Payment Amount”) of such Excess Proceeds;
(2) the offer price for the Notes will be payable in cash in an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the
Notes tendered pursuant to a Net Proceeds Offer, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any, to the date such
Net Proceeds Offer is consummated (the “Offered Price”), in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Indenture
and the redemption price for such Pari Passu Indebtedness (the “Pari Passu Indebtedness Price”) shall be as set forth
in the related documentation governing such Indebtedness;
Table of Contents
59
(3) if the aggregate Offered Price of Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn by Holders thereof exceeds the pro rata
portion of the Payment Amount allocable to the Notes, Notes to be purchased will be selected on a pro rata basis or as
nearly a pro rata basis as is practicable (subject to the procedures of the Depository Trust Company); and
(4) upon completion of such Net Proceeds Offer in accordance with the foregoing provisions, the amount of Excess
Proceeds with respect to which such Net Proceeds Offer was made shall be deemed to be zero.
To the extent that the sum of the aggregate Offered Price of Notes tendered pursuant to a Net Proceeds Offer and the
aggregate Pari Passu Indebtedness Price paid to the holders of such Pari Passu Indebtedness is less than the
Payment Amount relating thereto (such shortfall constituting a “Net Proceeds Deficiency”), the Issuer may use the Net
Proceeds Deficiency, or a portion thereof, for general corporate purposes, subject to the provisions of the Indenture.
In the event of the transfer of substantially all (but not all) of the assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted
Subsidiaries as an entirety to a Person in a transaction covered by and effected in accordance with the covenant
described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.,” the successor Person shall be
deemed to have sold for cash at Fair Market Value the assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted
Subsidiaries not so transferred for purposes of this covenant, and the successor Person shall comply with the
provisions of this covenant with respect to such deemed sale as if it were an Asset Sale (with such Fair Market Value
being deemed to be Net Available Proceeds for such purpose).
The Issuer will comply with applicable tender offer rules, including the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the
Exchange Act and any other applicable laws and regulations in connection with the purchase of Notes pursuant to a
Net Proceeds Offer. To the extent that the provisions of any securities laws or regulations conflict with this covenant,
the Issuer shall comply with the applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached
their obligations under this covenant by virtue of this compliance.
Excess Cash Flow
Within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the Issuer (commencing with the fiscal year ending December 31,
2011), when the aggregate Excess Cash Flow Amount equals or exceeds $1.0 million, the Issuer will be required to
make an offer to purchase from all Holders Notes issued under the Indenture (including the principal amount of any
Additional Notes issued under the Indenture but without duplication with respect to Exchange Notes) in an aggregate
principal amount equal to the Excess Cash Flow Amount as follows:
(1) the Issuer will make an offer to purchase (an “Excess Cash Flow Offer”) to all Holders in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Indenture, pro rata in proportion to the respective principal amounts of the Notes to be
purchased, the maximum principal amount that may be purchased out of the Excess Cash Flow Amount (the “Excess
Cash Flow Payment Amount”);
(2) the offer price for the Notes will be payable in cash in an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the
Notes tendered pursuant to an Excess Cash Flow Offer, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any, to the date
such Excess Cash Flow Offer is consummated (the “Excess Cash Flow Offered Price”), in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Indenture;
(3) if the aggregate Excess Cash Flow Offered Price of Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn by Holders thereof
exceeds the pro rata portion of the Excess Cash Flow Payment Amount allocable to the Notes, Notes to be purchased
will be selected on a pro rata basis or as nearly on a pro rata basis as is practical (subject to the procedures of the
Depository Trust Company; and
(4) upon completion of such Excess Cash Flow Offer in accordance with the foregoing provisions, the Excess Cash
Flow Amount with respect to which such Excess Cash Flow Offer was made shall be deemed to be zero.
To the extent that the sum of the aggregate Excess Cash Flow Offered Price of Notes tendered pursuant to an Excess
Cash Flow Offer is less than the Excess Cash Flow Payment Amount relating thereto (such shortfall constituting an
“Excess Cash Flow Offer Deficiency”), the Issuer may use the Excess Cash Flow Offer Deficiency, or a portion thereof,
for general corporate purposes, subject to the provisions of the Indenture.
The Issuer will comply with applicable tender offer rules, including the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the
Exchange Act and any other applicable laws and regulations in connection with the purchase of Notes pursuant to an
Excess Cash Flow Offer.
Table of Contents
60
Limitations on Designation of Unrestricted Subsidiaries
The Issuer may designate any Subsidiary (including any newly formed or newly acquired Subsidiary) of the Issuer
(other than the Co-Issuer) as an “Unrestricted Subsidiary” under the Indenture (a “Designation”) only if:
(1) no Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time of or after giving effect to such Designation; and
(2) the Issuer would be permitted to make, at the time of such Designation, (a) a Permitted Investment or (b) an
Investment pursuant to the first paragraph of “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Restricted Payments” above, in
either case, in an amount (the “Designation Amount”) equal to the Fair Market Value of the Issuer’s proportionate
interest in such Subsidiary on such date.
No Subsidiary shall be Designated as an “Unrestricted Subsidiary” unless such Subsidiary:
(1) has no Indebtedness other than Non-Recourse Debt;
(2) is not party to any agreement, contract, arrangement or understanding with the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Restricted Subsidiary unless the terms of the agreement, contract, arrangement or understanding are no less favorable
to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the Restricted Subsidiary than those that might be obtained at the time from Persons
who are not Affiliates;
(3) is a Person with respect to which none of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary has any direct or
indirect obligation (a) to subscribe for additional Equity Interests or (b) to maintain or preserve the Person’s financial
condition or to cause the Person to achieve any specified levels of operating results; and
(4) has not guaranteed or otherwise directly or indirectly provided credit support for any Indebtedness of the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, except for any guarantee given solely to support the pledge by the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Equity Interests of such Unrestricted Subsidiary, which guarantee is not
recourse to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, and except to the extent the amount thereof
constitutes a Restricted Payment permitted pursuant to the covenant described under “– Certain Covenants
– Limitations on Restricted Payments”; provided, further, that an Unrestricted Subsidiary may have previously been a
Guarantor and have provided a Note Guarantee of the Notes.
If, at any time, any Unrestricted Subsidiary fails to meet the preceding requirements as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, it
shall thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of the Indenture and any Indebtedness of the
Subsidiary and any Liens on assets of such Subsidiary shall be deemed to be incurred by a Restricted Subsidiary as
of the date and, if the Indebtedness is not permitted to be incurred under the covenant described under “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock” or the Lien is not permitted under the
covenant described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Liens,” the Issuer shall be in default of the applicable
covenant. The Issuer may not designate the Co-Issuer as an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
The Issuer may redesignate an Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary (a “Redesignation”) only if:
(1) no Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time of and after giving effect to such Redesignation; and
(2) all Liens, Indebtedness and Investments of such Unrestricted Subsidiary outstanding immediately following such
Redesignation would, if incurred or made at such time, be permitted to be incurred or made for all purposes of the
Indenture.
All Designations and Redesignations must be evidenced by resolutions of the Board of Directors of the Issuer,
delivered to the Trustee certifying compliance with the foregoing provisions.
Limitations on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, enter into
any Sale and Leaseback Transaction; provided, that the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary may enter
into a Sale and Leaseback Transaction if:
(1) the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary could have (a) incurred the Indebtedness in an amount
equal to the Attributable Indebtedness attributable to such Sale and Leaseback Transaction pursuant to the covenant
described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock” and (b) incurred
a Lien to secure such Attributable Indebtedness pursuant to the covenant described under “– Certain Covenants
– Limitations on Liens”;
(2) the gross cash proceeds of such Sale and Leaseback Transaction are at least equal to the Fair Market Value of the
asset that is the subject of such Sale and Leaseback Transaction; and
(3) the transfer of assets in such Sale and Leaseback Transaction is permitted by, and the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the
applicable Restricted Subsidiary applies the proceeds of such transaction in accordance with, the covenant described
under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
Table of Contents
61
Limitations on the Issuance or Sale of Equity Interests of Restricted Subsidiaries
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, sell or
issue any shares of Equity Interests of any Restricted Subsidiary except (1) to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, a Restricted
Subsidiary or the minority stockholders of any Restricted Subsidiary, on a pro rata basis or (2) to the extent such
shares represent directors’ qualifying shares or shares required by applicable law to be held by a Person other than
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary or (3) pursuant to the Absaloka operating
agreement or membership interest purchase agreement relating to the Indian coal tax credit transaction. The sale of all
the Equity Interests of any Restricted Subsidiary is permitted by this covenant but is subject to the covenant described
under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.
The Issuer will not, directly or indirectly, in a single transaction or a series of related transactions, (a) consolidate or
merge with or into another Person, or sell, lease, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of or assign all or substantially
all of the assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries (taken as a whole) or (b) adopt a Plan of
Liquidation unless, in either case:
(1) either:
(a) the Issuer will be the surviving or continuing Person; or
(b) the Person formed by or surviving such consolidation or merger or to which such sale, lease, conveyance or other
disposition shall be made (or, in the case of a Plan of Liquidation, any Person to which assets are transferred)
(collectively, the “Successor”) is a corporation, limited liability company or limited partnership organized and existing
under the laws of any State of the United States of America or the District of Columbia, and the Successor expressly
assumes, by a supplemental indenture in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee, all of the
obligations of the Issuer and the Co-Issuer under the Notes, the Indenture, the Security Documents, the Registration
Rights Agreement and, if the Revolving Credit Facility is then outstanding, the Intercreditor Agreement, and shall
cause (i) such amendments, supplements or other instruments to be executed, filed and recorded in such jurisdiction
as may be required by applicable law to preserve and protect any security interest on the Collateral pledged by the
Issuer, together with such financing statements or comparable documents as may be required to perfect any security
interest in such Collateral which may be perfected by the filing of a financing statement or a similar document under
the UCC or other similar statute or regulation of the relevant states or jurisdictions and (ii) the property and assets of
the Person which is merged or consolidated with or into the Successor, to the extent that they are property or assets of
the types which would constitute Collateral under the Security Documents (other than assets that would qualify as
Excluded Property or assets that otherwise may not be made subject to a Lien), to be treated as after-acquired property
and the Successor shall take such actions as may be reasonably necessary to cause such property and assets to be
made subject to the Lien of the Security Documents in the manner and to the extent provided in the Indenture, in each
case in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee;
(2) immediately prior to and immediately after giving effect to such transaction and the assumption of the obligations as
set forth in clause (1)(b) immediately above and the incurrence of any Indebtedness to be incurred in connection
therewith, and the use of any net proceeds therefrom on a pro forma basis, no Default or Event of Default shall have
occurred and be continuing;
(3) immediately after and giving effect to such transaction and the assumption of the obligations set forth in clause (1)
(b) immediately above and the incurrence of any Indebtedness to be incurred in connection therewith, and the use of
any net proceeds therefrom on a pro forma basis, the Issuer or the Successor, as the case may be, (a) could incur
$1.00 of additional Indebtedness pursuant to the Coverage Ratio Exception or (b) shall have a Fixed Charge
Coverage Ratio greater than the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Issuer immediately prior to such transaction and
assumption; and
(4) the Issuer shall have delivered to the Trustee an Officers’ Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel, each stating that
such transaction and such supplemental indentures, if any, comply with the Indenture.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, clauses (3) and (4) of the first paragraph of this covenant shall not be applicable to
(a) the Issuer consolidating with, merging into or selling, assigning, transferring, conveying, leasing or otherwise
disposing of all or part of its properties and assets to a Restricted Subsidiary and (b) the Issuer merging with an
Affiliate solely for the purpose and with the sole effect of reincorporating the Issuer, as the case may be, in another
jurisdiction so long as the amount of Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries is not
increased thereby.
For purposes of this covenant, any Indebtedness of the Successor which was not Indebtedness of the Issuer
immediately prior to the transaction shall be deemed to have been incurred in connection with such transaction.
Table of Contents
62
Except as provided in the fourth paragraph under the caption “– Note Guarantees,” no Guarantor or the Co-Issuer may
consolidate with or merge with or into (whether or not such Guarantor or the Co-Issuer is the surviving Person) another
Person, other than the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or another Guarantor, unless:
(1) either:
(a) such Guarantor will be the surviving or continuing Person; or
(b) the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger assumes, by supplemental indenture in form
and substance satisfactory to the Trustee, all of the obligations of such Guarantor under the Note Guarantee of such
Guarantor, the Indenture, the Security Documents, the Registration Rights Agreement and, if the Revolving Credit
Facility is then outstanding, the Intercreditor Agreement and shall cause (i) such amendments, supplements or other
instruments to be executed, filed and recorded in such jurisdiction as may be required by applicable law to preserve
and protect the lien on the Collateral pledged by such Guarantor, together with such financing statements or
comparable documents as may be required to perfect any security interest in such Collateral which may be perfected
by the filing of a financing statement or a similar document under the UCC or other similar statute or regulation of the
relevant states or jurisdictions and (ii) the property and assets of the Person which is merged or consolidated with or
into the Successor, to the extent that they are property or assets of the types which would constitute Collateral under
the Security Documents (other than assets that would qualify as Excluded Property or assets that otherwise may not
be made subject to a Lien), to be treated as after-acquired property and the Successor shall take such actions as may
be reasonably necessary to cause such property and assets to be made subject to the Lien of the Security Documents
in the manner and to the extent provided in the Indenture, in each case in a form reasonably satisfactory to the
Trustee; and
(2) immediately after giving effect to such transaction, no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be
continuing.
For purposes of the foregoing, the transfer (by lease, assignment, sale or otherwise, in a single transaction or series of
transactions) of all or substantially all of the properties or assets of the Co-Issuer or one or more Restricted
Subsidiaries, the Equity Interests of which constitute all or substantially all of the properties and assets of the Issuer,
will be deemed to be the transfer of all or substantially all of the properties and assets of the Issuer.
Upon any consolidation, combination or merger of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Guarantor, or any transfer of all or
substantially all of the assets of the Issuer in accordance with the foregoing, in which the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such
Guarantor is not the continuing obligor under the Notes or its Note Guarantee, the surviving entity formed by such
consolidation or into which the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Guarantor is merged or the Person to which the
conveyance, lease or transfer is made will succeed to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and power
of, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Guarantor under the Indenture, the Notes, the Note Guarantees, the Security
Documents, the Registration Rights Agreement and, if the Revolving Credit Facility is then outstanding, the
Intercreditor Agreement with the same effect as if such surviving entity had been named therein as the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or such Guarantor and, except in the case of a lease, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Guarantor, as the case
may be, will be released from the obligation to pay the principal of and interest on the Notes or in respect of its Note
Guarantee, as the case may be, and all of the Issuer’s, the Co-Issuer’s or such Guarantor’s other obligations and
covenants under the Notes, the Indenture, its Note Guarantee, the Security Documents, the Registration Rights
Agreement and the Intercreditor Agreement, if applicable.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any Guarantor may consolidate with, merge with or into or convey, transfer or lease, in
one transaction or a series of transactions, all or substantially all of its assets to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or another
Guarantor; provided, that the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantors shall cause such amendments, supplements
or other instruments to be executed, filed and recorded in such jurisdiction as may be required by applicable law to
preserve and protect the lien on the Collateral pledged by such entity, together with such financing statements or
comparable documents as may be required to perfect any security interest in such Collateral which may be perfected
by the filing of a financing statement or a similar document under the UCC or other similar statute or regulation of the
relevant states or jurisdictions.
Additional Note Guarantees
If, after the Initial Notes Issue Date, (a) the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary shall acquire or create
another Subsidiary (other than in any case a Subsidiary that has been designated an Unrestricted Subsidiary), (b) any
Unrestricted Subsidiary is redesignated a Restricted Subsidiary or, (c) the Issuer otherwise elects or is required to
have any Restricted Subsidiary become a Guarantor, then, in each such case, the Issuer shall, unless the Restricted
Subsidiary is prohibited from becoming a Guarantor, or from pledging its assets, by reason of any regulatory or
contractual prohibition existing at the time of acquisition or creation (but not created in anticipation of acquisition),
cause such Restricted Subsidiary to:
(1) execute and deliver to the Trustee (a) a supplemental indenture in form and substance satisfactory to the Trustee
pursuant to which such Restricted Subsidiary shall unconditionally guarantee all of the Issuer’s and the Co-Issuer’s
obligations under the Notes, the Indenture, the Security Documents, the Registration Rights Agreement and, if the
Revolving Credit Facility is then outstanding, the Intercreditor Agreement, (b) a notation of guarantee in respect of its
Note Guarantee, and (c) a joinder to the Security Documents or new Security Documents;
Table of Contents
63
(2) deliver to the Trustee one or more Opinions of Counsel that such supplemental indenture (a) has been duly
authorized, executed and delivered by such Restricted Subsidiary and (b) constitutes a valid and legally binding
obligation of such Restricted Subsidiary in accordance with its terms; and
(3) shall take such actions as may be reasonably necessary to cause the property and assets of such Restricted
Subsidiary, to the extent that they are property or assets of the types which would constitute Collateral under the
Security Documents, to be treated as after-acquired property and to be made subject to the Liens of the Security
Documents in the manner and to the extent provided in the Indenture and in the Security Documents, in a manner
reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee.
Conduct of Business
The Issuer and the Co-Issuer will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, engage in any business other
than a Permitted Business.
Limitation on Activities of Certain Subsidiaries
The Issuer will not permit Basin Resources Inc. to engage in any activities other than in relation to providing benefits to
former mining operation employees and activities incidental to its organization and existence and shall not permit
Basin Resources, Inc. to incur any Indebtedness, grant Liens over its assets or enter into any transactions other than in
the ordinary course. The Issuer will not permit Westmoreland Terminal Company, Eastern Coal & Coke Company, and
Criterion Coal Company to engage in any activities other than activities incidental to their organization and existence
and activities incidental to their respective dissolution and shall not permit such companies to incur any Indebtedness,
grant Liens over their assets or enter into any transactions.
Payments for Consent
The Issuers will not, and will not permit any of their Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, pay or cause to be
paid any consideration, whether by way of interest, fee or otherwise, to or for the benefit of any Holder for or as an
inducement to any consent, waiver or amendment of any of the terms or provisions of the Indenture or the Notes unless
such consideration is offered to be paid or is paid to all Holders or all Holders that consent, waive or agree to amend in
the time frame set forth in the solicitation documents relating to such consent, waiver or agreement.
Reports and Other Information
(a) Whether or not the Issuer is subject to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and any
Guarantor will, to the extent permitted under the Exchange Act, file with the SEC the annual reports, quarterly reports
and other documents which the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantor would have been required to file with the
SEC pursuant to Sections 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act if the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such Guarantor were
subject to such Sections, such documents to be filed with the SEC on or prior to the date (the “Required Filing Date”)
by which the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantor would have been required so to file such documents if the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantor were so subject.
If at any time the Notes are guaranteed by a direct or indirect parent of the Issuer and such company has complied with
the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, if applicable, and has furnished the Holders of
Notes, or filed electronically with the SEC’s Next-Generation EDGAR System (or any successor system), the reports
described herein with respect to such company, as applicable (including any financial information required by
Regulation S-X under the Securities Act relating to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Guarantors), the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer and the Guarantors shall be deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of this covenant.
The Issuer, the Co-Issuer and any Guarantor will also in any event (a) within 15 days after each Required Filing Date
file with the Trustee copies of the annual reports, quarterly reports and other documents which the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer and such Guarantor would have been required to file with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of
the Exchange Act if the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantor were subject to either of such Sections and (b) if
filing such documents by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and such Guarantor with the SEC is not permitted under the
Exchange Act or prior to the exchange offer or the effectiveness of a shelf registration statement contemplated by the
Registration Rights Agreement, promptly upon written request and payment of the reasonable cost of duplication and
delivery, supply copies of such documents to any prospective holder at the Issuer’s cost. The Issuer, the Co-Issuer and
each Guarantor shall be deemed to have satisfied the foregoing requirements if the relevant documents have been
filed with the SEC.
If the Co-Issuer’s, any Guarantor’s or secured party’s financial statements would be required to be included in the
financial statements filed or delivered pursuant to the Indenture if the Issuer were subject to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of
the Exchange Act, the Issuer shall include such financial statements in any filing or delivery pursuant to the Indenture.
So long as any of the Notes remain outstanding, the Issuer will make available to any prospective purchaser of Notes
or beneficial owner of Notes in connection with any sale thereof the information required by Rule 144A(d)(4) under the
Securities Act, until the earlier of (x) such time as the Issuer has exchanged the Notes for the Exchange Notes and
(y) such time as the holders thereof have disposed of such Notes pursuant to an effective registration statement under
the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
64
(b) The Issuer will also hold quarterly conference calls for the Holders of the Notes to discuss financial information for
the previous quarter. The conference call will be following the last day of each fiscal quarter of the Issuer and not later
than ten Business Days after the time that the Issuer distributes the financial information as set forth in paragraph (a)
immediately above. No fewer than two days prior to the conference call, the Issuer shall issue a press release
announcing the time and date of such conference call and providing instructions for Holders, securities analysts and
prospective investors to obtain access to such call. For the avoidance of doubt, the Issuer may satisfy the requirements
of this paragraph (b) by holding the conference calls required above within the time period required as part of any
earnings calls of the Issuer in accordance with past practice.
Events of Loss
Subject to any intercreditor agreement and the Security Documents, in the event of an Event of Loss with respect to
any Collateral, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the affected Guarantor, as the case may be, will apply the Net Loss
Proceeds from such Event of Loss, within 365 days after receipt, at its option to:
(1) repay obligations under any revolving credit facility with the Net Loss Proceeds of borrowing base assets, and
effect a permanent reduction in the availability under such revolving credit facility;
(2) repay any Indebtedness which was secured by the assets to which Event of Loss related; and/or
(3) invest all or any part of the Net Loss Proceeds thereof in (A) the purchase of assets (other than securities) to be
used by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in a Permitted Business, (B) capital expenditures to be
used by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in a Permitted Business, (C) acquisition of Qualified
Equity Interests in a Person that is a Restricted Subsidiary or in a Person engaged in a Permitted Business that shall
become a Restricted Subsidiary immediately upon the consummation of such acquisition or (D) a combination of (A),
(B) and (C).
Pending the final application of any Net Loss Proceeds, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the affected Guarantor shall
deposit such Net Loss Proceeds in accordance with the Security Documents and any applicable Intercreditor
Agreement.
Any Net Loss Proceeds from an Event of Loss that are not applied or invested as provided in the prior paragraph will
be deemed to constitute “Excess Loss Proceeds.” When the aggregate amount of Excess Loss Proceeds exceeds
$10.0 million, the Issuer will be required to make an offer to purchase from all Holders and, if applicable, redeem (or
make an offer to do so) any Pari Passu Indebtedness of the Issuer the provisions of which require the Issuer to redeem
such Indebtedness with the Net Loss Proceeds (or offer to do so) (a “Loss Proceeds Offer”) in an aggregate principal
amount of Notes and such Pari Passu Indebtedness equal to the amount of such Excess Loss Proceeds at an offer
price in cash in an amount equal to 100% of their principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest to the date of
purchase or redemption, as applicable. If the aggregate principal amount of Notes surrendered by Holders exceeds
the Excess Loss Proceeds to be used to purchase the Notes, the Trustee shall select the Notes to be purchased
pursuant to the Loss Proceeds Offer on a pro rata basis or on a pro rata basis as is practicable, subject to the
procedures of the Depository Trust Company.
The Issuer will comply with the applicable tender offer rules, including Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act, and any
other applicable securities laws or regulations in connection with a Loss Proceeds Offer, and the relevant provisions of
the Indenture will be deemed modified as necessary to permit such compliance.
Events of Default
Each of the following is an “Event of Default”:
(1) failure by the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to pay interest or Additional Interest on any of the Notes when it becomes
due and payable and the continuance of any such failure for 30 days;
(2) failure by the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to pay the principal of or premium, if any, on any of the Notes when due and
payable, whether at stated maturity, upon redemption, upon purchase, upon acceleration or otherwise;
(3) failure by the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to comply with any of its agreements or covenants described above under “–
Certain Covenants – Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.,” or in respect of its obligations to make a Change of
Control Offer as described above under “– Change of Control”;
(4) failure by the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to comply with any of its agreements or covenants described above under “–
Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock” or “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Restricted Payments” and continuance of this failure for 30 days after notice of the failure
has been given to the Issuer by the Trustee or by the Holders of at least 25% of the aggregate principal amount of the
Notes then outstanding;
(5) failure by the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to comply with any other agreement or covenant in the Indenture and
continuance of the failure for 60 days after notice of the failure has been given to the Issuer by the Trustee or by the
Holders of at least 25% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding;
Table of Contents
65
(6) default with respect to any payment when due under any mortgage, indenture or other instrument or agreement
under which there may be issued or by which there may be secured or evidenced Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, whether such Indebtedness now exists or is incurred after the Initial Notes Issue
Date; provided, that the principal amount of such Indebtedness aggregates to $15.0 million or more or such
Indebtedness is incurred under the Revolving Credit Facility;
(7) one or more judgments or orders that exceed $15.0 million in the aggregate (net of amounts covered by insurance
or bonded) for the payment of money have been entered by a court or courts of competent jurisdiction against the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary and such judgment or judgments have not been satisfied, stayed,
annulled or rescinded within 60 days of being entered;
(8) the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Significant Subsidiary pursuant to or within the meaning of any applicable
bankruptcy law:
(a) commences a voluntary case,
(b) consents to the entry of an order for relief against it in an involuntary case,
(c) consents to the appointment of a Custodian of it or for all or substantially all of its assets, or
(d) makes a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors;
(9) a court of competent jurisdiction enters an order or decree under any applicable bankruptcy law that:
(a) is for relief against the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Significant Subsidiary as debtor in an involuntary case,
(b) appoints a Custodian of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Significant Subsidiary or a Custodian for all or
substantially all of the assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Significant Subsidiary, or
(c) orders the liquidation of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Significant Subsidiary,
and the order or decree remains unstayed and in effect for 60 days;
(10) any Note Guarantee of any Significant Subsidiary ceases to be in full force and effect (other than in accordance
with the terms of such Note Guarantee and the Indenture) or is declared in a judicial proceeding null and void and
unenforceable or found in a judicial proceeding to be invalid or any Guarantor denies its liability under its Note
Guarantee (other than by reason of release of a Guarantor from its Note Guarantee in accordance with the terms of the
Indenture and the Note Guarantee); or
(11) so long as the Security Documents have not been otherwise terminated in accordance with their terms and the
Note Collateral as a whole has not been released from the Lien of the Security Documents securing the Notes in
accordance with the terms thereof, with respect to Collateral having a Fair Market Value in excess of $15.0 million,
(a) any default by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor in the performance of its obligations under the Security
Documents (after the lapse of any applicable grace periods) or the Indenture which adversely affects the condition or
value of such Collateral, in any material respect, (b) repudiation or disaffirmation of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Guarantor of its respective obligations under the Security Documents and (c) the determination in a judicial proceeding
that the Security Documents are unenforceable or invalid against the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor for any
reason.
If an Event of Default (other than an Event of Default specified in clause (8) or (9) immediately above with respect to
the Issuer or the Co-Issuer) shall have occurred and be continuing under the Indenture, the Trustee, by written notice
to the Issuer, or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding, by written
notice to the Issuer and the Trustee, may declare all amounts owing under the Notes to be due and payable
immediately. If an Event of Default specified in clause (8) or (9) immediately above with respect to the Issuer or the Co-
Issuer occurs, all outstanding Notes shall become due and payable without any further action or notice.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, after any such acceleration pursuant to either of the preceding two sentences, but
before a judgment or decree based on acceleration, the Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of
outstanding Notes may rescind and annul such acceleration:
(a) if the rescission would not conflict with any judgment or decree;
(b) if all existing Defaults have been cured or waived except nonpayment of principal or interest that has become due
solely because of such acceleration;
(c) to the extent the payment of such interest is lawful, interest on overdue installments of interest and overdue
principal, which has become due otherwise than by such declaration of acceleration, has been paid;
(d) if the Issuer has paid to the Trustee its reasonable compensation and reimbursed the Trustee of its expenses,
disbursements and advances; and
(e) in the event of a cure or waiver of an Event of Default of the type set forth in clauses (8) or (9) immediately above,
the Trustee shall have received an Officers’ Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel that such Default has been cured or
waived.
Table of Contents
66
The Trustee shall, within 30 days after obtaining actual knowledge of the occurrence of any uncured Default with
respect to the Notes, give the Holders notice of all uncured Defaults thereunder known to it; provided, however, that,
except in the case of a default in payment of principal of, or interest on, any Note, including an accelerated payment
and the failure to make a payment on the Change of Control Payment Date pursuant to a Change of Control Offer, the
Net Proceeds Payment Date pursuant to a Net Proceeds Offer or the Excess Cash Flow Payment Date pursuant to an
Excess Cash Flow Offer or a default in complying with the provisions of the covenant described above in “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.,” the Trustee may withhold the notice if and so long as the
Board of Directors, the executive committee, or a trust committee of directors and/or Responsible Officers, of the
Trustee in good faith determines that withholding the notice is in the interest of the Holders.
No Holder will have any right to institute any proceeding with respect to the Indenture, the Notes, the Security
Documents or, if applicable, the Intercreditor Agreement, or for any remedy thereunder, unless the Trustee:
(1) has failed to act for a period of 60 days after receiving written notice of a continuing Event of Default by such Holder
and a request to act by Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of Notes outstanding;
(2) has been offered indemnity, security or prefunding reasonably satisfactory to it; and
(3) has not received from the Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes a direction
inconsistent with such request.
However, such limitations do not apply to a suit instituted by a Holder of any Note for enforcement of payment of the
principal of or interest on such Note on or after the due date therefore (after giving effect to the grace period specified in
clause (1) of the first paragraph of this “– Events of Default” section).
The Holders of not less than a majority in principal amount of the outstanding Notes may direct the time, method and
place of conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the Trustee or exercising any trust or power conferred
on it. Subject to provisions in the Indenture setting forth the duties of the Trustee, however, the Trustee may refuse to
follow any direction that conflicts with any law or the Indenture, any Security Document or, if applicable, the
Intercreditor Agreement, that the Trustee determines may be unduly prejudicial to the rights of another Holder, or that
may involve the Trustee in personal liability; provided that the Trustee may take any other action deemed proper by the
Trustee which is not inconsistent with such direction. If the Trustee takes any action or follows any direction pursuant
to the Indenture, the Trustee shall be entitled to indemnification against any loss or expense caused by taking such
action or following such direction.
Subject to the Intercreditor Agreement and the Security Documents, if the Trustee collects any money or property
pursuant to the provisions described the provision described above, it shall pay out the money or property in the
following order:
First: to the Trustee for amounts due for compensation and indemnification as further set forth in the Indenture;
Second: to Holders for interest accrued on the Notes, ratably, without preference or priority of any kind, according to
the amounts due and payable on the Notes for interest;
Third: to Holders for principal amounts due and unpaid on the Notes, ratably, without preference or priority of any kind,
according to the amounts due and payable on the Notes for principal; and
Fourth: to the Issuers or, if applicable, the Guarantors, as their respective interests may appear.
The Trustee, upon prior notice to the Issuers, may fix a record date and payment date for any payment to Holders
described immediately above.
The Issuer is required to deliver to the Trustee annually an Officers’ Certificate regarding compliance with the
Indenture and, within five days after any Officer of the Issuer becomes aware of any Default, an Officers’ Certificate
specifying such Default and describing its status with particularity what action the Issuer is taking or proposes to take
with respect thereto.
Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
The Issuers may, at their option and at any time, elect to have its obligations and the obligations of the Co-Issuer and
the Guarantors discharged with respect to the outstanding Notes (“Legal Defeasance”). Legal Defeasance means that
the Issuers and the Guarantors shall be deemed to have paid and discharged the entire Indebtedness represented by
the Notes and the Note Guarantees, and to have satisfied all their obligations under the Notes, the Indenture and the
Security Documents, and the Guarantors shall be deemed to have satisfied all of their obligations under the Note
Guarantees, the Indenture and the Security Documents, except for the following provisions which shall survive until
otherwise terminated or discharged under the Indenture:
(1) the rights of Holders to receive payments in respect of the principal of, premium, if any on, and interest on the
outstanding Notes when such payments are due from the trust funds referred to below,
(2) the obligations of the Issuers with respect to the Notes concerning issuing temporary Notes, registration of Notes,
mutilated, destroyed, lost or stolen Notes, and the maintenance of an office or agency for payment, to hold money for
payments
Table of Contents
67
held in trust, and to maintain in the Borough of Manhattan, New York, an office or agency where Notes may be
presented or surrendered for registration of transfer or for exchange, or for payment and where notices and demands to
or upon the Issuers in respect of the Notes and the Indenture may be served,
(3) the rights, powers, trust, duties, and immunities of the Trustee and Note Collateral Agent, and the Issuer’s
obligation in connection therewith, and
(4) the Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance provisions of the Indenture.
In addition, the Issuer may, at its option and at any time, elect to have its obligations and the obligations of the Co-
Issuer and the Guarantors released with respect to most of the covenants under the Indenture and the Security
Documents, except as described otherwise in the Indenture (“Covenant Defeasance”), and thereafter any omission to
comply with such obligations shall not constitute a Default. In the event Covenant Defeasance occurs, the failure by
the Issuers to comply with the relevant covenants will not constitute an Event of Default. The Issuer may exercise its
Legal Defeasance option regardless of whether it previously exercised Covenant Defeasance.
In order to exercise either Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance:
(1) the Issuer must irrevocably deposit with the Trustee, as trust funds, in trust solely for the benefit of the Holders,
U.S. legal tender, U.S. Government Obligations or a combination thereof, in such amounts as will be sufficient (without
reinvestment) in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants selected by the Issuer,
to pay the principal of and interest on the Notes on the stated date for payment or on the redemption date of the
principal or installment of principal of or interest on the Notes and the Holders must have a valid, perfected exclusive
security interest in such trust,
(2) in the case of Legal Defeasance, the Issuer shall have delivered to the Trustee an Opinion of Counsel in the United
States confirming that:
(a) the Issuer has received from, or there has been published by the Internal Revenue Service, a ruling, or
(b) since the date of the Indenture, there has been a change in the applicable U.S. federal income tax law,
in either case to the effect that, and based thereon this Opinion of Counsel shall confirm that, the Holders and
beneficial owners of the Notes will not recognize income, gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a result
of the Legal Defeasance and will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and
at the same times as would have been the case if such Legal Defeasance had not occurred,
(3) in the case of Covenant Defeasance, the Issuer shall have delivered to the Trustee an Opinion of Counsel in the
United States reasonably acceptable to the Trustee confirming that the Holders and beneficial owners of the Notes will
not recognize income, gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a result of such Covenant Defeasance and
will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would
have been the case if the Covenant Defeasance had not occurred,
(4) no Default shall have occurred and be continuing on the date of such deposit (other than a Default resulting from
the borrowing of funds to be applied to such deposit and the grant of any Lien securing such borrowing);
(5) the Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance shall not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a Default
under the Indenture (other than a Default resulting solely from the borrowing of funds to be applied to such deposit and
the grant of any Lien on such deposit in favor of the Trustee and/or the Holders), the Revolving Credit Facility or any
other material agreement or instrument to which the Issuer or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which the Issuer or
any of its Subsidiaries is bound,
(6) the Issuer shall have delivered to the Trustee an Officers’ Certificate stating that the deposit was not made by it with
the intent of defeating, hindering, delaying or defrauding any other of its creditors or others, and
(7) the Issuer shall have delivered to the Trustee an Officers’ Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel, each stating that
the conditions provided for in, in the case of the Officers’ Certificate, clauses (1) through (6) of this paragraph and, in
the case of the Opinion of Counsel, clauses (1) (with respect to the validity and perfection of the security interest),
(2) and/or (3) and (5) of this paragraph have been complied with.
If the funds deposited with the Trustee to effect Covenant Defeasance are insufficient to pay the principal of and
interest on the Notes when due, then the Issuer’s and the Co-Issuer’s obligations and the obligations of Guarantors
under the Indenture will be revived and no such defeasance will be deemed to have occurred.
Table of Contents
Satisfaction and Discharge
68
The Issuers may terminate their obligations under the Notes, and the Indenture will cease to be of further effect (except
as to rights of registration of transfer or exchange of Notes which shall survive until all Notes have been canceled) if all
Notes previously authenticated and delivered (other than destroyed, lost or stolen Notes which have been replaced or
repaid) have been delivered to the Trustee for cancellation and the Issuers have paid all sums payable by them under
the Indenture, or if:
(1) all the Notes that have been authenticated and delivered (except lost, stolen or destroyed Notes which have been
replaced or paid and Notes for whose payment money has been deposited in trust or segregated and held in trust by
the Issuer and thereafter repaid to the Issuer or discharged from this trust) have been delivered to the Trustee for
cancellation, or
(2) (a) all Notes not delivered to the Trustee for cancellation otherwise have become due and payable or have been
called for redemption pursuant to the provisions described above under “– Optional Redemption” on arrangements
reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee, and the Issuer has irrevocably deposited or caused to be deposited with the
Trustee trust funds in an amount of money sufficient to pay and discharge the entire Indebtedness (including all
principal and accrued interest) on the Notes not theretofore delivered to the Trustee for cancellation,
(b) the Issuer and the Co-Issuer have paid all sums payable by it under the Indenture,
(c) the Issuer and the Co-Issuer have delivered irrevocable instructions to the Trustee to apply the deposited money
toward the payment of the Notes at maturity or on the date of redemption, as the case may be, and
(d) the Holders have a valid, perfected, exclusive security interest in this trust.
In addition, the Issuer must deliver an Officers’ Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel stating that all conditions
precedent to satisfaction and discharge have been satisfied.
Transfer and Exchange
A Holder will be able to register the transfer of or exchange Notes only in accordance with the provisions of the
Indenture. The Registrar will require a Holder, among other things, to furnish appropriate endorsements and transfer
documents, and the Issuers may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any transfer tax or similar governmental
charge payable in connection therewith and to pay any taxes and fees required by law or permitted by the Indenture.
Without the prior consent of the Issuer, the Registrar is not required to register the transfer of or exchange any Note
(1) selected for redemption, (2) for a period of 15 days before a selection of Notes to be redeemed or (3) between a
record date and the related interest payment date.
The Notes will be issued in registered form and the registered Holder will be treated as the owner of such Note for all
purposes.
Amendment, Supplement and Waiver and Entry into Intercreditor Agreement
Subject to certain exceptions, the Indenture may be amended with the consent of the Holders of a majority in principal
amount of the Notes then outstanding (voting as one class) (including consents obtained in connection with a tender
offer for, exchange for or purchase of, the Notes) and any past default or compliance with any provisions may also be
waived with the consent of the Holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the Notes then outstanding. An
intercreditor agreement containing terms that differ from those set forth under “– Security – Intercreditor Agreement
Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility” in any material respect may be entered into and, subject
to certain exceptions, the Intercreditor Agreement and the Security Documents may be amended, in each case with the
consent of the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Notes then outstanding (including consents obtained in
connection with a tender offer for, exchange for or purchase of, the Notes) and any past default or compliance with any
provisions in the Intercreditor Agreement and the Security Documents may also be waived with the consent of the
Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Notes then outstanding (including consents obtained in connection
with a tender offer for, exchange for or purchase of, the Notes); and such amendments may not, without the consent of
the Holders of 75% in principal amount of the Notes then outstanding, release all or substantially all of the Collateral
other than in accordance with the Indenture, the Intercreditor Agreement and the Security Documents; provided, that
without the consent of each Holder affected, no amendment or waiver may:
(1) change the maturity of any Note;
(2) reduce the amount, extend the due date or otherwise affect the terms of any scheduled payment of interest on or
principal of the Notes;
(3) reduce any premium payable upon optional redemption of the Notes, change the date on, or the circumstances
under which, any Notes are subject to redemption or otherwise alter the provisions with respect to the redemption of
the Notes (other than provisions relating to the repurchase of Notes described above under “– Change of Control,”
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales,” except that if a Change of Control has occurred, no amendment or
other modification of the obligation of the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to make a Change of Control Offer relating to such
Change of Control shall be made without the consent of each Holder of the Notes affected);
(4) make any Note payable in money or currency other than that stated in the Notes;
(5) make any change in the ranking or priority of any Note that would adversely affect the Holders of the Notes;
(6) reduce the percentage of Holders necessary to consent to an amendment or waiver to the Indenture or the Notes;
69
Table of Contents
(7) impair the rights of Holders to receive payments of principal of or interest on the Notes;
(8) release any Guarantor from any of its obligations under its Note Guarantee or the Indenture, except as permitted by
the Indenture; or
(9) make any change in these amendment and waiver provisions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Guarantors, the Trustee and the Note Collateral Agent, as
applicable, may (i) enter into an Intercreditor Agreement on the same terms set forth in “– Security – Intercreditor
Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility” in all material respects, without the consent
of any Holder and (ii) amend the Indenture, the Note Guarantees, the Notes, the Security Documents or the
Intercreditor Agreement, without the consent of any Holder:
(1) to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
(2) to provide for uncertificated Notes in addition to or in place of certificated Notes;
(3) to provide for the assumption of the obligations of the Issuer and the Co-Issuer to the Holders in the case of a
merger, consolidation or sale of all or substantially all of the assets in accordance with “– Certain Covenants –
Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.”;
(4) to release any Guarantor from any of its obligations under its Note Guarantee or the Indenture (to the extent
permitted by the Indenture);
(5) to provide for the accession or succession of any parties to the Intercreditor Agreement or the Security Documents
(and other amendments that are administrative or ministerial in nature) in connection with the execution or
amendment, renewal, extension, substitution, refinancing, restructuring, replacement, supplementing or other
modification from time to time of a Revolving Credit Facility, the Notes or any other agreement or action that is not
prohibited by the Indenture;
(6) to provide for the release of Collateral in accordance with the terms of the Indenture, the Intercreditor Agreement
and the Security Documents (it being understood that the Liens on the Collateral with respect to the Notes and the
Note Guarantees will be released to the extent the corresponding Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens securing
Revolving Credit Facility Obligations are released);
(7) to provide security for additional borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility or any additional Indebtedness
which Liens are permitted to be incurred in accordance with the Indenture;
(8) to expand the Note Collateral or the Note Guarantees;
(9) to evidence and provide the acceptance of the appointment of a successor trustee under the Indenture or successor
Note Collateral Agent;
(10) to provide for the issuance of Exchange Notes pursuant to the terms of the Indenture and the Registration Rights
Agreement; or
(11) to make any change that does not materially adversely affect the rights of any Holder, or, in the case of the
Indenture, to maintain the qualification of the Indenture under the Trust Indenture Act.
In the case of execution of an Intercreditor Agreement without the consent of the Holders, the Issuer shall have
delivered to the Trustee an Officers’ Certificate confirming that the Intercreditor Agreement shall have been entered
into on terms that are the same as the terms set forth under “– Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in
Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility” in all material respects.
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees, Stockholders and Members
No director, officer, employee, incorporator, stockholder, member or manager of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Restricted Subsidiary will have any liability for any obligations of the Issuer or the Co-Issuer under the Notes, the
Indenture, the Security Documents or the Intercreditor Agreement or of any Guarantor under its Note Guarantee or for
any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, such obligations or their creation. Each Holder by accepting a Note
waives and releases all such liability. The waiver and release are part of the consideration for issuance of the Notes
and the Note Guarantees. The waiver may not be effective to waive liabilities under the federal securities laws. It is the
view of the SEC that this type of waiver is against public policy.
Concerning the Trustee and the Note Collateral Agent
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association is the Trustee and the Note Collateral Agent under the Indenture and has
been appointed by the Issuer as Registrar and Paying Agent with regard to the Notes. The Indenture contains certain
limitations on the rights of the Trustee, should it become a creditor of the Issuer, to obtain payment of claims in certain
cases, or to realize on certain assets received in respect of any such claim as security or otherwise. The Trustee will
be permitted to engage in other transactions; however, if it acquires any conflicting interest (as defined in the Trust
Indenture Act), it must eliminate such conflict or resign.
Table of Contents
70
The Holders of not less than a majority in principal amount of the outstanding Notes have the right to direct the time,
method and place of conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the Trustee or exercising any trust or
power conferred on it, subject to certain exceptions. The Indenture provides that, in case an Event of Default occurs
and is not cured, the Trustee must exercise of its rights and power, using the degree of care and skill as of a prudent
person would exercise or use in similar circumstances in the conduct of such person’s own affairs. Subject to such
provisions, the Trustee will be under no obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers under the Indenture at the
request, order or direction of any Holders, unless such Holders shall have offered to the Trustee reasonable security or
indemnity satisfactory to the Trustee against the costs, expenses and liabilities which may be incurred therein or
thereby.
References in this section to the “Trustee” include the Trustee in its capacity as Note Collateral Agent.
Governing Law
The Indenture, the Notes, the Note Guarantees, the Security Documents (except as to real estate and certain other
security documents required to be governed by local law) and the Intercreditor Agreement are governed by, and are to
be construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
Certain Definitions
Set forth below is a summary of certain of the defined terms used in the Indenture. Reference is made to the Indenture
for the full definition of all such terms.
“Absaloka” means Absaloka Coal LLC.
“Absaloka Collateral” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (iv) of the first paragraph under the subheading
“— Security — General.”
“Acquired Indebtedness” means (1) with respect to any Person that becomes a Restricted Subsidiary after the Initial
Notes Issue Date, Indebtedness of such Person and its Subsidiaries existing at the time such Person becomes a
Restricted Subsidiary and (2) with respect to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, any Indebtedness
of a Person (other than the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary) existing at the time such Person is merged
with or into the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary, or Indebtedness expressly assumed by the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in connection with the acquisition of an asset or assets from another Person.
“Additional Interest” has the meaning set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement, and the Issuer shall promptly
notify the Trustee of such Additional Interest as set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement and any other
registration rights agreement.
“Additional Notes” has the meaning assigned to that term in the third paragraph under the heading “— Principal,
Maturity And Interest.”
“Administrative Agent” has the meaning assigned to that term in the ninth paragraph under the subheading “—
Security — Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
“Affiliate” of any Person means any other Person which directly or indirectly controls or is controlled by, or is under
direct or indirect common control with, the referenced Person. For purposes of the covenant described under
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Transactions with Affiliates,” Affiliates shall be deemed to include, with respect
to any Person, any other Person (1) which beneficially owns or holds, directly or indirectly, 10% or more of any class of
the Voting Stock of the referenced Person, (2) of which 10% or more of the Voting Stock is beneficially owned or held,
directly or indirectly, by the referenced Person or (3) with respect to an individual, any immediate family member of
such Person. For purposes of this definition, “control” of a Person shall mean the power to direct the management and
policies of such Person, directly or indirectly, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract or
otherwise.
“Affiliate Transaction” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the subheading “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Transactions with Affiliates.”
“Agents” means, together, the Note Collateral Agent and the Revolving Collateral Agent.
“Alternate Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term in the eighth paragraph under the heading “– Change of
Control.”
“amend” means to amend, supplement, restate, amend and restate or otherwise modify, including successively, and
“amendment” shall have a correlative meaning.
“asset” means any asset or property.
Table of Contents
“Asset Acquisition” means
71
(1) an Investment by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer in any other Person if, as a
result of such Investment, such Person shall become a Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer, or shall be merged with or
into the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer, or
(2) the acquisition by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer of all or substantially all of the
assets of any other Person or any division or line of business of any other Person.
“Asset Sale” means any sale, issuance, conveyance, transfer, lease, assignment or other disposition by the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary to any Person (including by means of a Sale and Leaseback Transaction or a
merger or consolidation or similar transaction and including any sale or issuance of the Equity Interest of any
Restricted Subsidiary) (collectively, for purposes of this definition, a “transfer”), in one transaction or a series of related
transactions, of any assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries of the Issuer; provided, that
for purposes of this definition, the term “Asset Sale” shall not include:
(1) transfers of cash or Cash Equivalents;
(2) transfers of assets (including Equity Interests) that are governed by, and made in accordance with, the covenant
described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.” and under “– Change of
Control”;
(3) Permitted Investments and Restricted Payments permitted under the covenant described under “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Restricted Payments”;
(4) the creation of or realization on any Permitted Lien;
(5) any transfer or series of related transfers that, but for this clause, would be Asset Sales, if after giving effect to such
transfers, the aggregate Fair Market Value of the assets transferred in such transaction or any such series of related
transactions does not exceed $2.5 million;
(6) a transfer of assets between or among any of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and any of the Guarantors, a transfer of
assets between any Restricted Subsidiaries that are not Guarantors and a transfer of assets by a Restricted Subsidiary
that is not a guarantor to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor;
(7) an issuance or sale of Equity Interests by a Guarantor to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or to another Guarantor or an
issuance or sale of Equity Interests by a Restricted Subsidiary that is not a Guarantor to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or
any Restricted Subsidiary;
(8) a disposition of inventory in the ordinary course of business;
(9) a disposition of obsolete or worn out equipment or equipment that is no longer useful in the conduct of the business
of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries of the Issuer and that is disposed of in each case in the
ordinary course of business;
(10) dispositions of past due accounts and notes receivable arising in the ordinary course of business, but only in
connection with the compromise or collection thereof;
(11) the licensing or sublicensing of intellectual property or other general intangibles and licenses, leases or
subleases of other property in the ordinary course of business and which do not materially interfere with the business
of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(12) a surrender or waiver of contract rights or the settlement, release or surrender of contract, tort or other claims of
any kind; and
(13) trades of coal properties of equivalent value in the ordinary course of business.
“Attributable Indebtedness ,” when used with respect to any Sale and Leaseback Transaction, means, as at the time
of determination, the present value (discounted at a rate equivalent to the Issuer’s then-current weighted average cost
of funds for borrowed money as at the time of determination, compounded on a semi-annual basis) of the total
obligations of the lessee for rental payments during the remaining term of the lease included in any such Sale and
Leaseback Transaction.
“Bankruptcy Code” means Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.
“bankruptcy law” means the Bankruptcy Code or any similar federal, foreign or state law for the relief of debtors.
“Board of Directors” means, with respect to any Person, (i) in the case of any corporation, the board of directors of
such Person, (ii) in the case of any limited liability company, the board of managers of such Person, (iii) in the case of
any partnership, the Board of Directors of the general partner of such Person and (iv) in any other case, the functional
equivalent of the foregoing.
“Business Day” means a day other than a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which banking institutions in New York
are authorized or required by law to close.
Table of Contents
72
“Capital Lease” means, with respect to any Person, a lease required to be capitalized for financial reporting purposes
on the balance sheet of such Person in conformity with GAAP.
“Capital Lease Obligations” of any Person means the obligations of such Person to pay rent or other amounts under
a Capital Lease, and the amount of such obligation shall be the capitalized amount thereof determined in accordance
with GAAP.
“Cash Equivalents” means:
(1) obligations issued or directly and fully guaranteed or insured by the United States of America or any agency or
instrumentality thereof (provided, that the full faith and credit of the United States of America is pledged in support
thereof) or obligations of state or local governments rated not lower than AAA/Aaa by S&P or Moody’s maturing no
later than twelve months from the date of acquisition;
(2) time deposits and certificates of deposit or acceptances with a maturity of 360 days or less of any financial
institution having combined capital and surplus and undivided profits of not less than $500.0 million whose obligations
are rated A- or the equivalent or better by S&P or A3 or better by Moody’s on the date of acquisition;
(3) commercial paper maturing no more than 180 days (or 270 days in the case of WML or its Subsidiaries) from the
date of creation thereof issued by a corporation that is not the Issuer or an Affiliate of the Issuer, and is organized under
the laws of any State of the United States of America or the District of Columbia and rated at least A-1 by S&P or at
least P-1 by Moody’s;
(4) repurchase obligations for underlying securities of the types described in clause (1) above entered into with any
financial institution meeting the specifications of clause (2) above; provided, that such obligations may not have a term
of more than seven days;
(5) demand deposit accounts maintained in the ordinary course of business; and
(6) investments in money market or other mutual funds 95% of whose assets comprise securities of the types
described in clauses (1) through (5) above.
“Cash Management Obligations” means, with respect to any Person, the obligations of such Person in connection
with (a) credit cards or stored value cards or (b) treasury, depository or cash management or related services, including
(i) the automated clearinghouse transfer of funds or overdrafts or (ii) controlled disbursement services.
“Change of Control” means:
(1) the merger or consolidation of the Issuer with or into another Person or the merger of another Person with or into
the Issuer or the merger of any Person with or into a Subsidiary of the Issuer if Equity Interests of the Issuer are issued
in connection therewith, or the sale of all or substantially all the assets of the Issuer and Guarantors, taken as a whole,
to another Person, unless holders of a majority of the aggregate voting power of the Voting Stock of the Issuer,
immediately prior to such transaction, hold securities of the surviving or transferee Person that represent, immediately
after such transaction, at least a majority of the aggregate voting power of the Voting Stock of the surviving Person;
(2) any person or group of persons (within the meaning of Sections 13(d) or 14(d)(2) of the Exchange Act) shall have
acquired beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 promulgated by the SEC) of capital stock or other
securities of the Issuer which are entitled to cast more than 40% of the total votes which may be cast in an election of
directors of the Issuer;
(3) a majority of the board of directors of the Issuer shall be comprised of persons other than individuals who were
directors of the Issuer one year prior to such time together with any individuals who were nominated for election as
directors of the Issuer by individuals who were directors of the Issuer who, at the time of such individuals’ nominations,
had been directors of the Issuer for at least one year;
(4) there is any change in the person (as such term is used in Section 13(d) and Section 14(d)(2) of the Exchange Act)
who are direct owners of an equity interest in WML or certain of its Subsidiaries;
(5) the execution by the Issuer, Co-Issuer or any of its Subsidiaries or Affiliates, of any agreement with respect to any
proposed transaction or event or series of transactions or events which, individually or in the aggregate, may
reasonably be expected to result in an event described in clauses (2), (3) or (4) above; or the execution of any written
agreement which, when fully performed by the parties thereto, would result in an event described in such clauses; or
(5) the adoption of a plan relating to the liquidation or dissolution of the Issuer.
“Change of Control Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the heading “– Change
of Control.”
“Change of Control Payment Date” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the heading
“– Change of Control.”
73
Table of Contents
“Change of Control Purchase Price” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the heading
“– Change of Control.”
“Co-Issuer” has the meaning assigned to that term in the fourth paragraph of this Description of the Exchange Notes
section.
“Coal Rights” means all right, title and interest of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary in and to the assets
described on Schedule 1.01 to the Indenture.
“Collateral “ means collectively Note Collateral and (if any) Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral.
“Consolidated Adjusted Working Capital” means at any date the excess of (i) Consolidated Current Assets
(excluding (A) cash and Cash Equivalents classified as such in accordance with GAAP and (B) deferred taxes
calculated in accordance with GAAP) over (ii) Consolidated Current Liabilities (excluding deferred taxes calculated in
accordance with GAAP).
“Consolidated Amortization Expense” for any period means the amortization expense of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer
and the Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated Asset Reclamation Accretion Expense” for any period means the accretion expense associated
with asset reclamation obligations of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries for such period,
determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated Capital Expenditures” means for any period the aggregate amount of all expenditures (whether paid
in cash or other consideration or accrued as a liability) that would, in accordance with GAAP, be included as additions
to property, plant and equipment and other capital expenditures of the Issuer and its consolidated Subsidiaries for
such period, as the same are or would be set forth in a consolidated statement of cash flows of the Issuer and its
consolidated Subsidiaries for such period (including the amount of assets leased under any capital lease and any
mine reserve acquisitions), but excluding (to the extent that they would otherwise be included) (i) any such
expenditures made for the replacement or restoration of assets in amounts not exceeding the aggregate amount of
insurance proceeds or casualty or condemnation proceeds with respect to the asset or assets being replaced or
restored, (ii) any such expenditures financed with the proceeds of Indebtedness, equity issuances or other proceeds
that would not be included in Consolidated EBITDA and (iii) capitalized interest.
“Consolidated Current Assets” means at any date the consolidated current assets of the Issuer and its consolidated
Subsidiaries determined as of such date in accordance with GAAP, including accounts receivable, inventory and for
purposes of this definition whether or not treated as a current asset in accordance with GAAP, restricted investments
and bond collateral, reclamation deposits and advanced coal royalties.
“Consolidated Current Liabilities” means at any date the consolidated current liabilities of the Issuer and its
consolidated Subsidiaries determined as of such date in accordance with GAAP, including the amount of any
accounts payable, accrued expenses and any Investments made during such period to purchase performance and
surety bonds for permitting purposes or reclamation.
“Consolidated Depreciation and Depletion Expense” for any period means the depreciation and depletion expense
of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in
accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated EBITDA” for any period means, without duplication, the sum of the amounts for such period of
(1) Consolidated Net Income, plus
(2) in each case only to the extent (and in the same proportion) deducted in determining Consolidated Net Income and
with respect to the portion of Consolidated Net Income attributable to the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary only if
a corresponding amount would be permitted at the date of determination to be distributed to the Issuer by the Co-Issuer
or such Restricted Subsidiary without prior approval (that has not been obtained), pursuant to the terms of its charter
and all agreements, instruments, judgments, decrees, orders, statutes, rules and governmental regulations applicable
to the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary or its stockholders,
(a) Consolidated Income Tax Expense (other than income taxes or income tax adjustments (whether positive or
negative) attributable to Asset Sales or extraordinary gains or losses and, without duplication, permitted tax
distributions,
(b) Consolidated Amortization Expense (but only to the extent not included in Consolidated Interest Expense),
(c) Consolidated Asset Reclamation Accretion Expense,
(d) Consolidated Depreciation and Depletion Expense (but only to the extent not included in Consolidated Interest
Expense),
(e) Consolidated Interest Expense,
Table of Contents
74
(f) all other non-cash items reducing Consolidated Net Income (including without limitation non-cash write-offs of
goodwill, intangibles and long-lived assets, but excluding any non-cash charge that results in an accrual of a reserve
for cash charges in any future period) for such period, and
(g) costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Transactions, in each case determined on a consolidated basis
in accordance with GAAP, minus
(3) the aggregate amount of all non-cash items, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP, to the
extent such items increased Consolidated Net Income (other than the accrual of revenue, recording of receivables or
the reversal of reserves in the ordinary course of business) for such period.
“Consolidated Income Tax Expense” for any period means the provision for taxes of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and
the Restricted Subsidiaries, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated Interest Expense” for any period means the sum, without duplication, of the total interest expense of
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in
accordance with GAAP and including, without duplication,
(1) imputed interest on Capital Lease Obligations and Attributable Indebtedness,
(2) commissions, discounts and other fees and charges owed with respect to letters of credit securing financial
obligations, bankers’ acceptance financing and receivables financings,
(3) amortization of debt issuance costs, debt discount or premium and other financing fees and expenses but
excluding amortization of deferred financing charges incurred in respect of the Notes,
(4) the interest portion of any deferred payment obligations,
(5) all other non-cash interest expense,
(6) consolidated capitalized interest,
(7) the product of (a) all cash and non-cash dividends paid, declared, accrued or accumulated on any series of
Disqualified Equity Interests or any Preferred Stock of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (other
than any such Disqualified Equity Interests or any Preferred Stock held by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Wholly Owned
Restricted Subsidiary or to the extent paid in Qualified Equity Interests), multiplied by (b) a fraction, the numerator of
which is one and the denominator of which is one minus the then current combined federal, state and local statutory
income tax rate of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries, expressed as a decimal,
(8) all interest payable with respect to discontinued operations, and
(9) all interest on any Indebtedness of any other Person guaranteed by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted
Subsidiary; provided, that to the extent directly related to the issuance of the Notes, amortization of debt issuance
costs, debt discount or premium and other financing fees and expenses shall be excluded. Consolidated Interest
Expense shall be calculated after giving effect to Hedging Obligations (including associated costs) described in
clause (1) of the definition of “Hedging Obligations,” but excluding unrealized gains and losses with respect to
Hedging Obligations.
“Consolidated Net Income” for any period means the net income (or loss) of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the
Restricted Subsidiaries for such period determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP; provided, that
there shall be excluded from the calculation of Consolidated Net Income (to the extent otherwise included therein),
without duplication:
(1) the net income (or loss) of any Person (other than a Restricted Subsidiary) in which any Person other than the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries has an ownership interest, except to the extent that cash in an
amount equal to any such income has actually been received by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries during such period;
(2) except to the extent includible in the consolidated net income of the Issuer pursuant to the foregoing clause (1), the
net income (or loss) of any Person that accrued prior to the date that (a) such Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary
or is merged into or consolidated with the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary or (b) the assets of such
Person are acquired by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(3) the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary and Co-Issuer during such period to the extent that the declaration or
payment of dividends or similar distributions by such Restricted Subsidiary and Co-Issuer of that income is not
permitted by operation of the terms of its charter or any agreement, instrument, judgment, decree, order, statute, rule or
governmental regulation applicable to that Subsidiary during such period, except that the Issuer’s equity in a net loss
of any such Restricted Subsidiary for such period shall be included in determining Consolidated Net Income;
(4) for the purposes of calculating the Restricted Payments Basket only, in the case of a successor to the Issuer by
consolidation, merger or transfer of its assets, any income (or loss) of the successor prior to such merger, consolidation
or transfer of assets;
Table of Contents
75
(5) any gain (or loss), together with any related provisions for taxes on any such gain (or the tax effect of any such
loss), realized during such period by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary upon (a) the acquisition of
any securities, or the extinguishment of any Indebtedness, or the sale or disposition of any Equity Interests of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary or (b) any Asset Sale (without regard to the $2.50 million limitation
set forth in clause (5) of the definition thereof) by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(6) gains and losses due solely to fluctuations in currency values and the related tax effects according to GAAP;
(7) unrealized gains and losses with respect to Hedging Obligations;
(8) any extraordinary or nonrecurring gain (or extraordinary or nonrecurring loss), together with any related provision
for taxes on any such gain (or the tax effect of any such loss), realized by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted
Subsidiary during such period;
(9) any impairment charge or asset write-off or write-down, including impairment charges or asset write-offs or write-
downs related to goodwill, intangible assets, deferred financing costs, inventory, long-lived assets, investments in debt
and equity securities in connection with any past or future acquisition, merger, consolidation or similar transaction
(excluding any non-cash items to the extent that it represents an accrual of or reserve for cash expenditures in any
future period except to the extent such item is subsequently reserved or as a result of a change in law or regulation, in
each case, pursuant to GAAP, and the amortization of intangibles arising pursuant to GAAP;
(10) effects of adjustments (including the effects of such adjustments pushed down to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and
Restricted Subsidiaries) in Issuer’s consolidated financial statements pursuant to GAAP (including in the inventory,
property and equipment, software, goodwill, intangible assets, in-process research and development, deferred
revenue and debt line items thereof) resulting from the application of purchase accounting, as the case may be, in
relation to any consummated transaction or the amortization or write-off of any amounts thereof, net of taxes; provided,
that this clause (10) shall not include the recognition of ROVA deferred revenue for any period subsequent to the Initial
Notes Issue Date; and
(11) cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle(s) during such period.
For purposes of this definition of “Consolidated Net Income,” “nonrecurring” means any gain or loss as of any date
that is not reasonably likely to recur within the two years following such date; provided, that if there was a gain or loss
similar to such gain or loss within the two years preceding such date, such gain or loss shall not be deemed
nonrecurring.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purposes of the covenant described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations
on Restricted Payments” only, there shall be excluded from Consolidated Net Income any repurchases, repayments or
redemptions of Investments, proceeds realized on the sale of Investments or return of capital to the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary to the extent such repurchases, repayments, redemptions, proceeds or returns
increase the amount of Restricted Payments permitted under such covenant pursuant to clause (3)(d) of the first
paragraph thereof or decrease the amount of Investments outstanding pursuant to the paragraph following clause (18)
of the definition of “Permitted Investments.”
“Consolidated Total Indebtedness” means, at any date of determination, an amount equal to the sum, without
duplication, of the aggregate amount of all outstanding Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and its Restricted
Subsidiaries.
“Covenant Defeasance” has the meaning assigned to that term in the second paragraph under the heading “– Legal
Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance.”
“Coverage Ratio Exception” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock.”
“Custodian” means any receiver, trustee, assignee, liquidator or similar official under any applicable bankruptcy law.
“Default” means (1) any Event of Default or (2) any event, act or condition that, after notice or the passage of time or
both, would be an Event of Default.
“Designated Preferred Stock” means Preferred Stock of the Issuer (other than in the form of Disqualified Equity
Interests) that is issued for cash (other than to the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary) and is so designated as
Designated Preferred Stock pursuant to an Officers’ Certificate on the issuance date thereof.
“Designation” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the subheading “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Designation of Unrestricted Subsidiaries.”
“Designation Amount” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (2) of the first paragraph under the
subheading “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Designation of Unrestricted Subsidiaries.”
“DIP Financing” has the meaning assigned to that term in the eleventh paragraph under the subheading “– Security –
Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
Table of Contents
76
“Disqualified Equity Interests” of any Person means any class of Equity Interests of such Person that, by its terms, or
by the terms of any related agreement or of any security into which it is convertible, puttable or exchangeable, is, or
upon the happening of any event or the passage of time would be, required to be redeemed by such Person, whether
or not at the option of the holder thereof, or matures or is mandatorily redeemable, pursuant to a sinking fund obligation
or otherwise, in whole or in part, on or prior to the date which is 91 days after the final maturity date of the Notes;
provided, however, that any class of Equity Interests of such Person that, by its terms, authorizes such Person to
satisfy in full its obligations with respect to the payment of dividends or upon maturity, redemption (pursuant to a
sinking fund or otherwise) or repurchase thereof or otherwise by the delivery of Equity Interests that are not
Disqualified Equity Interests, and that is not convertible, puttable or exchangeable for Disqualified Equity Interests or
Indebtedness, will not be deemed to be Disqualified Equity Interests so long as such Person satisfies its obligations
with respect thereto solely by the delivery of Equity Interests that are not Disqualified Equity Interests; provided, further,
that any Equity Interests that would not constitute Disqualified Equity Interests but for provisions thereof giving holders
thereof (or the holders of any security into or for which such Equity Interests are convertible, exchangeable or
exercisable) the right to require the Issuer to redeem such Equity Interests upon the occurrence of a change in control
or asset sale occurring prior to the final maturity date of the Notes shall not constitute Disqualified Equity Interests if the
change in control or asset sale provisions applicable to such Equity Interests are no more favorable to such holders
than the provisions described under “– Change of Control” and “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales,”
respectively, and such Equity Interests specifically provide that the Issuer will not redeem any such Equity Interests
pursuant to such provisions prior to the Issuer’s purchase of the Notes as required pursuant to the provisions
described under “– Change of Control” and “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales,” respectively.
“Equity Interests” of any Person means (1) any and all shares or other equity interests (including common stock,
preferred stock, limited liability company interests and partnership interests) in such Person and (2) all rights to
purchase, warrants or options (whether or not currently exercisable), participations or other equivalents of or interests
in (however designated) such shares or other interests in such Person (but excluding any debt security that is
convertible into, or exchangeable for, common stock).
“Event of Default” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the heading “– Events of
Default.”
“Event of Loss” means, with respect to any Collateral, whether in respect of a single event or a series of related
events, any (1) loss, destruction or damage of such Collateral, (2) condemnation, seizure or taking by exercise of the
power of eminent domain or otherwise of such Collateral, or confiscation of such Collateral or the requisition of the use
of such Collateral or (3) settlement in lieu of clause (2) above.
“Excess Cash Flow” means for any period an amount equal to the excess of (i) the sum, without duplication, of
(A) Consolidated EBITDA for such period plus
(B) the decrease, if any, in Consolidated Adjusted Working Capital from the first day to the last day of such period, plus
(C) the increase, if any, in deferred revenue liabilities (including both the current and non-current portion of such
liabilities) from the first day to the last day of such period, plus
(D) the increase, if any, in amounts drawn by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries under any revolving
credit facility from the first day to the last day of such period, over
(ii) the sum, without duplication, of
(A) Consolidated Interest Expense for such period paid in cash,
(B) Consolidated Income Tax Expense actually paid by the Issuer on a consolidated basis during such period in
respect of any period ending on or after the Initial Notes Issue Date,
(C) the increase, if any, in Consolidated Adjusted Working Capital from the first day to the last day of such period,
(D) the decrease, if any, in deferred revenue liabilities (including both the current and non-current portion of such
liabilities) from the first day to the last day of such period,
(E) the aggregate amount of any permitted optional redemptions of Notes during such period under “– Optional
Redemption,”
(F) cash payments made during such period in respect of Consolidated Capital Expenditures,
(G) consolidated cash payments (or repayments) in respect of outstanding Indebtedness (excluding any Indebtedness
outstanding under any revolving credit facility) of the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries, including principal
payments in respect of capital leases and payments of any make-whole amounts, actually paid by the Issuer or any of
its consolidated Subsidiaries during such period,
77
Table of Contents
(H) consolidated cash payments or repayments (whether or not resulting in a permanent commitment reduction) made
in respect of outstanding Indebtedness of the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries under any revolving credit
facility, actually paid by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries during such period,
(I) consolidated cash payments made by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries during such period related
to post-retirement medical and heritage costs, in excess of amounts included in Consolidated EBITDA,
(J) consolidated cash payments made by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries during such period related
to pension plans, in excess of amounts included in Consolidated EBITDA,
(K) consolidated cash payments made by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries during such period related
to asset reclamation,
(L) cash amounts contributed by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries to fund the WML debt service
reserve account during such period; provided, that such amounts shall not exceed the minimum amounts required to
fund such reserve account and
(M) cash payments made by the Issuer or any of its consolidated Subsidiaries to fund the WML working capital reserve
account during such period; provided, that such amounts shall not exceed the minimum amounts required to fund such
reserve account.
“Excess Cash Flow Amount” means, as of the date of determination, an aggregate amount equal to 75% of the
Excess Cash Flow for such prior fiscal year. For example, if the date of determination is April 30, 2012, Excess Cash
Flow shall be calculated for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2011.
“Excess Cash Flow Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (1) of the first paragraph under the
subheading “– Certain Covenants – Excess Cash Flow.”
“Excess Cash Flow Offer Deficiency” has the meaning assigned to that term in the second paragraph under the
subheading “– Certain Covenants – Excess Cash Flow.”
“Excess Cash Flow Offered Price” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (2) of the first paragraph under
the subheading “– Certain Covenants – Excess Cash Flow.”
“Excess Cash Flow Payment Amount” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (1) of the first paragraph
under the subheading “– Certain Covenants – Excess Cash Flow.”
“Excess Loss Proceeds” has the meaning assigned to that term in the third paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Events of Loss.”
“Excess Proceeds” has the meaning assigned to that term in the third paragraph under the subheading “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
“Exchange Act” means the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the rules and regulations of the
SEC promulgated thereunder.
“Exchange Notes” means any Notes issued pursuant to any Registration Rights Agreement in exchange for the
Notes covered by such Registration Rights Agreement.
“Excluded Property” means (A) shares of any first-tier Subsidiary of the Issuer that is a “controlled foreign corporation”
(as defined in Section 957(a) of the Internal Revenue Code) in excess of 66% of all of the issued and outstanding
Equity Interests in such Subsidiary entitled to vote (within the meaning of Treasury Regulation Section 1.956-2(c)(2)),
(B) any right, title or interest in any permit, lease, capital lease, license, contract, agreement, account receivable,
inventory or equipment held by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary Guarantor or to which any of the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary Guarantor is a party or any of its right, title or interest thereunder to the extent, but only to
the extent, that the creation of a security interest would, under the terms of such permit, lease, capital lease, license,
contract, agreement, account receivable, inventory or equipment, or as a matter of law, result in a breach of the terms
of, or constitute a default under, any permit, lease, capital lease, license, contract, agreement, account receivable,
inventory or equipment held by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary Guarantor or to which any of the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary Guarantor is a party or render void the security interest therein (other than to the extent
that any such term would be rendered ineffective pursuant to Section 9-406, 9-407, 9-408 or 9-409 of the UCC (or any
successor provision or provisions) and (C) the Coal Rights; provided, that immediately upon (x) any such Subsidiary
described in (A) not being a “controlled foreign corporation” or (y) the ineffectiveness, lapse or termination of any such
provision or upon obtaining a required consent to cure any potential breach, such right, title or interest in such permit,
lease, capital lease, license, contract, agreement, account receivable, inventory or equipment shall cease to be an
“Excluded Property.” For the avoidance of doubt, “Excluded Property” shall not include any right to receive any
payment of money or the proceeds, substitutions or replacements of any Excluded Property (unless such proceeds,
substitutions or replacements would constitute an Excluded Property).
Table of Contents
78
“Existing Notes” means the Initial Notes and the 2012 Additional Notes, collectively.
“Fair Market Value” means, with respect to any asset, the price (after taking into account any liabilities relating to such
assets) that would be negotiated in an arm’s-length transaction for cash between a willing seller and a willing and able
buyer, neither of which is under any compulsion to complete the transaction, as such price is determined in good faith
by the Board of Directors of the Issuer or a duly authorized committee thereof, as evidenced by a resolution of such
Board or committee.
“First Lien Collateral” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (ii) of the first paragraph under the subheading
“– Security – General.”
“First Lien Security Documents” means any security document granting or evidencing a first-priority security interest
in or Liens on any assets of any Person to secure the Obligations under the Indenture, the Notes and the Note
Guarantees, as each may be amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time.
“Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio” means the ratio of Consolidated EBITDA during the Four-Quarter Period ending on
or prior to the date of the transaction giving rise to the need to calculate the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (the
“Transaction Date”) to Consolidated Interest Expense for the Four-Quarter Period. For purposes of this definition,
Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Interest Expense shall be calculated after giving effect on a pro forma basis
for the period of such calculation to:
(1) the incurrence of any Indebtedness or the issuance of any Preferred Stock or Disqualified Equity Interests of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (and the application of the proceeds thereof) and any repayment of
other Indebtedness or redemption of other Preferred Stock or Disqualified Equity Interests (and the application of the
proceeds therefrom) (other than the incurrence or repayment of Indebtedness in the ordinary course of business for
working capital purposes pursuant to any revolving credit arrangement) occurring during the Four-Quarter Period or at
any time subsequent to the last day of the Four-Quarter Period and on or prior to the Transaction Date, as if such
incurrence, repayment, issuance or redemption, as the case may be (and the application of the proceeds thereof),
occurred on the first day of the Four-Quarter Period; and
(2) any Asset Sale or Asset Acquisition (including, without limitation, any Asset Acquisition giving rise to the need to
make such calculation as a result of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (including any Person who
becomes a Restricted Subsidiary as a result of such Asset Acquisition) incurring Acquired Indebtedness and also
including any Consolidated EBITDA associated with any such Asset Acquisition) occurring during the Four-Quarter
Period or at any time subsequent to the last day of the Four-Quarter Period and on or prior to the Transaction Date, as
if such Asset Sale or Asset Acquisition (including the incurrence of, or assumption of liability for, any such
Indebtedness or Acquired Indebtedness) occurred on the first day of the Four-Quarter Period; provided, that with
respect to any Asset Sale, in the case of Consolidated Interest Expense, only to the extent that the obligations giving
rise to such Consolidated Interest Expense will not be obligations of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted
Subsidiary following the Transaction Date.
If the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary directly or indirectly guarantees Indebtedness of a third
Person, the preceding sentence shall give effect to the incurrence of such guaranteed Indebtedness as if the Issuer,
the Co-Issuer or such Restricted Subsidiary had directly incurred or otherwise assumed such guaranteed
Indebtedness.
In calculating Consolidated Interest Expense for purposes of determining the denominator (but not the numerator) of
this Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio:
(1) interest on outstanding Indebtedness determined on a fluctuating basis as of the Transaction Date and which will
continue to be so determined thereafter shall be deemed to have accrued at a fixed rate per annum equal to the rate of
interest on such Indebtedness in effect on the Transaction Date;
(2) if interest on any Indebtedness actually incurred on the Transaction Date may optionally be determined at an
interest rate based upon a factor of a prime or similar rate, a eurocurrency interbank offered rate, or other rates, then
the interest rate in effect on the Transaction Date will be deemed to have been in effect during the Four-Quarter
Period; and
(3) notwithstanding clause (1) or (2) above, interest on Indebtedness determined on a fluctuating basis, to the extent
such interest is covered by agreements relating to Hedging Obligations, shall be deemed to accrue at the rate per
annum resulting after giving effect to the operation of these agreements.
For purposes of this definition, whenever pro forma effect is to be given to any pro forma event, the pro forma
calculations will be made on a basis that is consistent with Article 11 of Regulation S-X under the Securities Act and
shall include, for the avoidance of doubt, synergies, operating expense reductions and other cost savings to the extent
allowable, calculated in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X under the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
79
“Four-Quarter Period” with respect to any Person means the most recent four consecutive full fiscal quarters for which
internal financial statements are available at such Person.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles set forth in the opinions and pronouncements of the
Accounting Principles Board of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and statements and
pronouncements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board or in such other statements by such other entity as may
be approved by a significant segment of the accounting profession of the United States, as in effect on the Initial Notes
Issue Date (without giving effect to Accounting Standards Codification Topic 825-10-25, “The Fair Value Option”).
“guarantee” means a direct or indirect guarantee by any Person of any Indebtedness of any other Person and
includes any obligation, direct or indirect, contingent or otherwise, of such Person (1) to purchase or pay (or advance
or supply funds for the purchase or payment of) Indebtedness of such other Person (whether arising by virtue of
partnership arrangements, or by agreements to keep-well, to purchase assets, goods, securities or services (unless
such purchase arrangements are on arm’s-length terms and are entered into in the ordinary course of business), to
take-or-pay, or to maintain financial statement conditions or otherwise); or (2) entered into for purposes of assuring in
any other manner the obligee of such Indebtedness of the payment thereof or to protect such obligee against loss in
respect thereof (in whole or in part); “guarantee,” when used as a verb, and “guaranteed” have correlative meanings.
“Guarantors” means the Subsidiary Guarantors, and each other Person that is required to, or at the election of the
Issuer does, become a Guarantor by the terms of the Indenture after the Initial Notes Issue Date, in each case, until
such Person is released from its Note Guarantee in accordance with the terms of the Indenture.
“Hedging Obligations” of any Person means the obligations of such Person pursuant to (1) any interest rate swap
agreement, interest rate collar agreement or other similar agreement or arrangement, (2) agreements or arrangements
relating to, or designed to protect such Person against, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, or (3) any
forward contract, commodity swap agreement, commodity option agreement or other similar agreement or
arrangement.
“Holder” means any registered holder, from time to time, of the Notes.
“Holder Buy-out Right” has the meaning assigned to that term in the eighth paragraph under the subheading “–
Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
“incur” means, with respect to any Indebtedness or Obligation, incur, create, issue, assume, guarantee or otherwise
become directly or indirectly liable, contingently or otherwise, with respect to such Indebtedness or Obligation;
provided, that (1) the Indebtedness of a Person existing at the time such Person became a Restricted Subsidiary shall
be deemed to have been incurred by such Restricted Subsidiary and (2) neither the accrual of interest nor the
accretion of original issue discount shall be deemed to be an incurrence of Indebtedness.
“Indebtedness” means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1) all liabilities, contingent or otherwise, of such Person for borrowed money (whether or not the recourse of the lender
is to the whole of the assets of such Person or only to a portion thereof);
(2) all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or other similar instruments other than
obligations in respect of asset reclamation obligations;
(3) all letters of credit or reimbursement obligations of such Person in respect of letters of credit, letters of guaranty,
bankers’ acceptances and similar credit transactions;
(4) all obligations of such Person to pay the deferred and unpaid purchase price of property or services, except trade
payables, pension and other retirement related benefits and accrued expenses incurred by such Person in the
ordinary course of business in connection with obtaining goods, materials or services;
(5) the maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price of all Disqualified Equity Interests of such Person;
(6) all Capital Lease Obligations of such Person;
(7) all Indebtedness of others secured by a Lien on any asset of such Person, whether or not such Indebtedness is
assumed by such Person;
(8) all Indebtedness of others guaranteed by such Person to the extent of such guarantee; provided, that Indebtedness
of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or its Subsidiaries that is guaranteed by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the Issuer’s
Subsidiaries shall only be counted once in the calculation of the amount of Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer
and its Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis;
(9) all Attributable Indebtedness;
(10) all Preferred Stock of such Person;
Table of Contents
80
(11) to the extent not otherwise included in this definition, Hedging Obligations of such Person; and
(12) all obligations of such Person under conditional sale or other title retention agreements relating to assets
purchased by such Person;
if and to the extent any of the preceding items (other than letters of credit, Attributable Indebtedness and Hedging
Obligations) would appear as a liability on a balance sheet of the specified Person prepared in accordance with
GAAP.
The amount of any Indebtedness which is incurred at a discount to the principal amount at maturity thereof as of any
date shall be deemed to have been incurred at the accreted value thereof as of such date. The amount of
Indebtedness of any Person at any date shall be the outstanding balance at such date of all unconditional obligations
as described above, the maximum liability of such Person for any such contingent obligations at such date and, in the
case of clause (7), the lesser of (a) the Fair Market Value of any asset subject to a Lien securing the Indebtedness of
others on the date that the Lien attaches and (b) the amount of the Indebtedness secured. For purposes of clause (5),
the “maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price” of any Disqualified Equity Interests that do not have a fixed
redemption or repurchase price shall be calculated in accordance with the terms of such Disqualified Equity Interests
as if such Disqualified Equity Interests were redeemed or repurchased on any date on which an amount of
Indebtedness outstanding shall be required to be determined pursuant to the Indenture.
“Indenture” has the meaning assigned to that term in the fourth paragraph of this Description of the Exchange Notes
section.
“Independent Financial Advisor” means an accounting, appraisal or investment banking firm of nationally
recognized standing that is, in the reasonable judgment of the Issuer’s Board of Directors, qualified to perform the task
for which it has been engaged and disinterested and independent with respect to the Issuer and its Affiliates.
“Initial Notes” means the Notes issued pursuant to the Indenture on the Initial Notes Issue Date.
“Initial Notes Issue Date” means February 4, 2011, the date that the Initial Notes were issued pursuant to the
Indenture.
“Initial Purchaser” means means Gleacher & Company Securities, Inc. and such other initial purchasers party to the
purchase agreement entered into in connection with the offer and sale of the Initial Notes issued on the Initial Notes
Issue Date.
“Intercreditor Agreement” means, as applicable, (a) the Amended and Restated Intercreditor Agreement, dated
April 28, 2014, between the Note Collateral Agent and Working Capital Lender under the Revolving Credit Facility, as
amended, amended and restated, supplemented, modified or replaced, in whole or in part, (b) or any other intercreditor
agreement that complies with the requirements of the Indenture and is entered into in connection with a Revolving
Credit Facility.
“interest” means, with respect to the Notes, interest on the Notes, and shall include, if applicable, Additional Interest
payable upon the occurrence of a Registration Default under any Registration Rights Agreement.
“Investments” of any Person means:
(1) all direct or indirect investments by such Person in any other Person in the form of joint ventures, loans, advances
or capital contributions or other credit extensions constituting Indebtedness of such other Person, and any guarantee
of Indebtedness of any other Person;
(2) all purchases (or other acquisitions for consideration) by such Person of Indebtedness, Equity Interests or other
securities of any other Person (other than any such purchase that constitutes a Restricted Payment of the type
described in clause (2) of the definition thereof);
(3) all other items that would be classified as investments (including purchases of assets outside the ordinary course of
business) on a balance sheet of such Person prepared in accordance with GAAP; and
(4) the Designation of any Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
Except as otherwise expressly specified in this definition, the amount of any Investment (other than an Investment
made in cash) shall be the Fair Market Value thereof on the date such Investment is made. The amount of Investment
pursuant to clause (4) shall be the Designation Amount determined in accordance with the covenant described under
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Designation of Unrestricted Subsidiaries.” If the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any
Subsidiary sells or otherwise disposes of any Equity Interests of any direct or indirect Subsidiary such that, after giving
effect to any such sale or disposition, such Person is no longer a Subsidiary, the Issuer shall be deemed to have made
an Investment on the date of any such sale or other disposition equal to the Fair Market Value of the Equity Interests of
and all other Investments in such Subsidiary not sold or disposed of, which amount shall be determined in good faith
by the Board of Directors. The acquisition by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of a Person that
holds an Investment in a third Person shall be deemed to be an Investment by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or such
Restricted Subsidiary in the third Person in an amount equal to the Fair Market Value of the Investment held by the
acquired Person in the third Person.
Table of Contents
81
“Issue Date” means (i) when used in connection with the issuance of the Initial Notes, the Initial Notes Issue Date
(ii) when used in connection with the issuance of 2012 Additional Notes under the Supplemental Indenture, the 2012
Additional Notes Issue Date, (iii) when used in connection with the 2014 Additional Notes, the 2014 Additional Notes
Issue Date and (iv) when used in connection with a future issuance of Additional Notes, the date of issuance of such
Additional Notes.
“Issuer” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph of this Description of the Exchange Notes section.
“Issuers” means the Issuer and the Co-Issuer together.
“Legal Defeasance” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the heading “– Legal
Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance.”
“Lien” means, with respect to any asset, any mortgage, deed of trust, lien (statutory or other), pledge, lease, easement,
restriction, covenant, charge, security interest or other encumbrance of any kind or nature in respect of such asset,
whether or not filed, recorded or otherwise perfected under applicable law, including any conditional sale or other title
retention agreement, and any lease in the nature thereof, any option or other agreement to sell, and any filing of, or
agreement to give, any financing statement under the Uniform Commercial Code (or equivalent statutes) of any
jurisdiction (other than cautionary filings in respect of operating leases).
“Loss Proceeds Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term in the third paragraph under the subheading “– Certain
Covenants – Events of Loss.”
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc., and its successors.
“Mortgage” means any mortgage or deed of trust to secure debt with respect to Real Property owned in fee simple by
the Issuer, Co-Issuer, any Guarantor or Absaloka (or Real Property which is the subject of the Mineral Consents), or,
with respect to any such Real Property located in Canada, a mortgage on any such Real Property, in each case in
form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Note Collateral Agent, including any assignment of leases and
rents, security agreement and fixture filing relating thereto, entered into by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Subsidiary
Guarantor or Absaloka in favor of the Note Collateral Agent for its benefit and the benefit of the Trustee and the
Holders of Notes.
“Mortgaged Property” has the meaning assigned to that term in the third paragraph under the subheading “–
Security – Certain Covenants with Respect to the Note Collateral – Real estate mortgages and filings.”
“Net Available Proceeds” means, with respect to any Asset Sale, the proceeds of such Asset Sale in the form of cash
or Cash Equivalents, net of:
(1) brokerage commissions and other fees and expenses (including fees and expenses of legal counsel, accountants
and investment banks) of such Asset Sale;
(2) provisions for taxes payable as a result of such Asset Sale (after taking into account any available tax credits or
deductions and any tax sharing arrangements);
(3) amounts required to be paid to any Person (other than the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary)
owning a beneficial interest in the assets subject to the Asset Sale or to repay Indebtedness outstanding at the time of
the Asset Sale that is secured by a Lien on the property or assets sold; and
(4) appropriate amounts to be provided by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be,
as a reserve required in accordance with GAAP against any adjustment in the sale price of such asset or assets or
liabilities associated with such Asset Sale and retained by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, as
the case may be, after such Asset Sale, including pensions and other post-employment benefit liabilities, liabilities
related to environmental matters and liabilities under any indemnification obligations associated with such Asset Sale,
all as reflected in an Officers’ Certificate delivered to the Trustee; provided, however, that any amounts remaining after
adjustments, revaluations or liquidations of such reserves shall constitute Net Available Proceeds.
“Net Loss Proceeds” means, with respect to any Event of Loss, the aggregate proceeds in the form of cash or Cash
Equivalents including, without limitation, insurance proceeds from condemnation awards or damages awarded by any
judgment, in each case received by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries from such Event of
Loss, net of:
(1) reasonable out-of-pocket expenses and fees relating to such Event of Loss (including without limitation legal,
accounting, appraisal or insurance adjuster fees);
(2) taxes paid or payable after taking into account any reduction in consolidated tax liability due to available tax credits
or deductions and any tax sharing arrangements;
(3) any repayment of Indebtedness that is secured by, or directly related to, the property or assets that are the subject
of such Event of Loss;
Table of Contents
82
(4) amounts required to be paid to any Person (other than the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary)
owning a beneficial interest in the assets subject to the Event of Loss; and
(5) appropriate amounts to be provided by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be,
as a reserve, in accordance with GAAP, against any liabilities associated with such Event of Loss and retained by the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, after such Event of Loss, including, without
limitation, liabilities related to environmental matters and liabilities under any indemnification obligations associated
with such Event of Loss.
“Net Proceeds Deficiency” has the meaning assigned to that term in the seventh paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
“Net Proceeds Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (1) of the sixth paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
“Non-Recourse Debt” means Indebtedness of an Unrestricted Subsidiary:
(1) as to which none of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (a) provides credit support of any kind
(including any undertaking, agreement or instrument that would constitute Indebtedness), (b) is directly or indirectly
liable as a guarantor or otherwise, or (c) constitutes the lender;
(2) no default with respect to which (including any rights that the holders thereof may have to take enforcement action
against an Unrestricted Subsidiary) would permit upon notice, lapse of time or both any holder of any other
Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary to declare a default on such other Indebtedness
or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated or payable prior to its stated maturity; and
(3) as to which the lenders have been notified in writing that they will not have any recourse to the Equity Interests or
assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary.
“Note Collateral” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the subheading “– Security –
General.”
“Note Collateral Agent” has the meaning assigned to that term in the fourth paragraph of this Description of the
Exchange Notes section.
“Note First-Priority Liens” means the liens on the Note Collateral created in favor of the Note Collateral Agent for its
benefit and the benefit of the Trustee and the Holders of the Notes, subject solely to Permitted Liens; provided,
however, that, pursuant to the terms of the Intercreditor Agreement, the Lien of the Collateral Agent on the Revolving
Facility First-Priority Collateral is a Note Second-Priority Lien.
“Note Guarantees” has the meaning assigned to that term under the first paragraph of the heading “– Note
Guarantees.”
“Note Liens” means, collectively, the Note First-Priority Liens and the Note Second-Priority Liens.
“Note Second Lien Collateral” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (i) of the first paragraph under the
subheading “– Security – General.”
“Note Second-Priority Liens” means the Liens on the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral created in favor of the
Note Collateral Agent for its benefit and the benefit of the Trustee and the Holders of the Notes, subject solely to
Permitted Liens and Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens.
“Notes” has the meaning given to it in the third paragraph of this Description of the Exchange Notes section.
“Obligations” means any principal, premium, interest, penalties, fees, indemnification, reimbursements, costs,
expenses, damages and other liabilities payable under the documentation governing any Indebtedness.
“Offered Price” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (2) of the fourth paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
“Offering Memorandum” means (i) the offering memorandum of the Issuers dated February 1, 2011 relating to the
Initial Notes, (ii) the offering memorandum of the Issuers dated January 23, 2012 relating to the 2012 Additional Notes
issued under the Supplemental Indenture, (iii) the offering memorandum of the Issuers dated January 29, 2014 relating
to the 2014 Additional Notes issued under the Third Supplemental Indenture, and (iv) an offering memorandum of the
Issuers relating to a subsequent issuance of Additional Notes.
“Officer” means any of the following of the Issuer: the Chairman of the Board of Directors, the Chief Executive Officer,
the Chief Financial Officer, the President, any Vice President, the Treasurer or the Secretary.
Table of Contents
83
“Officers’ Certificate” means a certificate signed in the name of the Issuer (i) by the chairman of the Board of Directors,
the president or chief executive officer or a vice president and (ii) by the chief financial officer, the treasurer or any
assistant treasurer or the secretary or any assistant secretary.
“Opinion of Counsel” means a written opinion from legal counsel who is reasonably acceptable to the Trustee. The
counsel may be an employee of or counsel to the Issuer.
“Pari Passu Indebtedness” means any Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Guarantor that ranks pari
passu in right of payment with the Notes or the Note Guarantees, as applicable, and is secured by a Lien on the Note
Collateral that has the same priority as the Lien securing the Notes and the Note Guarantees.
“Pari Passu Indebtedness Price” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (2) of the fourth paragraph under
the subheading “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
“Paying Agent” has the meaning assigned to that term under the heading “– Methods of Receiving Payments on the
Notes.”
“Payment Amount” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (1) of the fourth paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales.”
“Permitted Business” means the businesses engaged in by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and its Subsidiaries on the
Initial Notes Issue Date as described in the Offering Memorandum covering the Initial Notes and businesses that are
reasonably related thereto or reasonable extensions thereof.
“Permitted Collateral Liens” shall mean (a) in the case of Collateral other than Mortgaged Property and any pledged
securities, Permitted Liens, (b) in the case of Mortgaged Property, “Permitted Collateral Liens” shall mean the Liens
described in clauses (1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (10), (13), (14), (16), (18), (19) and (20) (insofar as it relates to Liens to secure
Obligations in respect of Refinancing Indebtedness of Indebtedness secured by Liens referred to in clause (12), (15),
(18), (19), (26), (29) or (32) of the definition of “Permitted Liens”) and (21), (26), (28), (29), (31) and (32) of the definition
of “Permitted Liens” and (c) in the case of Collateral consisting of pledged securities, shall mean the Liens described
in clause (1), (3), (5), (8), (16), (17), (19), (20), (29), (31) and (32) of the definition of “Permitted Liens.”
“Permitted Indebtedness” has the meaning assigned to that term in the second paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock.”
“Permitted Investment” means:
(1) (a) Investments by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in (i) the Issuer, any Guarantor or the Co-
Issuer or (ii) in any Person that is or will become immediately after such Investment a Restricted Subsidiary and a
Guarantor or that will merge or consolidate into the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Guarantor, including any Investment of
such Person not made in contemplation of such transaction and (b) Investments by any Restricted Subsidiary that is
not a Guarantor in (i) any Restricted Subsidiary or (ii) any Person that is or will become immediately after such
Investment a Restricted Subsidiary or that will merge or consolidate into the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted
Subsidiary, including any Investment of such Person not made in contemplation of such transaction;
(2) Investments in the Issuer by any Restricted Subsidiary or the Co-Issuer;
(3) Hedging Obligations incurred pursuant to clause (4) of the second paragraph under the covenant described under
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock”;
(4) cash and Cash Equivalents;
(5) receivables owing to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary if created or acquired in the ordinary
course of business and payable or dischargeable in accordance with customary trade terms; provided, however, that
such trade terms may include such concessionary trade terms as the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any such Restricted
Subsidiary deems reasonable under the circumstances;
(6) ordinary course trade credit, advances to customers, commissions, tranche and other similar advances to officers,
directors and employees made in each case in the ordinary course of business.
(7) Investments in securities of trade creditors or customers received pursuant to any plan of reorganization or similar
arrangement upon the bankruptcy or insolvency of such trade creditors or customers;
(8) Investments made by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary as a result of consideration received in
connection with an Asset Sale made (to the extent applicable) in compliance with the provisions of the fourth
paragraph of the covenant described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Asset Sales”;
(9) prepaid expenses, surety, reclamation and performance bonds and lease, tax, utilities, workers’ compensation,
performance and similar deposits made in the ordinary course of business;
Table of Contents
84
(10) stock, obligations or securities received in settlement of debts created in the ordinary course of business and
owing to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary or in satisfaction of judgments;
(11) Investments, to the extent Qualified Equity Interests are used to make the Investment;
(12) Investments existing on the Initial Notes Issue Date and any modification, replacement, renewal or extension
thereof; provided, that the amount of any such Investment may be increased (x) (i) as required by the terms of such
Investment as in existence on the Initial Notes Issue Date or (ii) as otherwise permitted under the Indenture, or (y) with
respect to Absaloka, as required to meet the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code;
(13) Investments represented by guarantees otherwise permitted to be made by the Indenture;
(14) Investments not to exceed the greater of (a) $1.0 million per any calendar year at WRM and (b) contributions
required to maintain statutorily-defined minimum capitalization at WRM; provided, that such Investments are in the
ordinary course of business, consistent with past practice and made on an arm’s length basis;
(15) Investments from the Issuer up to $1.0 million per any calendar year to Basin Resources Inc. and Westmoreland
Power Inc. and Investments from the Issuer in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5,000 to Westmoreland Terminal
Company, Eastern Coal & Coke Company, and Criterion Coal Company, in each case in connection with their
respective dissolution;
(16) Investments made after the date hereof in Restricted Subsidiaries that are not Guarantors in an aggregate amount
not to exceed $10.0 million at any one time outstanding (with each Investment being valued as of the date made and
without regard to subsequent changes in value);
(17) any Investment by Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary in a Permitted Business having an aggregative
fair market value, taken together with all other Investments made pursuant to this clause (17) that are at that time
outstanding (without giving effect to the sale of an Unrestricted Subsidiary to the extent the proceeds of such sale do
not consist of cash and/or marketable securities), not to exceed $5.0 million; and
(18) other Investments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $10.0 million at any one time outstanding (with each
Investment being valued as of the date made and without regard to subsequent changes in value); provided, that no
Investment made in reliance on clauses (17) and (18) shall be made in any Person that is the direct or indirect holder
of a majority of the outstanding Equity Interests of the Issuer.
The amount of Investments outstanding at any time pursuant to clauses (16), (17) and (18) above shall be deemed to
be reduced:
(a) upon the disposition or repayment of or return on any Investment made pursuant to clauses (16), (17) and
(18) above, by an amount equal to the return of capital with respect to such Investment to the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or
any Restricted Subsidiary (to the extent not included in the computation of Consolidated Net Income), less the cost of
the disposition of such Investment and net of taxes); and
(b) upon a Redesignation of an Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary, by an amount equal to the lesser of
(x) the Fair Market Value of the Issuer’s proportionate interest in such Subsidiary immediately following such
Redesignation, and (y) the aggregate amount of Investments in such Subsidiary that increased (and did not previously
decrease) the amount of Investments outstanding pursuant to clauses (16), (17) and (18) above.
“Permitted Liens” means the following types of Liens:
(1) Liens for taxes, assessments or governmental charges or claims, Liens otherwise existing under applicable law, or
Liens or encumbrances upon, and defects of title to, real or personal property other than the Collateral, including any
attachment of personal or real property or other legal process prior to adjudication of a dispute on the merits, in each
case, that are either (a) not delinquent or (b) contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and as to which the
Issuer, Co-Issuer or the Restricted Subsidiaries shall have set aside on its books such reserves as may be required
pursuant to GAAP and such proceedings have the effect of preventing forfeiture or sale of the property or assets
subject to any such Lien;
(2) statutory Liens of landlords and Liens of carriers, warehousemen, mechanics, suppliers, materialmen, repairmen
and other Liens imposed by law incurred in the ordinary course of business for sums not yet delinquent or being
contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings, if adequate reserves or other appropriate provision, if any, as shall
be required by GAAP shall have been made in respect thereof and such proceedings have the effect of preventing
forfeiture or sale of the property or assets subject to any such Lien;
(3) pledges incurred, deposits made or bonds given in the ordinary course of business in connection with workers’
compensation, unemployment insurance and other types of social security, or to secure the performance of tenders,
statutory obligations, reclamation, surety and appeal bonds, bids, leases, government contracts, performance and
return-of-money bonds and other ordinary course obligations (exclusive of obligations for the payment of borrowed
money);
(4) Liens upon specific items of inventory or other goods and proceeds of any Person securing such Person’s
obligations in respect of bankers’ acceptances issued or created for the account of such Person to facilitate the
purchase, shipment or storage of such inventory or other goods;
Table of Contents
85
(5) judgment Liens not giving rise to a Default so long as such Liens are adequately bonded and any appropriate legal
proceedings which may have been duly initiated for the review of such judgment have not been finally terminated or
the period within which the proceedings may be initiated has not expired;
(6) survey exceptions, easements, rights-of-way, zoning restrictions and other similar charges, restrictions or
encumbrances in respect of real property or immaterial imperfections of title that were not incurred in connection with
Indebtedness and which do not, in the aggregate, impair in any material respect the ordinary conduct of the business
of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries taken as a whole, including without limitation,
encumbrances and exceptions to title expressly set forth as an exception to the policies of title insurance obtained to
insure the lien of each Mortgage granted in connection with the Notes or the Revolving Credit Facility;
(7) Liens securing reimbursement obligations with respect to commercial letters of credit which encumber documents
and other assets relating to such letters of credit and products and proceeds thereof;
(8) Liens encumbering deposits made to secure obligations arising from statutory, regulatory, contractual or warranty
requirements of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, including rights of offset and setoff;
(9) bankers’ Liens, rights of setoff and other similar Liens existing solely with respect to cash and Cash Equivalents on
deposit in one or more of accounts maintained by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each case
granted in the ordinary course of business in favor of the bank or banks with which such accounts are maintained,
securing amounts owing to such bank with respect to cash management and operating account arrangements,
including those involving pooled accounts and netting arrangements; provided, that in no case shall any such Liens
secure (either directly or indirectly) the repayment of any Indebtedness;
(10) Liens on leases or subleases arising from the provisions of such lease and subleases and granted to others in the
ordinary course of business that do not materially interfere with the ordinary course of business of the Issuer, Co-Issuer
or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(11) Liens arising from filing Uniform Commercial Code (or equivalent statutes) financing statements regarding
operating leases entered into in the ordinary course of business;
(12) (a) Liens securing the Notes (other than any Additional Notes, except as otherwise provided in this
clause (12)) and any Note Guarantee and (b) Liens securing Additional Notes to the extent such Liens secure
Refinancing Indebtedness represented by Additional Notes and Note Guarantees of Indebtedness incurred as set forth
in clause 1(b) of the second paragraph of the description of the covenant under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on
Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock”;
(13) Liens in respect of royalty, production payment and other obligations under coal leases and similar agreements
entered into in the ordinary course of business and to the extent such Liens do not secure any obligation for borrowed
money;
(14) Liens in respect of supply, sales, surface use and other operational agreements entered into consistent with
normal practices in the mining industry, in each case to the extent such agreements are entered into in the ordinary
course of business and such Liens do not secure any obligation for borrowed money;
(15) (a) Liens existing on the Initial Notes Issue Date securing Indebtedness outstanding on the Initial Notes Issue
Date and (b) Liens with respect to the assets and common stock, and the products and proceeds thereof, of WML’s
Subsidiary Texas Westmoreland Coal Co. in favor of NRG Texas Power LLC as contemplated by the WML Credit
Agreements when they were in effect;
(16) Liens in favor of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Guarantor;
(17) Liens securing Obligations in respect of Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Facility, but only to the extent
such Indebtedness is incurred in reliance on and outstanding as set forth in clause (1) in the second paragraph of the
description of the covenant under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock”
and only for so long as the Liens securing such Obligations are subject to the Intercreditor Agreement;
(18) Liens securing Purchase Money Indebtedness;
(19) Liens on assets or shares of stock of a Person existing at the time such Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary
of the Issuer or at the time the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or the Restricted Subsidiary acquires the asset or shares including
by merger or consolidation or otherwise; provided, that such Liens were in existence prior to the contemplation of such
Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer or such acquisition and do not extend to any assets other than
those of the Person that becomes a Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer, or is merged with or into or consolidated with
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Issuer or otherwise acquired;
Table of Contents
86
(20) Liens to secure Obligations in respect of Refinancing Indebtedness of Indebtedness secured by Liens referred to
in the foregoing clauses (12) (with respect to Notes and Additional Notes), (15), (17), (19), (29) and (32) (but only to the
extent any such Indebtedness secured by such Lien is permitted to be refinanced pursuant to the covenant entitled “–
Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock”); provided, that in each case:
(a) such Liens do not extend to any additional assets (other than improvements thereon and replacements
thereof); and
(b) the Indebtedness secured by such Lien is not increased to any amount greater than the sum of (x) the outstanding
principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, or, if greater, the committed amount, of the Indebtedness renewed,
refunded, refinanced, replaced, defeased or discharged with such Refinancing Indebtedness and (y) an amount
necessary to pay any fees and expenses, including premiums, related to such renewal, refunding, refinancing,
replacement, defeasance or discharge;
(21) Liens to secure Attributable Indebtedness incurred pursuant to the covenant described under “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Sale and Leaseback Transactions”; provided, that any such Lien shall not extend to or
cover any assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary other than the assets which are the subject
of the Sale and Leaseback Transaction in which the Attributable Indebtedness is incurred;
(22) Liens in favor of customs and revenue authorities arising as a matter of law to secure payment of customs duties
in connection with the importation of goods in the ordinary course of business;
(23) Liens incurred in the ordinary course of business of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary with
respect to obligations (other than Indebtedness) that do not in the aggregate exceed $5.0 million at any one time
outstanding; provided, that such Lien shall in no event extend to any Mortgaged Property;
(24) Liens securing Hedging Obligations permitted to be incurred as set forth in clause (4) of the description of the
covenant under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock” so long as to the
extent such Liens relate to Collateral they are subject to the Intercreditor Agreement;
(25) Liens to secure Obligations in respect of Cash Management Obligations permitted to be incurred as set forth in
clause (16) of the description of the covenant under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness
and Preferred Stock” so long as to the extent such Liens relate to Collateral, they are subject to the Intercreditor
Agreement;
(26) Liens on cash, Cash Equivalents or other property arising in connection with the defeasance, discharge or
redemption of Indebtedness or other Obligations in compliance with the Indenture;
(27) licenses of intellectual property granted by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary in the ordinary
course of business and not interfering in any material respect with the ordinary conduct of business of the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer or the Restricted Subsidiaries;
(28) encumbrances or exceptions expressly permitted pursuant to the Mortgages;
(29) Liens securing Indebtedness permitted to be incurred as set forth in clause (18) of the description of the covenant
under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Additional Indebtedness and Preferred Stock”
(30) Liens on cash advances in favor of the seller of any property to be acquired in an Investment permitted pursuant to
Permitted Investments to be applied against the purchase price for such Investment, solely to the extent such
Investment would have been permitted on the date of the creation of such Lien;
(31) Liens arising by operation of law or contract on insurance policies and the proceeds thereof to secure premiums
thereunder; and
(32) Liens on Collateral in favor of an Agent for the benefit of the Holders or the Revolving Lenders relating to such
Agent’s administrative expenses with respect to the Collateral; provided, however, that no consensual Liens shall be
permitted to exist, directly or indirectly, on any Collateral, other than Permitted Collateral Liens and Liens granted
pursuant to the Security Documents (including Mortgages), any First Lien Security Document or any Second Lien
Security Document.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, incorporated or
unincorporated association, joint-stock company, trust, unincorporated organization or government or other agency or
political subdivision thereof or other entity of any kind.
“Plan of Liquidation” with respect to any Person, means a plan that provides for, contemplates or the effectuation of
which is preceded or accompanied by (whether or not substantially contemporaneously, in phases or otherwise):
(1) the sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of such Person; and (2) the
distribution of all or substantially all of the proceeds of such sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition of all or
substantially all of the remaining assets of such Person to holders of Equity Interests of such Person.
“Preferred Stock” means, with respect to any Person, any and all preferred or preference stock or other equity
interests (however designated) of such Person whether now outstanding or issued after the Initial Notes Issue Date.
Table of Contents
87
“principal” means, with respect to the Notes, the principal of, and premium, if any, on the Notes.
“Purchase Money Indebtedness” means Indebtedness, including Capital Lease Obligations, of the Issuer, the Co-
Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary incurred for the purpose of financing all or any part of the purchase price of
property, plant or equipment used in the business of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary or the cost
of installation, construction or improvement thereof; provided, however, that (1) the amount of such Indebtedness shall
not exceed such purchase price or cost, (2) such Indebtedness shall not be secured by any asset other than the
specified asset being financed or assets securing any letter of credit supporting the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or Restricted
Subsidiary’s ability to pay such purchase price or, in the case of real property or fixtures, including additions and
improvements, the real property (other than any Mortgaged Property) to which such asset is attached and (3) such
Indebtedness shall be incurred within 180 days after such acquisition of such asset by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or
such Restricted Subsidiary or such installation, construction or improvement.
“Qualified Equity Interests” of any Person means Equity Interests of such Person other than Disqualified Equity
Interests; provided, that such Equity Interests shall not be deemed Qualified Equity Interests to the extent sold or owed
to a Subsidiary of such Person or financed, directly or indirectly, using funds (1) borrowed from such Person or any
Subsidiary of such Person until and to the extent such borrowing is repaid or (2) contributed, extended, guaranteed or
advanced by such Person or any Subsidiary of such Person (including, without limitation, in respect of any employee
stock ownership or benefit plan). Unless otherwise specified, Qualified Equity Interests refer to Qualified Equity
Interests of the Issuer.
“Qualified Equity Offering” means the issuance and sale of Qualified Equity Interests of the Issuer to Persons other
than any Person who is, prior to such issuance and sale, an Affiliate of the Issuer; provided, however, that cash
proceeds therefrom equal to not less than 100% of the aggregate principal amount of any Notes to be redeemed are
received by the Issuer as a capital contribution immediately prior to such redemption.
“Real Property” means, collectively, all right, title and interest (including any leasehold, mineral or other estate) in and
to any and all parcels of or interests in real property owned, leased or operated by any Person, whether by lease,
license or other means, together with, in each case, all easements, hereditaments and appurtenances relating thereto,
all improvements and appurtenant fixtures and rights incidental to the ownership, lease or operation thereof.
“redeem” means to redeem, repurchase, purchase, defease, retire, discharge or otherwise acquire or retire for value;
and “redemption” shall have a correlative meaning; provided, that this definition shall not apply for purposes of
“– Optional Redemption.”
“Redesignation” has the meaning assigned to that term in the fourth paragraph under the subheading “– Certain
Covenants – Limitations on Designation of Unrestricted Subsidiaries.”
“refinance” means to refinance, repay, prepay, replace, renew or refund.
“Refinancing Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted Subsidiary issued in
exchange for, or the proceeds from the issuance and sale or disbursement of which are used substantially
concurrently to redeem, extend, refinance, renew, replace, defease or refund in whole or in part, or constituting an
amendment of, any Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary (the “Refinanced
Indebtedness”) in a principal amount not in excess of the principal amount (plus premium, if any) of the Refinanced
Indebtedness so repaid or amended (or, if such Refinancing Indebtedness refinances Indebtedness under a revolving
credit facility or other agreement providing a commitment for subsequent borrowings, with a maximum commitment
plus costs and fees not to exceed the maximum commitment under such revolving credit facility or other agreement,
less the amount of any permanent repayment and/or commitment reduction that was required thereunder at any time);
provided, that:
(1) the Refinancing Indebtedness is the obligation of the same Person as that of the Refinanced Indebtedness;
(2) if the Refinanced Indebtedness was subordinated to or pari passu with the Notes or the Note Guarantees, as the
case may be, then such Refinancing Indebtedness, by its terms, is expressly pari passu with (in the case of
Refinanced Indebtedness that was pari passu with) or subordinate in right of payment to (in the case of Refinanced
Indebtedness that was subordinated to) the Notes or the Note Guarantees, as the case may be, at least to the same
extent as the Refinanced Indebtedness;
(3) the Refinancing Indebtedness is scheduled to mature either (a) no earlier than the Refinanced Indebtedness being
repaid or amended or (b) at least 91 days after the maturity date of the Notes;
(4) the portion, if any, of the Refinancing Indebtedness that is scheduled to mature on or prior to the maturity date of the
Notes has a Weighted Average Life to Maturity at the time such Refinancing Indebtedness is incurred that is equal to
or greater than the Weighted Average Life to Maturity of the portion of the Refinanced Indebtedness being repaid that
is scheduled to mature on or prior to the maturity date of the Notes; and
(5) the Refinancing Indebtedness is secured only to the extent, if at all, and by the assets, that the Refinanced
Indebtedness being repaid or amended is secured, and such security interest encumbering such assets is of the same
priority as, or a lower priority than, the security interest that secured the Refinanced Indebtedness being repaid or
amended.
Table of Contents
88
“Registrar” has the meaning assigned to that term under the heading “– Methods of Receiving Payments on the
Notes.”
“Registration Rights Agreement” means, as applicable, (i) the Registration Rights Agreement related to the Initial
Notes executed on February 4, 2011, among the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Guarantors and the Initial Purchaser set
forth therein, (ii) the Registration Rights Agreement entered into on the 2012 Additional Notes Issue Date having
substantially similar terms as the Registration Rights Agreement related to the Initial Notes, entered into in connection
with the issuance of the 2012 Additional Notes issued pursuant to the Supplemental Indenture among the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer, the Guarantors and the Initial Purchaser set forth therein, (iii) the Registration Rights Agreement entered
into on the 2014 Additional Notes Issue Date having substantially similar terms as the Registration Rights Agreement
related to the Initial Notes, entered into in connection with the issuance of the 2014 Additional Notes issued pursuant
to the Third Supplemental Indenture among the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Guarantors and the Initial Purchasers set
forth therein or (iv) any other registration rights agreement entered into in connection with an issuance of Additional
Notes in a private offering.
“Remedy/Acceleration Notice” has the meaning assigned to that term in the seventh paragraph under the
subheading “– Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
“Required Filing Date” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the subheading “– Certain
Covenants – Reports and Other Information.”
“Restricted Payment” means any of the following:
(1) the declaration or payment of any dividend or any other distribution on Equity Interests of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer
or any Restricted Subsidiary or any payment made to the direct or indirect holders (in their capacities as such) of
Equity Interests of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary, including, without limitation, any payment of
any dividend or other distribution in connection with any merger or consolidation involving the Issuer (but not included
in or part of merger consideration) but excluding (a) dividends or distributions payable solely in Qualified Equity
Interests, (b) in the case of the Co-Issuer and Restricted Subsidiaries, dividends or distributions payable to the Issuer,
the Co-Issuer or to a Guarantor, (c) in the case of Restricted Subsidiaries that are not Guarantors, dividends or
distributions payable to the Issuer or to a Restricted Subsidiary that is not a Guarantor and (d) in the case of any
dividend or distribution payable on or in respect of any class or series of securities issued by a Restricted Subsidiary
other than a Wholly Owned Subsidiary, pro rata dividends or distributions to minority stockholders of such Restricted
Subsidiary (or owners of an equivalent interest in the case of a Subsidiary that is an entity other than a corporation in
accordance with the organizational documents of such entities); provided, that the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Restricted
Subsidiary receives at least its pro rata share of such dividend or distribution in accordance with its Equity Interests in
such class or series of securities or in accordance with the organizational documents of such entities;
(2) the purchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any Equity Interests of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, any
Restricted Subsidiary or any equity holder of the Issuer, including, without limitation, any purchase, redemption or
other acquisition or retirement in connection with any merger or consolidation involving the Issuer (other than an
exchange of stock as part of merger consideration in connection with a merger or consolidation) but excluding any
such Equity Interests held by the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(3) any Investment other than a Permitted Investment; or
(4) any payment or redemption, repurchase, defeasance or other acquisition or retirement in each case prior to the
scheduled maturity or prior to any scheduled repayment of principal or sinking fund payment, as the case may be, on
or in respect of Subordinated Indebtedness.
“Restricted Payments Basket” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (3) of the first paragraph under the
subheading “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Restricted Payments.”
“Restricted Subsidiary” means any current or future Subsidiary of the Issuer other than an Unrestricted Subsidiary,
including Absaloka. For the avoidance of doubt, on the Issue Date, WELLC and each Subsidiary of WELLC, WRI and
each Subsidiary of WRI, Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc. (formerly known as Westmoreland Mining Services, Inc.),
WML, WRM, Westmoreland Coal Sales Co., WCC Land Holding Company, Inc. and Westmoreland Power Inc. will be
Restricted Subsidiaries unless and until designated as Unrestricted Subsidiaries.
“Revolving Buy-out Price” has the meaning assigned to that term in the eighth paragraph under the subheading
“– Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
“Revolving Credit Facility” means (a) the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement dated as of April 28,
2014 among the Working Capital Lender, the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantors, including any
notes, guarantees, collateral and security documents, instruments and agreements executed in connection therewith,
and in each case as amended, amended and restated, supplemented, modified, refinanced, replaced or otherwise
restructured, in whole or in part, from time to time, or, if applicable, (b) a revolving credit facility that may be entered into
after the date of the Indenture and under which the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and Absaloka
would be a borrower or a guarantor, including any notes, guarantees, collateral and
Table of Contents
89
security documents, instruments and agreements executed in connection therewith, and in each case as amended,
amended and restated, supplemented, modified, refinanced, replaced or otherwise restructured, in whole or in part,
from time to time. References herein to the “Revolving Credit Facility” shall only be deemed to mean such Revolving
Credit Facility as fully executed.
“Revolving Credit Facility Obligations” means the indebtedness outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility that
is secured by a Permitted Lien described in clause (17) of the definition thereof, and all other obligations of the Issuer,
the Co-Issuer, any Guarantor or Absaloka under the Revolving Credit Facility, all Cash Management Obligations
permitted by the Indenture and secured by the collateral securing any Obligations under such Revolving Credit
Facility, and all Hedging Obligations permitted by the Indenture and secured by the collateral securing any Obligations
under the Revolving Credit Facility.
“Revolving Collateral Agent” means the Working Capital Lender under any Revolving Credit Facility.
“Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral” means substantially all of the accounts and inventory of the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors (whether now owned or hereinafter arising or acquired) and Absaloka (if it is a
guarantor under the Revolving Credit Facility) and the proceeds and products thereof.
“Revolving Facility First-Priority Liens” means Liens on the Revolving Facility First-Priority Collateral securing any
Revolving Credit Facility Obligations on a first-priority basis.
“Rights Plan” means that certain amended and restated rights agreement entered into by the Issuer on February 7,
2003, as subsequently amended, and any successor plan.
“S&P” means Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services, a division of the McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., and its successors.
“Sale and Leaseback Transactions” means with respect to any Person an arrangement with any bank, insurance
company or other lender or investor or to which such lender or investor is a party, providing for the leasing by such
Person of any asset of such Person which has been or is being sold or transferred by such Person to such lender or
investor or to any Person to whom funds have been or are to be advanced by such lender or investor on the security of
such asset.
“SEC” means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Second Lien Security Document” means any security document by and among the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the
Subsidiary Guarantors, the Note Collateral Agent and the Revolving Collateral Agent granting or evidencing a second-
priority security interest in or Liens on any assets of any Person to secure the Obligations under the Indenture, the
Notes and the Note Guarantees, as each may be amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to
time.
“Second Supplemental Indenture” means the Second Supplemental Indenture dated as of February 3, 2014, among
the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Guarantors, the Trustee and the Note Collateral Agent.
“Secretary’s Certificate” means a certificate signed by the Secretary of the Issuer.
“Securities Act” means the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
“Security Documents” means collectively, the First Lien Security Documents and the Second Lien Security
Documents.
“Senior Indebtedness” means
(1) all Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries outstanding under the Revolving
Credit Facility and all Hedging Obligations with respect thereto;
(2) any other Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries permitted to be incurred
under the terms of the Indenture, unless the instrument under which such Indebtedness is incurred expressly provides
that it is subordinated in right of payment to the Notes or any Note Guarantee; and
(3) all Obligations with respect to the items listed in the preceding clauses (1) and (2).
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding sentence, Senior Indebtedness will not include:
(a) any intercompany Indebtedness of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries to the Issuer or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; or
(b) any Indebtedness that is incurred in violation of the Indenture.
For the avoidance of doubt, “Senior Indebtedness” will not include any trade payables or taxes owed or owing by the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer or any Restricted Subsidiary.
Table of Contents
90
“Series A Preferred Stock” means the Series A Convertible Exchangeable Preferred Stock, par value $1.00 per
share, of the Issuer.
“Significant Subsidiary” means (1) any Restricted Subsidiary that would be a “significant subsidiary” as defined in
Rule 1-02(w)(1) or (2) of Regulation S-X promulgated pursuant to the Securities Act as such Regulation was in effect
on the Initial Notes Issue Date and (2) any Restricted Subsidiary that, when aggregated with all other Restricted
Subsidiaries that are not otherwise Significant Subsidiaries and as to which any event described in clause (8) or
(9) under “– Events of Default” has occurred and is continuing, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary under
clause (1) of this definition.
“Standstill Period” has the meaning assigned to that term in the seventh paragraph under the subheading “– Security
– Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
“Subordinated Indebtedness” means (a) with respect to the Issuer or the Co-Issuer, any Indebtedness of the Issuer
or the Co-Issuer that is by its terms subordinated in right of payment to the Notes pursuant to a written agreement and
(b) with respect to any Guarantor, any Indebtedness of such Guarantor that is by its terms subordinated in right of
payment to the Note Guarantee of such Guarantor pursuant to a written agreement. For the purposes of the foregoing,
for the avoidance of doubt, no Indebtedness shall be deemed to be subordinated in right of payment to any other
Indebtedness solely by virtue of being unsecured or secured by a lower priority Lien or by virtue of the fact that the
holders of such Indebtedness have entered into intercreditor agreements or other arrangements giving one or more of
such holders priority over the other holders in the collateral held by them.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person:
(1) any corporation, limited liability company, association or other business entity of which more than 50% of the total
voting power of the Equity Interests entitled (without regard to the occurrence of any contingency) to vote in the
election of the Board of Directors thereof is at the time owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by such Person or one
or more of the other Subsidiaries of such Person (or a combination thereof); and
(2) any partnership (a) the sole general partner or the managing general partner of which is such Person or a
Subsidiary of such Person or (b) the only general partners of which are such Person or one or more Subsidiaries of
such Person (or any combination thereof);
provided, that Absaloka shall be considered a Subsidiary of the Issuer. Unless otherwise specified, “Subsidiary” refers
to a Subsidiary of the Issuer.
“Subsidiary Guarantors” means (i) WELLC, Westmoreland—North Carolina Power, L.L.C., WEI—Roanoke Valley,
Inc., Westmoreland—Roanoke Valley, L.P., WRI, WRI Partners, Inc., Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc. (formerly known
as Westmoreland Mining Services, Inc.), Westmoreland Coal Sales Company, Inc., WCC Land Holding Company,
Inc., Westmoreland Power Inc., Westmoreland Energy Services, Inc., WML, Dakota Westmoreland Corporation, Texas
Westmoreland Coal Co., Western Energy Company, Westmoreland Savage Corporation, Westmoreland Canada LLC,
Westmoreland Canadian Investments L.P., WCC Holding, B.V., Westmoreland Canada Holdings Inc., Westmoreland
Prairie Resources Inc., Coal Valley Resources Inc., Prairie Mines & Royalty ULC, Prairie Coal Ltd., Willowvan Mining
Ltd. and Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership, (ii) each other domestic Subsidiary of WELLC, WRI, WML or
Westmoreland Canada LLC as may be formed after the Initial Notes Issue Date and (iii) each other domestic
Subsidiary of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer or a Guarantor that becomes a Restricted Subsidiary after the Initial Notes Issue
Date.
“Successor” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (1)(b) of the first paragraph under the subheading
“– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Mergers, Consolidations, Etc.”
“Supplemental Indenture” means the Supplemental Indenture dated as of January 31, 2012, among the Issuer, the
Co-Issuer, the Guarantors, the Trustee and the Note Collateral Agent, pursuant to which the 2012 Additional Notes
were issued.
“Third Supplemental Indenture” means the Third Supplemental Indenture dated as of the 2014 Additional Notes
Issue Date, among the Issuer, the Co-Issuer, the Guarantors, the Trustee and the Note Collateral Agent, pursuant to
which the 2014 Additional Notes were issued.
“Total Assets” means the total amount of all assets of the Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries,
determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP as shown on the most recent internal balance sheet of
the Issuer.
“Total Leverage Ratio” means the ratio, as of any date of determination, of (i) Consolidated Total Indebtedness of the
Issuer, the Co-Issuer and the Restricted Subsidiaries as of such date to (ii) Consolidated EBITDA for the most recently
ended four full fiscal quarters for which internal consolidated financial statements are available immediately preceding
such date.
“Transactions” means (a) the entering into and initial borrowing, if any, under the Revolving Credit Facility, (b) the
issuance of the Initial Notes, the 2012 Additional Notes and the 2014 Additional Notes (including the grant of the
security interests and Liens
Table of Contents
91
pursuant to the Security Documents) and issuance of Exchange Notes to be issued in exchange for any such Notes,
(c) the repayment of the Issuer’s existing PIK senior secured convertible notes, (d) the repayment of WRI’s existing
revolving credit facility and term loan, (e) the repayment of WELLC’s existing term loan, (f) redemption or repayment of
the outstanding accrued dividends on the Issuer’s Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, (g) the repayment of all
amounts due under the WML Credit Agreements with certain of the proceeds of the 2014 Additional Notes and (h) all
transactions (including the payment of fees and expenses) related to any of the foregoing.
“Trust Indenture Act” means the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
“Trustee” has the meaning assigned to that term in the fourth paragraph of this Description of the Exchange Notes
section.
“2012 Additional Notes” means the Additional Notes issued pursuant to the Supplemental Indenture.
“2012 Additional Notes Issue Date” means January 31, 2012, the date the 2012 Additional Notes were issued
pursuant to the Supplemental Indenture.
“2014 Additional Notes” means the Additional Notes issued pursuant to the Third Supplemental Indenture.
“2014 Additional Notes Issue Date” means April 28, 2014, the date on which the 2014 Additional Notes were issued
pursuant to the Third Supplemental Indenture.
“UCC” means the Uniform Commercial Code as in effect in the State of New York, and any successor statute, as in
effect from time to time (except that terms used herein which are defined in the Uniform Commercial Code as in effect
in the State of New York on the date hereof shall continue to have the same meaning notwithstanding any
replacement or amendment of such statute except as the Note Collateral Agent may otherwise determine).
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means (1) Basin Resources Inc.; (2) any Subsidiary that at the time of determination shall
be designated an Unrestricted Subsidiary by the Board of Directors of the Issuer in accordance with the covenant
described under “– Certain Covenants – Limitations on Designation of Unrestricted Subsidiaries”; and (3) any
Subsidiary of an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
“U.S. Government Obligations” means direct non-callable obligations of, or obligations guaranteed by, the United
States of America for the payment of which guarantee or obligations the full faith and credit of the United States is
pledged.
“Voting Stock” with respect to any Person, means securities of any class of Equity Interests of such Person (in the
case of a partnership, the sole general partner or managing general partner of such Person) entitling the holders
thereof (whether at all times or only so long as no senior class of stock or other relevant equity interest has voting
power by reason of any contingency) to vote in the election of members of the Board of Directors of such Person.
“Weighted Average Life to Maturity” when applied to any Indebtedness at any date, means the number of years
obtained by dividing (1) the sum of the products obtained by multiplying (a) the amount of each then remaining
installment, sinking fund, serial maturity or other required payment of principal, including payment at final maturity, in
respect thereof by (b) the number of years (calculated to the nearest one-twelfth) that will elapse between such date
and the making of such payment by (2) the then outstanding principal amount of such Indebtedness.
“WELLC” means Westmoreland Energy LLC.
“Wholly Owned” means, with respect to any Restricted Subsidiary, a Restricted Subsidiary of which 100% of the
Equity Interests (except for directors’ qualifying shares) are owned directly by the Issuer or through one or more Wholly
Owned Restricted Subsidiaries (or a combination thereof).
“WML” means Westmoreland Mining LLC.
“WML Credit Agreements” means (A) the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement by and among Westmoreland
Mining LLC, the guarantors party thereto, the banks party thereto and PNC Bank, National Association, as agent,
dated as of June 26, 2008, which was paid-off in full and terminated on or around May 28, 2014, and (B) the WML
Notes.
“WML Notes” means the Note Purchase Agreement regarding $125,000,000 8.02% Senior Guaranteed Secured
Notes due March 31, 2018 among Westmoreland Mining LLC and each of the purchasers named in Schedule A
thereto, dated as of June 26, 2008 and the notes delivered by WML pursuant thereto, which were prepaid in full on
May 28, 2014.
“Working Capital Lender” has the meaning assigned to that term in the first paragraph under the subheading
“– Security – Intercreditor Agreement Entered into in Connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.”
“WRI” means Westmoreland Resources Inc.
Table of Contents
92
“WRM” means Westmoreland Risk Management Inc.
“WRM Collateral” has the meaning assigned to that term in clause (iv) of the first paragraph under the subheading
“– Security – General.”
Table of Contents
93
MATERIAL UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The following is a summary of material U.S. federal income tax considerations relating to the exchange of Restricted
Notes for Exchange Notes in the exchange offer. It does not contain a complete analysis of all the potential tax
considerations relating to the exchange. This summary is limited to holders of Restricted Notes that hold the Restricted
Notes as “capital assets” (in general, assets held for investment). Special situations, such as the following, are not
addressed:
•   tax consequences to holders that may be subject to special tax treatment, such as tax-exempt entities,
dealers in securities or foreign currencies, brokers, certain financial institutions or “financial services entities,”
insurance companies, regulated investment companies, traders in securities that elect to use a mark-to-
market method of accounting for their securities holdings, retirement plans, real estate investment trusts,
controlled foreign corporations and shareholders of such corporations, passive foreign investment companies
and shareholders of such companies, former citizens or long-term residents of the United States, certain U.S.
expatriates or corporations that accumulate earnings to avoid U.S. federal income tax;
•   tax consequences to persons holding notes as part of a hedging, integrated, constructive sale or conversion
transaction or a straddle or other risk reduction transaction;
•   tax consequences to holders whose “functional currency” is not the U.S. Dollar;
•   tax consequences to persons who hold notes through a partnership or similar pass-through entity;
•   alternative minimum tax, gift tax or estate tax consequences, if any; or
•   any state, local or foreign tax consequences.
The discussion below is based upon the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, existing and
proposed Treasury regulations promulgated thereunder, and rulings, judicial decisions and administrative
interpretations thereunder, as of the date hereof. Those authorities may be changed, perhaps retroactively, so as to
result in U.S. federal income tax consequences different from those discussed below.
Consequences of Tendering Notes
The exchange of the Restricted Notes for the Exchange Notes in the exchange offer will not constitute a taxable
exchange. As a result, you will not recognize taxable gain or loss as a result of such exchange, the holding period of
the Exchange Notes you receive will include the holding period of the Restricted Notes you exchange and the
adjusted tax basis of the Exchange Notes you receive will be the same as the adjusted tax basis of the Restricted
Notes you exchange.
The preceding discussion of certain material U.S. federal income tax consequences is for general information
only and is not tax advice. Accordingly, each investor is urged to consult its own tax advisor as to the
particular tax consequences to it of exchanging Restricted Notes for Exchange Notes, including the
applicability and effect of any U.S. federal, state, local or foreign tax laws, and of any proposed changes in
applicable laws.
Table of Contents
94
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each broker-dealer that receives Exchange Notes in the exchange offer for its own account must acknowledge that it
will deliver a prospectus meeting the requirements of the Securities Act in connection with any resales of such
Exchange Notes. Broker-dealers who acquired the Restricted Notes directly from us in the initial offering must, in the
absence of an exemption, comply with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act in
connection with the resales of the Exchange Notes and cannot rely on the position of the staff of the Commission
enunciated in the Exxon Capital no-action letter. In addition, broker-dealers who acquired Restricted Notes directly
from us in the initial offering cannot use this prospectus in connection with resales of the Exchange Notes. We reserve
the right in our sole discretion to purchase or make offers for, or to offer Exchange Notes for, any Restricted Notes that
remain outstanding subsequent to the expiration of the exchange offer pursuant to this prospectus or otherwise and, to
the extent permitted by applicable law, purchase Restricted Notes in the open market, in privately negotiated
transactions or otherwise. This prospectus, as it may be amended or supplemented from time to time, may be used by
all persons subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, including broker-dealers in
connection with resales of Exchange Notes received in the exchange offer, where such Exchange Notes were
acquired as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities and may be used by us to purchase any
Restricted Notes outstanding after expiration of the exchange offer. We have agreed that, for a period of up to 180 days
from the date on which the exchange offer is completed, we will make this prospectus, as amended or supplemented,
available to any broker-dealer for use in connection with any such resale if such broker-dealer indicates in the letter of
transmittal that it will do so. In addition, until             , 2014, all dealers effecting transactions in the Exchange Notes
may be required to deliver a prospectus.
We will not receive any proceeds from any sale of Exchange Notes by broker-dealers. Exchange Notes received by
broker-dealers in the exchange offer for their own account may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions in
the over-the-counter market, in negotiated transactions, through the writing of options on the Exchange Notes or a
combination of such methods of resale, at market prices prevailing at the time of resale, at prices related to such
prevailing market prices or negotiated prices. Any such resale may be made directly to purchasers or to or through
brokers or dealers who may receive compensation in the form of commissions or concessions from any such broker-
dealer and/or the purchasers of any such Exchange Notes. Any broker-dealer that resells Exchange Notes that were
received by it in the exchange offer for its own account and any broker or dealer that participates in a distribution of
such Exchange Notes may be deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act and any profit on
any such resale of such Exchange Notes and any commissions or concessions received by any such persons may be
deemed to be underwriting compensation under the Securities Act. The letter of transmittal states that, by
acknowledging that it will deliver and by delivering a prospectus meeting the requirements of the Securities Act, a
broker-dealer will not be deemed to admit that it is an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act.
For a period of up to 180 days from the date on which the exchange offer is completed, we will promptly send
additional copies of this prospectus and any amendment or supplement to this prospectus to any broker-dealer that
requests such documents. We have agreed to pay all expenses incident to the exchange offer, other than
commissions or concessions of any brokers or dealers and will indemnify holders of the Notes, including any broker-
dealers, against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the Exchange Notes and the related guarantees, subject to the assumptions, qualifications, exceptions
and limitations set forth in such opinion, will be passed upon for us by Holland & Hart LLP, Denver, Colorado and by
Williams Mullen, Clark & Dobbins, Richmond, Virginia. Certain matters concerning certain of our subsidiary guarantors
will be passed on by Holland & Hart LLP, Denver, Colorado, Williams Mullen, Clark & Dobbins, Richmond, Virginia,
Gowling Lafleur Henderson LLP, Calgary, Alberta, Stikeman Elliot LLP, Montreal, Quebec, MacPherson Leslie &
Tyerman LLP, Regina, Saskatchewan and Buren NV, The Hague, The Netherlands, as applicable.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Westmoreland Coal Company and subsidiaries for the year ended December
31, 2013 appearing in Westmoreland Coal Company’s Current Report (Form 8-K) filed with the SEC on August 6,
2014, and the effectiveness of Westmoreland Coal Company and subsidiaries’ internal control over financial reporting
appearing in Westmoreland Coal Company’s Annual Report (Form 10-K) as of December 31, 2013 have been audited
by Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their reports thereon, included
therein, and incorporated herein by reference. Such consolidated financial statements and Westmoreland Coal
Company and subsidiaries management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
as of December 31, 2013 are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon such reports given on the authority of
such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated financial statements of Westmoreland Resources, Inc. and subsidiary appearing in Westmoreland
Coal Company’s Annual Report (Form 10-K) for the year ended December 31, 2013 have been audited by Ernst &
Young LLP,
Table of Contents
95
independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report thereon, included therein, and incorporated
herein by reference. Such consolidated financial statements are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon
such report given on the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated financial statements of Westmoreland Energy LLC and subsidiaries appearing in Westmoreland
Coal Company’s Annual Report (Form 10-K) for the year ended December 31, 2013 have been audited by Ernst &
Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report thereon, included therein, and
incorporated herein by reference. Such consolidated financial statements are incorporated herein by reference in
reliance upon such report given on the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The financial statements of Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc. appearing in Westmoreland Coal Company’s Annual
Report (Form 10-K) for the year ended December 31, 2013 have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, independent
registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report thereon, included therein, and incorporated herein by
reference. Such financial statements are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon such report given on the
authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The financial statements related to the Kemmerer Mine Statements of Revenues and Direct Operating
Expenses and Statements of Cash Flows for the month ended January 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31,
2011, incorporated in this prospectus supplement by reference to Westmoreland Coal Company’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of Tanner LLC,
an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and
accounting.
96
Table of Contents
WESTMORELAND COAL COMPANY
WESTMORELAND PARTNERS
Offer to Exchange
All outstanding $425,000,000 of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
(CUSIP Nos. 960887 AD9 and U96068 AC2)
for $425,000,000 of 10.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2018
that have been registered under the Securities Act of 1933
Until the date that is 90 days from the date of this prospectus, all dealers that effect transactions in these
securities, whether or not participating in this offering, may be required to deliver a prospectus. This is in
addition to the dealers’ obligation to deliver a prospectus when acting as underwriters with respect to their
unsold allotments or subscriptions or otherwise.
Table of Contents
, 2014
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 20.
Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Registrants under the laws of Delaware
Section 145 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware empowers a corporation to indemnify any person
who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or she is or was a
director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation or another enterprise if serving such enterprise at the request of
the corporation. Depending on the character of the proceeding, a corporation may indemnify against expenses
(including attorney’s fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred in
connection with such action, suit or proceeding if the person indemnified acted in good faith and in a manner he or she
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to any criminal
action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful. In the case of an action by
or in the right of the corporation, no indemnification may be made in respect to any claim, issue or matter as to which
such person shall have been adjudged to be liable to the corporation unless and only to the extent that the Court of
Chancery or the court in which such action or suit was brought shall determine that despite the adjudication of liability,
but in view of all the circumstances of the case, such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such
expenses that the court shall deem proper. Section 145 further provides that to the extent a director or officer of a
corporation has been successful in the defense of any action, suit or proceeding referred to above, or in defense of any
claim, issue or matter therein, he or she shall be indemnified against expenses (including attorney’s fees) actually and
reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith.
Our certificate of incorporation, as amended, and bylaws, as amended, provide that we shall, to the fullest extent
authorized by the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, indemnify our directors and executive officers;
provided, however, that we may limit the extent of such indemnification by individual contracts with our directors and
executive officers we are not required to indemnify any director or executive officer in connection with any proceeding
(or part thereof) initiated by such person or any proceeding by such person against us or our directors, officers,
employees or other agents unless (i) such indemnification is expressly required to be made by law, (ii) the proceeding
was authorized by the board of directors, and (iii) such indemnification is provided by us, in our sole discretion,
pursuant to our powers under the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware.
We have entered into agreements to indemnify our directors and executive officers. These indemnity agreements
require us to hold harmless and indemnify each of our directors and executive officers (i) to the fullest extent
authorized or permitted by the provisions of our bylaws and the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, as
the same may be amended from time to time, and (ii) subject to certain exclusions, against expenses that such director
or executive officer becomes legally obligated to pay because of any claim or claims made against or by such director
or executive officer in connection with threatened, pending or completed actions, suits or proceedings, to which such
director or executive officer at any time becomes a party or a participant, or is threatened to be made a party, by reason
of the fact that such director or executive officer is, was or at any time becomes a director, officer, employee or other
agent of ours, or is or was serving or at any time serves at our request as a director, officer, employee or other agent of
another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, employee benefit plan or other enterprise, including any of our
subsidiaries. These indemnity agreements also establish the processes and procedures for indemnification claims,
advancement of expenses and costs and other determinations with respect to indemnification. The contractual rights to
indemnification provided by these indemnity agreements are subject to the limitations and conditions specified in such
agreements.
Our bylaws, as amended, also permit us to maintain insurance to protect us and any director, officer, employee or
agent against any liability with respect to which we would have the power to indemnify such persons under the
General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware. We maintain an insurance policy insuring our directors and officers
against certain liabilities.
Registrants under the laws of Virginia
Westmoreland—North Carolina Power, L.L.C. is a limited liability company organized under the laws of the State of
Virginia. Under Virginia law, to the extent provided in the articles of organization or operating agreement, a limited
liability company may eliminate a manager or member’s personal liability for monetary damages in any proceeding
brought by or in the right of the limited liability company or by or on behalf of its members, except for liability resulting
from such manager or member’s willful misconduct or knowing violation of criminal law. If the articles of organization
and operating agreement are silent, a manager or member’s personal liability is limited to the greater of $100,000 or
the amount of cash compensation received by such manager or member in the twelve months immediately preceding
the act or omission for which liability is imposed. Section 13.1-1009 of the Virginia Limited Liability Company Act
empowers a Virginia limited liability company, subject to such standards and restrictions, if any, as are set forth in its
articles of organization or an operating agreement, to indemnify and hold harmless any member or manager or other
person from and against any and all claims and demands whatsoever, and to pay for or reimburse any member or
manager or other person for reasonable expenses incurred by such a person who is a party to a proceeding in
advance of final disposition of the proceeding. The Operating Agreement of Westmoreland—North Carolina Power,
L.L.C. grants it the power to indemnify any person who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party to any
threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding by reason of the fact that he, she or it is or was a member,
manager, officer or employee of the company.
Table of Contents
II-1
Westmoreland Partners is a partnership formed under the laws of the State of Virginia. Under section 50-73.99 of the
Virginia Uniform Partnership Act, a partnership is obligated to reimburse a partner for payments made and indemnify a
partner for liabilities incurred by the partner in the ordinary course of the business of the partnership or for the
preservation of its business or property. The partnership agreement of Westmoreland Partners provides that the
partnership will indemnify the partners, their affiliates and the employees, officers, directors, managers and partners of
such the partners from any claims, demands, judgments and costs and expenses arising out of or related to any act or
omission in connection with the business and affairs of the partnership by the indemnified party, except for any act or
omission performed or omitted to be performed in bad faith or which constitutes gross negligence, willful misconduct or
breach of fiduciary duty attributable to the party seeking indemnification.
Registrants under the laws of Montana
Texas Westmoreland Coal Co. and Western Energy Company (the “Montana Corporations”) are both corporations
formed under the laws of the state of Montana. Sections 35-1-451 through 35-1-459 of the Montana Business
Corporation Act, or the Montana Act, provide that a corporation may indemnify its directors and officers. In general, the
Montana Act provides that a corporation must indemnify a director or officer who is wholly successful in his defense of
a proceeding to which he is a party because of his status as a director or officer, unless limited by the articles of
incorporation. Pursuant to the Montana Act, a corporation may indemnify a director or officer, if it is determined that the
director engaged in good faith and meets certain standards of conduct. A corporation may not indemnify a director or
officer under the Montana Act when a director is adjudged liable to the corporation, or when such person is adjudged
liable on the basis that personal benefit was improperly received. The Montana Act also permits a director or officer of
a corporation, who is a party to a proceeding, to apply to the courts for indemnification or advancement of expenses,
unless the articles of incorporation provide otherwise and the court may order indemnification or advancement of
expenses under certain circumstances.
The bylaws of the Montana Corporations provide for the indemnification of their respective directors and officers to the
fullest extent allowed under the Montana Act, including (i) the mandatory indemnification of a director or officer who
was wholly successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any proceeding, (ii) the mandatory indemnification
of directors and officers if a determination to indemnify such person has been made as prescribed by the Montana Act
and (iii) for the reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred by a director or officer who is party to a proceeding in
advance of final disposition of the proceeding, if the determination to indemnify has been made pursuant to the
Montana Act.
Registrants under the laws of Alberta
Coal Valley Resources, Inc., Westmoreland Canada Holdings Inc. and Westmoreland Prairie Resources, Inc. (the
“Alberta Corporations”) are each corporations organized under the laws of the Province of Alberta, Canada, and
Prairie Mines & Royalty ULC (together with the Alberta Corporations, the “Alberta Companies”) is an unlimited liability
company organized under the laws of the Province of Alberta, Canada. Under the Business Corporations Act
(Alberta), a company may, and pursuant to the bylaws of each of the Alberta Companies, such companies
shall, indemnify certain persons associated with the company or, at the request of the company, another entity, against
all costs, charges, and expenses (including an amount paid to settle an action or satisfy a judgment) reasonably
incurred by him or her in respect of any civil, criminal, administrative, investigative, or other proceeding in which he or
she is involved because of that association with the corporation or other entity. Indemnifiable persons are current and
former directors or officers, other individuals who act or acted at the corporation’s request as a director or officer, or an
individual acting in a similar capacity of another entity.
The law permits indemnification only if the indemnifiable person acted honestly and in good faith with a view to the
best interests of the corporation or, as the case may be, to the best interests of the other entity for which the individual
acted as a director or officer in a similar capacity at the corporation’s request and, in the case of a criminal or
administrative action or proceeding that is enforced by a monetary penalty, he or she had reasonable grounds for
believing his or her conduct was lawful and he or she was not judged by a court or other competent authority to have
committed any fault or omitted to do anything he or she ought to have done. With the approval of the court, a
corporation may also indemnify an indemnifiable person in respect of an action by or on behalf of the corporation to
which the indemnifiable person is made a party because of his or her association with the corporation.
Registrants under the laws of Quebec
Westmoreland Canadian Investment L.P. is a partnership formed under the laws of the Province of Quebec, Canada.
Article 2246 of the Civil Code of Quebec provides that where the property of the partnership is insufficient, the general
partners are solidarily liable for the debts of the partnership in respect of third persons. Limited partners are only liable
for the debts up to the agreed amount of their contribution, notwithstanding any transfer of their share in the common
stock. The partnership agreement provides that the general partner will have unlimited liability for the debts and other
obligations of the partnership, and that the liability of a limited partner for the debts and other obligations of the
partnership will be limited to its contribution to the partnership. The general partner will indemnify and hold harmless
the partnership from, and will be liable to any other partner for, any loss, liability, expense, cost or damage suffered or
incurred by the partnership or such partner, as applicable, arising out of any act, omission or error in judgment of the
general partner which (i) is in contravention of its duties under the partnership agreement, (ii) results in a loss of limited
liability of a limited partner or otherwise exposes a limited partner to unlimited liability, or (iii) results from the gross
negligence or willful misconduct of the general partner.
Table of Contents
Registrants under the law of Saskatchewan
II-2
Prairie Coal Ltd. and Willowvan Mining Ltd. (the “Saskatchewan Companies”) are both corporations formed under the
laws of the Province of Saskatchewan, Canada. Under Section 119 of The Business Corporations
Act (Saskatchewan), the Saskatchewan Companies may, and the bylaws of each company provides that it
shall, indemnify a present or former director or officer of the company, or a person who acts or acted at the company’s
request as a director or officer of another entity of which the company is or was a shareholder or creditor, and his or her
heirs and legal representatives, against all costs, charges and expenses, including an amount paid to settle an action
or satisfy a judgment, that the individual reasonably incurs with respect to any civil, criminal, administrative,
investigative or other proceeding in which the individual is involved because of that association with the corporation or
other entity, if the individual acted honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the company or the
other entity and, in the case of a criminal or administrative action or proceeding that is enforced by a monetary penalty,
had reasonable grounds for believing that his or her conduct was lawful; provided, however, that
such indemnification may be made in respect of a derivative action by or on behalf of the company or the other entity to
procure a judgment in its favor only with the approval of the Court of Queen’s Bench of Saskatchewan. The statute
further provides that any such present or former director or officer of either Saskatchewan Company is entitled, as a
matter of right, to indemnification from the company in respect of all costs, charges and expenses reasonably incurred
by him in connection with the defense of any such civil, criminal or administrative action or proceeding to which he or
she is made a party by reason of being or having been a director or officer of the company or that other body corporate
if the individual seeking indemnity was not judged by the court or other competent authority to have committed any
fault or to have omitted to do anything that the individual ought to have done, and fulfils the conditions set out in
clauses the individual acted honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of, as the case may be, the
corporation or the other entity, and in the case of a criminal or administrative action or proceeding that is enforced by a
monetary penalty, the individual had reasonable grounds for believing that the individual’s conduct was lawful.
Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership is a partnership organized under the laws the Province of Saskatchewan,
Canada. Under section 26 of The Partnership Act (Saskatchewan), Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership must
indemnify every partner in respect of payments made and personal liabilities incurred by him or her in the ordinary and
proper conduct of the business of the firm or in or about anything necessarily done for the preservation of the business
or property of the firm. The partnership agreement provides that each partner indemnifies the other partners against all
law suits and expenses arising out of or in connection with any breach of the partnership agreement.
Registrants under the laws of The Netherlands
WCC Holding B.V. is a company organized under the laws of the Netherlands. Dutch law does not contain any
specific provisions with respect to the indemnification of directors. However, the concept of indemnification of directors
of a company for liabilities arising from their actions as members of the executive is accepted in the Netherlands. In
principle, any director party to an employment agreement with the company that is governed by Dutch law is entitled to
indemnification by law. However, exceptions to the disadvantage of the director are possible when agreed to by the
director in writing and only as far as the director is covered by insurance. Indemnification can otherwise be made
pursuant to a contract or pursuant to a company’s articles of association. No indemnification can be made in respect of
any claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged to be liable for gross negligence or
willful misconduct in the performance of their duties.
Item 21. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
(a) Exhibits
See the Exhibit Index attached to this registration statement and incorporated by reference herein.
Financial Statement Schedules:
All schedules have been omitted because they are not applicable or not required, or the required information is
included in the financial statements or notes thereto, which are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 22. Undertakings
The undersigned Registrants hereby undertake:
(a) (1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this
registration statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any fact or events arising after the effective date of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in this registration
statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities offered
(if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any
deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in
the form of prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to
Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20%
change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee”
table in the effective registration statement; and
(iii) To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed
in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration
statement.
II-3
Table of Contents
(b) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective
amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(c) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which
remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(d) That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, each prospectus
filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration
statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part
of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used after effectiveness; provided, however, that no
statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a
document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of
the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or
modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration
statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
(e) That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrants under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in
the initial distribution of the securities, in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrants pursuant to this
registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the
securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned
registrants will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrants relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii) any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned
registrants or used or referred to by the undersigned registrants;
(iii)
the portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrants or their securities provided by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrants; and
(iv) any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrants to the
purchaser.
(f) That, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each filing of a registrant’s annual
report pursuant to Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that is incorporated by
reference in the registration statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering
thereof.
(g) Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors,
officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has
been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a
director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is
asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant
will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act of 1933 and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
(h) To respond to requests for information that is incorporated by reference into the prospectus pursuant to Items 4,
10(b), 11, or 13 of this Form, within one business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated
documents by first class mail or other equally prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed
subsequent to the effective date of the registration statement through the date of responding to the request.
(i) To supply by means of a post-effective amendment all information concerning a transaction, and the company being
acquired involved therein, that was not the subject of and included in the registration statement when it became
effective.
Table of Contents
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, each Registrant has duly caused this Registration
Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Englewood, State of
Colorado on August 6, 2014.
WESTMORELAND COAL COMPANY
/s/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Keith E. Alessi and Kevin A. Paprzycki, and each of them, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and
agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any
and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments
and registration statements filed pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and
the other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to
such attorneys-in-fact and agents and each of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person,
hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or any of them, or his or their substitute or
substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    KEITH E. ALESSI
Keith E. Alessi
/S/    KEVIN A. PAPRZYCKI
Kevin A. Paprzycki
/S/    RUSSELL H. WERNER
Russell H. Werner
/S/    GAIL E. HAMILTON
Gail E. Hamilton
/S/    MICHAEL G. HUTCHINSON
Michael G. Hutchinson
/S/    RICHARD M. KLINGAMAN
Richard M. Klingaman
/s/    CRAIG R. MACKUS
Craig R. Mackus
/s/    JAN B. PACKWOOD
Jan B. Packwood
/s/    ROBERT C. SCHARP
Robert C. Scharp
Table of Contents
Title
Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
(Principal Financial Officer)
Corporate Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND PARTNERS
By:
By:
WESTMORELAND —
 
NORTH CAROLINA POWER, LLC
/s/ DONALD KEISLING
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
By:
WESTMORELAND ENERGY LLC
/s/ DONALD KEISLING
By:
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
Table of Contents
(Principal Executive Officer)
WESTMORELAND ENERGY LLC
/S/ DONALD KEISLING
By:
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    DONALD KEISLING
Donald Keisling
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND — ROANOKE
VALLEY, L.P.
By:
WEI—Roanoke Valley, Inc., General
 
Partner
/s/ DONALD KEISLING
By:
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
By:
Westmoreland Energy LLC, Limited
 
Partner
/s/ DONALD KEISLING
By:
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
Table of Contents
(Principal Executive Officer)
WEI — ROANOKE VALLEY, INC.
/S/ DONALD KEISLING
By:
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    DONALD KEISLING
Donald Keisling
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Title
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
WESTMORELAND — NORTH CAROLINA
POWER, L.L.C.
/S/ DONALD KEISLING
By:
Name: Donald Keisling
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    DONALD KEISLING
Donald Keisling
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND RESOURCES, INC.
/S/ CURT LIGHTLE
By:
Name: Curt Lightle
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Brent Winkelman as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    CURT LIGHTLE
Curt Lightle
/S/    BRENT WINKELMAN
Brent Winkelman
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Controller and Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
WRI PARTNERS, INC.
/s/ KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
By:
Name: Kevin Paprzycki
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Kevin Paprzycki as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Controller and Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND POWER, INC.
/S/ JENNIFER GRAFTON
By:
Name: Jennifer Grafton
Title:
 General Counsel
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Kevin Paprzycki as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
General Counsel and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Controller and Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND KEMMERER, INC.
/S/ SCOTT STURM
By:
Name: Scott Sturm
Title:
President
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    SCOTT STURM
Scott Sturm
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND COAL SALES
COMPANY, INC.
/s/ MIKE KEGLEY
By:
Name: Mike Kegley
Title:
General Counsel
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russel H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    MIKE KEGLEY
Mike Kegley
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/s/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
General Counsel
(Principal Executive Officer)
Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WCC LAND HOLDING COMPANY, INC.
/S/ MORRIS KEGLEY
By:
Name: Morris Kegley
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    MORRIS KEGLEY
Title
President
Date
August 6, 2014
Morris Kegley
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
WESTMORELAND ENERGY SERVICES,
INC.
/S/ BRADLEY LEWIS
By:
Name: Bradley Lewis
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    BRADLEY LEWIS
Bradley Lewis
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Director
August 6, 2014
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
WESTMORELAND MINING LLC
/S/ PHILIP SALITROS
By:
Name: Philip Salitros
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Amy Rush as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    PHILIP SALITROS
Philip Salitros
/S/    AMY RUSH
Amy Rush
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Manager
Manager
Manager
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
DAKOTA WESTMORELAND
CORPORATION
/S/ WILLIAM WEAVER
By:
Name: William Weaver
Title: President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Brent Winkelman as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    WILLIAM WEAVER
William Weaver
/S/    BRENT WINKELMAN
Brent Winkelman
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Manager
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
TEXAS WESTMORELAND COAL CO.
/S/ J. DENNY KINGSLEY
By:
Name: J. Denny Kingsley
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints J. Denny Kingsley as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    J. DENNY KINGSLEY
J. Denny Kingsley
/S/    ELAINE PARISHER
Elaine Parisher
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
WESTERN ENERGY COMPANY
/S/ PHILIP SALITROS
By:
Name: Philip Salitros
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Philip Salitros as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    PHILIP SALITROS
Philip Salitros
/S/    KENNETH RUX
Kenneth Rux
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Director
Director
Director
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND SAVAGE
CORPORATION
/S/ JODY MANN
By:
Name: Jody Mann
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Amy Rush as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    JODY MANN
Jody Mann
/S/    AMY RUSH
Amy Rush
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
WESTMORELAND CANADA LLC
/S/ KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
By:
Name: Kevin Paprzycki
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Kevin Paprzycki as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
President and Treasurer
(Principal Executive Officer and Principal
Accounting Officer)
Manager
Manager
Manager
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND CANADIAN
INVESTMENTS L.P.
By:
Westmoreland Canada LLC, General
 
Partner
/S/ KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
By:
Name: Kevin Paprzycki
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
By:
Westmoreland Coal Company, Limited
 
Partner
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
Table of Contents
(Principal Executive Officer)
WCC HOLDING B.V.
/S/ JENNIFER GRAFTON
By:
Name: Jennifer Grafton
Title:
Managing Director A
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Jennifer Grafton as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    RUTGER H. W. FUNNEKOTTER
Rutger H. W. Funnekoter
/S/    OLIVER B. L. HOYNG
Oliver B. L. Hoyng
Table of Contents
Title
Managing Director A
(Principal Executive Officer and Principal
Accounting Officer)
Managing Director B
Managing Director B
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND CANADA HOLDINGS
INC.
/S/ JOSEPH MICHELETTI
By:
Name: Joseph Micheletti
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    ROBERT HAGERMAN
Robert Hagerman
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Table of Contents
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
WESTMORELAND PRAIRIE RESOURCES
INC.
/S/ JOSEPH MICHELETTI
By:
Name: Joseph Micheletti
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Russell H. Werner as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    RUSSELL WERNER
Russell Werner
/S/    JENNIFER GRAFTON
Jennifer Grafton
/S/    ROBERT HAGERMAN
Robert Hagerman
/S/    JOSEPH MICHELETTI
Joseph Micheletti
/S/    KEVIN PAPRZYCKI
Kevin Paprzycki
Title
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
COAL VALLEY RESOURCES INC.
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Keith E. Alessi as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/S/    KEITH E. ALESSI
President and Director
August 6, 2014
/S/    KEITH E. ALESSI
President and Director
Keith E. Alessi
/S/    JASON VEENSTRA
Jason Veenstra
/S/    JOHN SCHADAN
John Schadan
(Principal Executive Officer)
Vice President, Finance and Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
PRAIRIE MINES & ROYALTY ULC
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Keith E. Alessi as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    KEITH E. ALESSI
Keith E. Alessi
/S/    JASON VEENSTRA
Jason Veenstra
/S/    JOHN SCHADAN
John Schadan
Title
President and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Vice President, Finance and Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
PRAIRIE COAL LTD.
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Keith E. Alessi as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/S/    KEITH E. ALESSI
Keith E. Alessi
/S/    JASON VEENSTRA
Jason Veenstra
/S/    JOHN SCHADAN
John Schadan
Title
President and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Vice President, Finance and Treasurer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Date
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
WILLOWVAN MINING LTD.
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and
appoints Keith E. Alessi as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments to this registration statement (including post-effective amendments and registration statements filed
pursuant to Rule 462 or otherwise) and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and the other documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such attorney-in-fact and
agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as
fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorney-in-fact and agent may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/S/    KEITH E. ALESSI
President and Director
August 6, 2014
Keith E. Alessi
/S/    JASON VEENSTRA
Jason Veenstra
/S/    JOHN SCHADAN
John Schadan
(Principal Executive Officer)
Vice President, Finance
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
August 6, 2014
August 6, 2014
Table of Contents
POPLAR RIVER COAL MINING
PARTNERSHIP
By:
Prairie Coal Ltd., Partner
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
By:
Prairie Mines and Royalty ULC, Partner
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
(Principal Executive Officer)
By:
Willowvan Mining Ltd., Partner
/S/ KEITH E. ALESSI
By:
Name: Keith E. Alessi
Title:
President
Table of Contents
(Principal Executive Officer)
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Exhibit Description
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Coal Company
Certificate of Correction to the Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Coal Company
Certificate of Amendment to the Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Coal Company
Certificate of Amendment to the Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Coal Company
Amended and Restated Bylaws of Westmoreland Coal Company
Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement of Westmoreland Partners
Amendment No. 1 to Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement of Westmoreland Partners
Amendment No. 2 to Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement of Westmoreland Partners
Certificate of Formation of Westmoreland Energy LLC
Operating Agreement of Westmoreland Energy LLC
Exhibit
Number  
  
  3.1*
  
  3.2*
  3.3*
  
  
  3.4*
  
  3.5*
  3.6*
  
  
  3.7*
  3.8*
  
  
  3.9*
  3.10*
3.11*
  3.12*
  3.13*
  3.14*
  3.15*
  3.16*
  3.17*
  3.18*
  3.19*
  3.20*
  3.21*
  3.22*
  3.23*
  3.24*
  3.25*
  3.26*
  3.27*
  3.28*
  3.29*
  3.30*
  3.31*
  3.32*
  3.33*
  3.34*
  3.35*
Certificate of Formation of Westmoreland—North Carolina Power LLC
Operating Agreement of Westmoreland—North Carolina Power LLC
Certificate of Incorporation of WEI—Roanoke Valley, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of WEI—Roanoke Valley, Inc.
Bylaws of WEI—Roanoke Valley, Inc.
Certificate of Limited Partnership of Westmoreland—Roanoke Valley LP
Amendment to Certificate of Limited Partnership of Westmoreland—Roanoke Valley LP
Agreement of Limited Partnership of Westmoreland—Roanoke Valley LP
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Resources, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Resources, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Resources, Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Resources, Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of WRI Partners, Inc.
Bylaws of WRI Partners, Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Mining Services, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Mining Services, Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Kemmerer, Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Coal Sales Company, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Coal Sales Company, Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Coal Sales Company, Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of WCC Land Holding Company, Inc.
Bylaws of WCC Land Holding Company, Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number  
  3.36*
 
  3.37***** 
  3.38***** 
  3.39
 
 
  3.40
 
  3.41
  3.42
 
 
  4.43
  3.44
 
 
  3.45
 
  3.46
  3.47
 
 
  3.48
Exhibit Description
Bylaws of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Certificate of Formation of Westmoreland Mining LLC
Second Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Westmoreland Mining LLC
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Western Energy Company
Certificate of Amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation of Western Energy Company
Articles of Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation of Western Energy Company
Articles of Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation of Western Energy Company
Bylaws of Western Energy Company
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
Articles of Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation of Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
Articles of Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation of Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
Articles of Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation of Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
Articles of Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation of Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
3.49
  3.50
  3.51
  3.52
  3.53
  3.54
  3.55
  3.56
  3.57
  3.58
  3.59
  3.60
  3.61
  3.62
  3.63
  3.64
  3.65
  3.66
  3.67
  3.68
  3.69
  3.70
  3.71
  3.72
Amended and Restated Bylaws of Texas Westmoreland Coal Co.
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Savage Corporation
First Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Savage Corporation
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Savage Corporation
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Savage Corporation
Bylaws of Westmoreland Savage Corporation
Certificate of Incorporation of Dakota Westmoreland Corporation
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Dakota Westmoreland Corporation
Second Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Dakota Westmoreland Corporation
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Dakota Westmoreland Corporation
Bylaws of Dakota Westmoreland Corporation
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Energy Services, Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Energy Services, Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Power, Inc.
Certificate of Amalgamation of Coal Valley Resources Inc.
Bylaws of Coal Valley Resources Inc.
Partnership Agreement of Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership
Supplemental Partnership Agreement of Poplar River Coal Mining Partnership
Certificate of Incorporation of Prairie Coal Ltd.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Prairie Coal Ltd.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Prairie Coal Ltd.
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number  
 
  3.73
 
  3.74
  3.75
 
 
  3.76
  3.77
 
 
  3.78
 
  3.79
  3.80
 
 
  3.81
 
  3.82
  3.83
 
 
  3.84
 
  3.85
  3.86
 
 
  3.87
Exhibit Description
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Prairie Coal Ltd.
Bylaws of Prairie Coal Ltd.
Certificate of Amalgamation of Prairie Mines & Royalty ULC
Bylaws of Prairie Mines & Royalty ULC
Deed of Incorporation of WCC Holding B.V.
Certificate of Formation of Westmoreland Canada LLC
Limited Liability Company Agreement of Westmoreland Canada LLC
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Canada Holdings Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Canada Holdings Inc.
Declaration of Registration of Westmoreland Canadian Investments L.P.
Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement of Westmoreland Canadian Investments L.P.
Certificate of Incorporation of Westmoreland Prairie Resources Inc.
Bylaws of Westmoreland Prairie Resources Inc.
Certificate of Incorporation of Willowvan Mining Ltd.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Willowvan Mining Ltd.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Willowvan Mining Ltd.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Willowvan Mining Ltd.
Bylaws of Willowvan Mining Ltd.
Indenture, dated as of February 4, 2011, by and between Westmoreland Coal Company,
Westmoreland Partners and Wells Fargo Bank, NA, as trustee and note collateral agent.
Form of 10.75% Senior Notes due 2018 (included as Exhibit A in Exhibit 4.1).
Pledge and Security Agreement dated as of February 4, 2011, by Westmoreland Coal Company and
Westmoreland Partners in favor of Wells Fargo Bank, NA, as note collateral agent
Supplemental Indenture, dated as of January 31, 2012, by and among Westmoreland Coal Company,
Westmoreland Partners and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee and note collateral
agent
Amendment No. 1 to the Pledge and Security Agreement dated January 26, 2012
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 3, 2014, by and among Westmoreland Coal
Company, Westmoreland Partners and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee and note
collateral agent
Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 28, 2014, by and among Westmoreland Coal
Company, Westmoreland Partners, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee and note
collateral agent, and the guarantors party thereto
Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 28, 2014, by and among Westmoreland Coal
Company, Westmoreland Partners, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee and note
collateral agent, and the new guarantors party thereto
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of April 28, 2014, by and among Westmoreland Coal
Company, Westmoreland Partners, the guarantors party thereto, and BMO Capital Markets Corp. and
Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.
Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated July 31, 2014, by and among Westmoreland Coal Company,
Westmoreland Partners, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee and note collateral agent,
and the new guarantors party thereto
3.88
  3.89
  3.90
  4.1*
4.2*
  4.3*
4.4**
4.5**
  4.6***
4.7****
4.8****
4.9****
4.10*****
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number  
  
  5.1
  
  5.2
  5.3
  
  
  5.4
  
  5.5
  5.6
  
  
12.1
  
21.1
23.1
  
  
23.2
23.3
  
  
23.4
  
23.5
23.6
  
  
23.7
Exhibit Description
Legal opinion of Holland & Hart LLP
Legal opinion of Williams Mullen, Clark & Dobbins
Legal opinion of Buren N.V.
Legal opinion of Gowling Lafleur Henderson LLP
Legal opinion of MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman LLP
Legal opinion of Stikeman Elliott LLP
Statement Regarding Computation of Ratios
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP
Consent of Tanner LLC
Consent of Holland & Hart LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1)
Consent of Williams Mullen, Clark & Dobbins (included in Exhibit 5.2)
Consent of Buren N.V. (included in Exhibit 5.3)
Consent of Gowling Lafleur Henderson LLP (included in Exhibit 5.4)
Consent of MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman LLP (included in Exhibit 5.5)
23.8
24.1
25.1
99.1
99.2
99.3
99.4
*
**
***
****
*****
Consent of Stikeman Elliott LLP (included in Exhibit 5.6)
Power of Attorney (included on signature page)
Statement of Eligibility on Form T-1 of Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Letter of Transmittal
Letter to Brokers, Dealers, Commercial Banks, Trust Companies and other Nominees
Letter to Clients for use by Brokers, Dealers, Commercial Banks, Trust Companies and other Nominees
Substitute Form W-9
Incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-4 filed with the SEC on June 3,
2011 (File No. 333-174723)
Incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on January 31,
2012 (File No. 001-11155)
Incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 12,
2014 (File No. 001-11155)
Incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on May 2, 2014
(File No. 001-11155)
Incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on August 6, 2014
(File No. 001-11155)