
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One) 
[X]   ANNUAL  REPORT  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  13  OR  15(d)  OF  THE  SECURITIES  EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934.
[   ]    TRANSITION  REPORT  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  13  OR  15(d)  OF  THE  SECURITIES
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934.
For the transition period from _______ to ______
Commission file number: 0-29392
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
British Columbia
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
4415 Caribou Road, P.O. Box 653
Nederland, Colorado
(Address of principal executive offices)
98-0434111 
(IRS Employer
Identification No.)
80466-0653 
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (303) 258-3806
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act:
Title of each class
N/A
Name of each exchange on which registered
N/A
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Shares, no par value
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities 
Act.  Yes [  ]  No [X] 
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the 
Act.    Yes [  ]  No [X] 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant 
was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.  Yes [  ]  
No [X]
Page 1 of 110
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if 
any,  every  Interactive  Data  File  required  to  be  submitted  and  posted  pursuant  to  Rule  405  of  Regulation  S-T 
(§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required 
to submit and post such files).    Yes [  ]  No [X]  
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§232.405 of this 
chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy 
or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 
10-K.   [X]  
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, 
or a smaller reporting company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller 
reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.   
Large accelerated filer [  ]  Accelerated filer [  ]   Non-accelerated filer [  ]  Smaller reporting company [X]   
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).   
Yes [  ]  No [X]
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates computed by 
reference to the price at which the common equity was last sold, or the average bid and asked price of such common 
equity, as the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter: $5,260,588 as of 
November 30, 2008.
As of June 10, 2011, the registrant had 150,184,754 shares of common stock outstanding.
Page 2 of 110
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Item 1. Business. 
Item 1A. Risk Factors. 
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 
Item 2. Properties. 
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Part I 
 
 
 
 
 
Part II
Part III
Part IV
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer 
Purchases of Equity Securities. 
Item 6. Selected Financial Data. 
Item  7.  Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of 
Operations. 
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk. 
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. 
Item  9.  Changes  in  and  Disagreements  With  Accountants  on  Accounting  and  Financial 
Disclosure. 
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures. 
Item 9B. Other Information.
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance. 
Item 11. Executive Compensation. 
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related 
Shareholder Matters. 
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence. 
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules. 
 
Signatures
Page
5 
13 
13 
13 
37
39 
45 
 
45 
56 
57 
 
57 
58 
60
60 
63 
 
65 
66 
70
71 
 
76
Page 3 of 110
Except for an annual report for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010 filed May 9, 2011 and the quarterly reports for 
the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2011  filed  May  20,  2011  through  May  26,  2011,  Calais  Resources  Inc.  and  its 
subsidiaries  (together,  the  “Company,”  “Calais,”  “we,”  and  “us”)  have  not  filed  financial  statements  with  the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) since its Form 10-QSB for the quarter ended August 31, 2004.  The 
Company is preparing additional quarterly and annual reports covering the periods from August 31, 2004 through 
February 28, 2009, and the quarterly reports for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010 and intends to file those reports 
with the SEC as soon as practicable.
Through August 31, 2004, we reported our financial information using Canadian Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles  (“Canadian  GAAP”)  using  the  Canadian  dollar  as  our  functional  and  reporting  currency.    During  the 
fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2005,  we  changed  our  reporting  basis  to  the  United  States  Generally  Accepted 
Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and our functional and reporting currency to the United States dollar (“U.S. 
dollar”).  This change was made for several reasons, including the following: (1) substantially all of our assets and 
employees are now located in the United States; (2) substantially all of our labor, materials and other costs are now 
denominated in the U.S. dollar; and (3) our recent financing transactions, including both lending activities and cash 
infusions in exchange for equity, have been denominated in the U.S. dollar and have involved parties and investors 
located in the United States.  Accordingly, unless otherwise noted, historical financial information included in this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K has been restated using U.S. GAAP with a functional and reporting currency of the 
U.S.  dollar.    All  references  herein  to  “$”  and  “US$”  refer  to  U.S.  Dollars  and  all  references  to  “Cdn$”  refer  to 
Canadian  Dollars.    Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  dollar  amounts  are  expressed  in  United  States  dollars.    All 
references to Common Shares refer to shares of our common stock (without par value) unless otherwise indicated.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS  
In  our  effort  to  make  the  information  in  this  report  more  meaningful,  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  and 
documents incorporated by reference herein (or otherwise made by us or on our behalf) contain both historical and 
forward-looking statements.  Such forward-looking statements are not based on historical facts, but rather reflect the 
current  expectations  of  our  management  concerning  future  results  and  events.  Forward-looking  statements  are 
generally accompanied by words such as “estimate,” “project,” “predict,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” 
“goal”  or  other  similar  words  or  variations  that  convey  the  uncertainty  of  future  events  or  outcomes.      These 
statements are based on the beliefs an assumptions of our management based on information currently available to 
us. These statements by their nature are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions and will be influenced 
by various factors, some of which are beyond our control. Actual results could vary materially from future results 
expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.  Important factors that could cause actual results to differ 
materially from the forward-looking statements include, without limitation, the following risk factors:  
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   •
our ability to execute against our plans; 
  our ability to continue as a going concern; 
  the possible loss of our interest in our Caribou properties if we do not meet our debt obligations; 
  the potential that we will not obtain good title to a portion of our Manhattan project; 
  the volatility and low trading volume of our common stock; 
  our ability to secure additional capital; 
  the possibility we may never achieve any mineral production; 
  the  future  dilution  to  our  shareholders  from  future  capital-raising  activities  and  payments  to  employees, 
directors and consultants; 
  the possibility our Board of Directors may issue authorized and unissued shares of our stock; 
  the effects the penny stock rules may have on the trading of our stock; 
  our dependence on a few key employees; 
  the influence of a few large shareholders on our business; 
  risks associated with our incorporation in Canada; 
  our lack of experience in mining and selling minerals; 
  operational end environmental risks associated with the mining industry; 
  the effect of government regulations on our business; 
  lack of clear title to some of our mineral prospects; 
  the fact our mineral interests are not yet proven; and 
  fluctuation in the prices of gold and silver.
• 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   • 
   •
Page 4 of 110
All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made.  All subsequent written and oral forward-looking 
statements  attributable  to  us,  or  persons  acting  on  our  behalf,  are  expressly  qualified  in  their  entirety  by  these 
cautionary  statements.    Except  as  required  by  law,  we  undertake  no  obligation  to  update  any  forward-looking 
statement  to  reflect  events  or  circumstances  after  the  date  on  which  it  is  made  or  to  reflect  the  occurrence  of 
anticipated  or  unanticipated  events  or  circumstances.    Except  for  the  financial  statements  contained  in  the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010 and the three quarterly filings for the year ended May 
31,  2011the  Company  has  not  filed  financial  statements  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (“SEC”) 
since its Form 10-QSB for the quarter ended August 31, 2004.  The Company is preparing additional quarterly and 
annual reports covering the periods from August 31, 2004 through February 28, 2009 and the three quarterly filings 
for the fiscal year ended May 2010, and intends to file those reports with the SEC as soon as practicable.
ITEM 1. BUSINESS.
PART I
Glossary 
 
The following is a glossary of geological and technical terms used in this report:  
 
ac - acres 
 
Adits - An underground mine tunnel with only one end daylighting. 
 
Breccia - A rock in which angular fragments are surrounded by a mass of fine-grained minerals. 
 
Chalcopyrite - copper bearing sulphide 
 
CNI  43-101  –    NI  43-101  is  a  national  instrument  for  the  ''Standards  of  Disclosure  for  Mineral  Projects''  within 
Canada. The Instrument is a codified set of rules and guidelines for reporting and displaying information related to 
mineral  properties  owned  by,  or  explored  by,  companies  which  report  these  results  on  stock  exchanges  within 
Canada.  This  includes  foreign-owned  mining  entities  that  trade  on  trading  markets  overseen  by  the  Canadian 
securities administrators.  
 
Cretaceous - The geologic time that is part of the Mesozoic era covering the period from 144 to 66 million years 
ago. 
 
Epithermal - refers to the process of near surface ore deposition by fluids from an intrusive source; said of a mineral 
deposit formed within about 1 km of the earth's surface and in the temperature range 50 - 200 degrees C, occurring 
mainly as veins. Also said of that environment. 
 
Exploration stage – Includes all issuers engaged in the search for mineral deposits (reserves) which are not in either 
the development or production stage. 
 
Galena - Lead sulfide mineral. 
 
Gneiss - A common and widely distributed type of rock formed by high-grade regional metamorphic processes from 
pre-existing formations that were originally either igneous or sedimentary rocks. Gneissic rocks are coarsely foliated 
and largely recrystallized but do not carry large quantities of micas, chlorite or other platy minerals. 
 
ha – hectares 
Mineral Resource - Is a concentration or occurrence of natural, solid, inorganic or fossilized organic material in or 
on the Earth’s crust in such form and quantity and of such a grade or quality that it has reasonable prospects for 
economic extraction.  The location, quantity, grade, geological characteristics and continuity of a Mineral Resource 
are known, estimated or interpreted from specific geological evidence and knowledge.
Page 5 of 110
Inferred  Mineral  Resource  -  Is  that  part  of  a  Mineral  Resource  for  which  quantity  and  grade  or  quality  can  be 
estimated  on  the  basis  of  geological  evidence  and  limited  sampling  and  reasonably  assumed,  but  not  verified, 
geological  and  grade  continuity.    The  estimate  is  based  on  limited  information  and  sampling  gathered  through 
appropriate techniques from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drillholes. 
 
Indicated Mineral Resource - Is that part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or quality, densities, shape 
and  physical  characteristics  can  be  estimated  with  a  level  of  confidence  sufficient  to  allow  the  appropriate 
application of technical and economic parameters, to support mine planning and evaluation of the economic viability 
of the deposit.  The estimate is based on detailed and reliable exploration and testing information gathered through 
appropriate  techniques  from  locations  such  as  outcrops,  trenches,  pits,  workings  and  drillholes  that  are  spaced 
closely enough for geological and grade continuity to be reasonably assumed. 
 
Measured  Mineral  Resource    Is  that  part  of  a  Mineral  Resource  for  which  quantity,  grade  or  quality,  densities, 
shape, physical characteristics are so well established that they can be estimated with confidence sufficient to allow 
the appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to support production planning and evaluation of 
the  economic  viability  of  the  deposit.    The  estimate  is  based  on  detailed  and  reliable  exploration,  sampling  and 
testing  information  gathered  through  appropriate  techniques  from  locations  such  as  outcrops,  trenches,  pits, 
workings and drillholes that are spaced closely enough to confirm both geological and grade continuity. 
 
Mineral Reserve - Is the economically mineable part of a Measured or Indicated Mineral Resource demonstrated by 
at least a Preliminary Feasibility Study – based on CNI 43-101 requirements.  This Study must include adequate 
information on mining, processing, metallurgical, economic and other relevant factors that demonstrate, at the time 
of  reporting,  that  economic  extraction  can  be  justified.    A  Mineral  Reserve  includes  diluting  materials  and 
allowances for losses that may occur when the material is mined.   
 
NSR – Net smelter royalty 
 
Phyllite - A metamorphic rock, intermediate in grade between slate and mica schist. 
 
Probable Mineral Reserve - Reserves for which quantity and grade and/or quality are computed form information 
similar  to  that  used  for  proven  (measure)  reserves,  but  the  sites  for  inspection,  sampling,  and  measurement  are 
farther apart or are otherwise less adequately spaced. The degree of assurance, although lower than that for proven 
(measured) reserves, is high enough to assume continuity between points of observation.   
Proven  Mineral  Reserve  -  Reserves  for  which  (a)  quantity  is  computed  from  dimensions  revealed  in  outcrops, 
trenches, workings or drill holes; grade and/or quality are computed from the results of detailed sampling and (b) the 
sites for inspection, sampling and measurement are spaced so closely and the geologic character is so well defined 
that size, shape, depth and mineral content of reserves are well-established. 
Mesothermal  -  Refers  to  a  mineral  deposit  formed  at  moderate  depth  hence  at  "moderate"  temperature  and 
pressures: said of a hydrothermal mineral deposit formed at considerable depth and in the temperature range of 200 - 
300 degrees C. Also said of that environment. 
 
Metamorphism – The process by which the form or structure of rocks is changed by heat and pressure. 
 
Monzonites – Rock that contains abundant and approximately equal amounts of plagioclase and potash feldspar; it 
also contains subordinate amounts of biotite and hornblende, and sometimes minor quantities of orthopyroxene.  
 
Patented Mining Claim - A mineral claim  originally staked on land owned by in the United States Government, 
where all its associated mineral rights have been secured by the claimant from the U.S. Government in compliance 
with the laws and procedures relating to such claims, and title to the surface of the claim and the minerals beneath 
the surface have been transferred from the U.S. Government to the claimant. Annual mining claim assessment work 
is not required, and the patented claim is taxable real estate. Mining claims located on State of Alaska lands cannot 
be patented. 
 
Pegmatite  -  A  very  coarse-grained,  intrusive  igneous  rock  composed  of  interlocking  grains  usually  larger  than 
2.5 cm in size.
Page 6 of 110
Precambrian - Noting or pertaining to the earliest era of earth history, ending 570 million years ago, during which 
the earth's crust formed and life first appeared in the seas.  
 
Pyrite – A yellow iron sulphide mineral, normally of little value. It is sometimes referred to as “fool’s gold”. 
 
Quartz – Common rock-forming mineral consisting of silicon and oxygen. 
 
Schist –  Medium-grained to coarse-grained metamorphic rock composed of laminated, often flaky parallel layers of 
chiefly micaceous minerals. 
 
Shear  or  sheared  –  The  deformation  of  rocks  by  lateral  movement  along  innumerable  parallel  planes,  generally 
resulting from pressure and producing such metamorphic structures as cleavage and schistosity. 
 
Sphalerite - zinc bearing sulphide. 
 
st – short tons. 
 
stpy – short tons per year 
 
Sulphide – A compound of sulphur and some other element. 
 
t - ton 
 
Tailings - Fine grained or ground up material rejected from a mill after more of the recoverable valuable minerals 
have been extracted. Can also mean the waste material resulting from placer mining. 
 
Tertiary - Relating to the first period of the Cenozoic era, about 65 to 1.64 million years ago. 
 
tpy – tons per year 
 
Unpatented Mining Claim - A mineral claim staked on federal, state or, in the case of severed mineral rights, private 
land to which a deed from the U.S. Government or other mineral title owner has not been received by the claimant. 
Unpatented claims give the claimant the exclusive right to explore for and to develop the underlying minerals and 
use the surface for such purpose. However, the claimant does not own title to either the minerals or the surface, and 
the  claim  is  subject  to  annual  assessment  work  requirements  and  the  payment  of  annual  rental  fees  which  are 
established by  the  governing  authority  of  the  land on which  the  claim  is  located.  The  claim  may  or  may  not  be 
subject  to  production  royalties  payable  to  that  governing  authority  although  at  this  time  there  are  no  royalties 
payable on unpatented mining claims
General Information
We are a mineral exploration company engaged directly and indirectly through subsidiaries, in the acquisition of 
properties and the exploration for minerals and metals, primarily gold and silver.  Our business is currently in the 
exploratory  or  exploration  stage  as  defined  by  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (“ASC”)  915-10  and  SEC 
Industry  Guide  7  and,  to  date,  our  activities  have  not  included  development  or  mining  operations.    Our  primary 
property is the Caribou project (advanced exploration stage) located in Nederland, Colorado; however, we also have 
properties in Nye County, Nevada.
During the fiscal years ended May 31, 2010, 2009, 2008, 2007, 2006 and 2005, we experienced significant financial 
difficulties that left us substantially without cash, full-time employees or an ability to fund operations.  While we 
were  able  to  acquire  some  cash  through  equity  and  debt  financing  transactions,  this  cash  was  used  primarily  to 
provide operating funds, pay trade creditors and maintain our operating permits, properties and mineral interests. 
There  is  no  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  obtain  additional  funding  when  needed,  or  that  such  funding,  if 
available, can be obtained on terms acceptable to us or at all.  If we are unable to obtain additional funds we may be
Page 7 of 110
forced to curtail or case our activities.  Equity financing, if available, may result in substantial dilution to existing 
stockholders.
Currently, under U.S. GAAP, we have not completed sufficient and appropriate exploration work to determine if a 
viable mineral deposit or reserve exists in any of our properties.  Although we previously reported the existence of 
measured, indicated and inferred mineral resources on our Caribou project, these types of mineral resource estimates 
do not meet the current requirements of National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure of Mineral Projects 
issued  by  the  Canadian  Securities  Commission.  Investors  are  advised  that  while  terms  such  as  “measured,” 
“indicated”  and  “inferred”  mineral  resources  are  recognized  and  required  by  Canadian  regulations  and  Canadian 
GAAP, under which we previously reported, these terms are not recognized by the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission.  Accordingly, we will not know whether a commercially viable mineral deposit or a reserve exists on 
our  properties  until  sufficient  and  appropriate  exploration  work  is  done  and  a  comprehensive  evaluation  of  such 
work  concludes  economic  and  legal  feasibility.    The  estimation  of  measured,  indicated  and  inferred  mineral 
resources involves greater uncertainty as to their existence and economic feasibility than the estimation of proven 
and probable reserves.  U.S. investors are cautioned (i) not to assume that measured or indicated resources will be 
converted into reserves and (ii) not to assume that estimates of inferred mineral resources exist, are economically 
minable, or will be upgraded into measured or indicated mineral resources.  It cannot be assumed that the Company 
will identify any viable mineral resources on its properties or that any mineral reserves, if any, can be recovered 
profitably, if at all. We will require additional funds in the event any of the Company’s properties are capable of 
being advanced beyond the exploration stage.
All of the Company's property interests are in the exploration stage and do not contain any  "reserves",  as that term 
is defined in Industry Guide 7 adopted by the SEC. The term “reserves" is defined in Industry  Guide 7 as "that part 
of  a  mineral  deposit  which  could  be  economically  and  legally  extracted  or  produced  at  the  time  of  the  reserve 
determination."  Industry Guide 7 is available from the SEC's website at:
http://www.sec.gov/about/forms/industryguides.pdf.
Mineral  exploration  involves  significant  risk  and  few  properties  that  are  explored  are  ultimately  developed  into 
producing  mines.    The  probability  of  an  individual  prospect  ever  having  reserves  that  meet  the  requirements  of 
Industry  Guide  7  is  extremely  remote.    The  Company’s  property  interests,  in  all  probability,  do  not  contain  any 
reserves and any funds spent on exploration of the Company’s property interests will probably be lost. If any of the 
Company's exploration programs are successful, the Company will require additional funds to advance the property 
beyond the exploration stage.  Substantial expenditures are required to establish reserves through drilling, to develop 
metallurgical processes to extract the metal from the ore and, in the case of new properties, to develop the mining 
and  processing  facilities  and  infrastructure  at  any  site  chosen  for  mining.    If  the  Company  is  unable  to  secure 
additional funding, the Company may lose its interest in one or more of its mineral claims and/or may be required to 
cease all activities. 
 
The address of our principal executive offices and our telephone and facsimile numbers at that address are:
Calais Resources Inc. 
4415 Caribou Rd  (PO Box 653) 
Nederland, Colorado 80466-0653 
Telephone No.: (303) 258-3806 
Facsimile No.: (303) 258-0402
Our legal name is Calais Resources Inc.  We were incorporated under the laws of British Columbia, Canada, on 
December 30, 1986 under the name “Millennium Resources Inc.”  We changed our name to Calais Resources Inc. 
on March 19, 1992.  Our Common Shares trade on the Pink Sheets under trading symbol “CAAUF.PK”.  Our fiscal 
year ends May 31st.
Page 8 of 110
Inter-corporate Relationships
Organization Chart
Calais  Resources  Inc.,  a  British  Columbia  corporation,  owns  100%  of  the  common  shares  of  Calais  Resources 
Colorado, Inc., a Nevada corporation, and Calais Resources Nevada, Inc., a Nevada corporation.
Calais  Resources  Colorado,  Inc.  owns  our  interests  in  the  Caribou  prospect.    Calais  Resources  Nevada,  Inc.,  a 
Nevada corporation, owns the Company’s interest in mineral prospects in Nevada (the “Manhattan prospect”).
Business of Calais
We  are  in  the  business  of  researching,  acquiring,  and  exploring  for  minerals  on  our  prospects,  with  the  goal  of 
producing minerals on our prospects.  Our corporate philosophy has been to seek out and acquire other potential 
gold prospects.
If  we  identify  prospects,  we  endeavor  to  acquire  the  rights  to  the  prospect  and  surrounding  claims.  During  the 
acquisition  process,  we  also  proceed  through  a  due  diligence  period  to  the  commencement  of  a  full  scientific 
analysis  of  the  district,  followed  by  an  exploration  program.  Suitable  results  at  each  step  in  the  process  are  a 
prerequisite to further exploration.  Upon suitable identification of a mineral deposit and reserve, of which there can 
be no assurance, we will then make the decision to either proceed with the development and mining thereof, to joint 
venture with another mining or exploration company, or to sell the prospect outright.
Exploration of mineral resources can be expensive.  Through the years, we have accomplished limited exploration 
activities with funds provided through debt and equity investment.  We have been using, and expect to continue to 
use, the net proceeds from periodic capital raising activities to expand our exploration operations on our Caribou 
project in Colorado and to commence exploration operations on the Manhattan prospect in Nevada.
If we reach the development and mining stages for any of our prospects, which cannot be assured, we plan to seek 
additional capital through equity and/or debt financing, and we may have to sell an interest in our prospects, enter 
into joint venture or other arrangements, or otherwise dilute our interest in our mineral properties in order to attract 
third-party  financing.    We  will  likely  only  be  able  to  attract  interest  in  our  mineral  prospects  on  commercially-
reasonable terms if we are able to show positive results from our exploration programs and our other work, such as 
core drilling, sufficient to attract third-party financing or industry participants.  There are no assurances we will be 
able to obtain any additional funding or, if we do obtain such funding, that it will be on terms acceptable to us.
Our activities on our mineral interests are not significantly affected by seasonality. See “Item 2. Properties.”
Page 9 of 110
The raw materials that we need for our mineral exploration activities consist of readily available consumables such 
as fuel and equipment.  We also contract with third parties for some of these activities and, at this time, we believe 
there  is  no  shortage  of  these  materials  or  contractors  available  at  reasonable  prices,  although  the  prices  and 
availability of these materials or services can be volatile.
Since we have not yet produced any gold or silver for sale, we have not developed any marketing channels.  If we do 
produce  precious  metals,  which  cannot  be  assured,  we  believe  there  are  numerous  outlets  for  the  sale  of  any 
production.
Our operations and our prospective operations are not dependent on any intellectual property patents or licenses, 
industrial, commercial, or financial contracts, or new manufacturing processes.
Government Regulations and Rules
The prospects which we are exploring are subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations governing 
prospecting,  exploration,  development,  production,  labor  standards,  occupational  health,  mine  safety,  control  of 
toxic substances, and other matters involving environmental protection and taxation. U.S. and foreign environmental 
protection laws address, among other things, the maintenance of air and water quality standards, the preservation of 
threatened  and  endangered  species  of  wildlife  and  vegetation,  the  preservation  of  certain  archaeological  sites, 
reclamation, and limitations on the generation, transportation, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes.  
There can be no assurance that all the required permits and governmental approvals necessary for any mining project 
with which we may be associated can be obtained on a timely basis, or maintained as required by the operator of the 
project.  We have spent a significant amount of money complying with the environmental laws in the United States, 
Colorado and Boulder County in connection with our operations on the Caribou project. We will incur additional 
expenses for environmental compliance should we undertake any significant activities on our other prospects.
We are not aware of any proposed or existing United States regulations pertaining to environmental matters which 
might have a material impact on our future financial performance. Nevertheless, the applicable governmental bodies 
can  change  the  current  rules  and  regulations  in  accordance  with  their  procedural  requirements,  and  certain 
governmental  employees  may  interpret  existing  rules  and  regulations  in  a  manner  that  we  do  not  believe  is 
consistent with the intent of those rules or regulations.  Should the regulations or their interpretation change, the 
changes  may  have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  our  operations.  See  also  “Item  3.  Legal  Proceedings  –  Nevada 
Environmental Issues.”
On July 21, 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the “Dodd-Frank Act”) was 
signed into law.  Section 1503 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires issuers that either directly or indirectly through a 
subsidiary operate a “coal or other mine,” as defined in the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (the “Mine 
Safety Act”), to disclose, in each periodic report filed with the SEC, certain mine safety information relating to the 
period covered by such report.  However, because we are in the exploratory stage, we do not meet the definitions put 
forth by the Mine Safety Act and, therefore, are exempt from the Dodd-Frank Act Section 1503 disclosures.  We are 
committed to providing a safe and healthy work environment and, upon meeting the Mine Safety Act definitions, 
will provide mining safety disclosures as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. 
Conflict minerals, as defined by the Dodd-Frank Act, are not necessary to the functionality or production of our 
products.
Competition
There are a large number of other companies in the United States and abroad that are engaged in the exploration and 
development of prospects for gold and silver.  Many of these companies have achieved production and, therefore, 
have  cash  flow  and  have  financial  strength  that  exceeds  our  financial  strength.    While  we  compete  with  these 
companies in attempting to locate and acquire mineral properties, the market for our possible future production of 
minerals tends to be commodity-oriented, rather than company or brand oriented.  Additionally, readily available 
markets  exist  worldwide  for  the  sale  of  mineral  products.    Therefore,  we  will  likely  be  able  to  sell  any  mineral 
products that we identify and produce.
Page 10 of 110
We expect to compete by keeping our production costs low through judicious selection of which portions of the 
property  to  develop,  if  development  is  warranted,  and  by  keeping  overhead  charges  within  industry  standards.   
There can be no assurance that our current mineral interests or any additional mineral resource properties we may 
acquire in the future will yield reserves or result in commercial mining operations.
Property Exploration and Maintenance Activities
Our property exploration and drilling activities were severely limited during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2010, 
2009,  2008,  2007,  2006  and  2005  due  to  working  capital  shortages  as  described  previously.    The  following 
discussion describes our exploration and maintenance activities during those periods.
During  our  2004  fiscal  year,  we  commenced  a  drilling  program  on  our  Caribou  project  which  was  intended  to 
expand the mineral resources we had already identified on this property. During September and October 2003, we 
drilled two core holes at a cost of approximately $250,000, and subsequently drilled an additional four holes at a 
cost of approximately $500,000. We also have updated all of the geologic information about the Caribou project in a 
three-dimensional program which we expect will assist us in determining future exploration activities and whether 
additional  development  drilling  is  warranted.  We  have  not  identified  any  reserves  or  determined  whether 
commencement  of  commercial  production  is  warranted.    Subject  to  receipt  of  adequate  funding,  a  pilot  scale 
underground mining program and additional exploration drilling program are expected to commence in the summer 
of 2011 to further identify potential mining areas and confirm mining methods and operating costs.  The results of 
these programs will be used to further evaluate the Caribou project.  We have continuously maintained all of our 
permits, including exploration, operating, water discharge, air quality control, and explosive licenses.  We have also 
commissioned  technical reports on our  assets.    These  Canadian National  Instrument  43 – 101 Technical  Reports 
were completed in February 2011 and were filed on SEDAR.  We did not conduct any additional exploration work 
on  our  Nevada  prospect  during  the  years  ended  May  31,  2010,  2009,  2008,  2007,  2006  and  2005  due  to  the 
aforementioned working capital shortages, but we continue to fund a significant amount of work to ascertain the 
status of title to the Nevada prospect.  Furthermore, we obtained an agreement from Marlowe Harvey (a significant 
shareholder, former officer and director of the Company, and the person who has agreed to transfer a significant 
portion  of  the  Manhattan  prospect  to  Calais)  pursuant  to  which  he  recognized  his  responsibility  to  provide  us 
evidence of good title to the mineral interests in Nevada.  Mr. Harvey and certain affiliates have assigned the title 
they hold in the Nevada properties to us, but there are other title conflict issues that must be resolved.  Although we 
believe we have enforceable contractual rights to acquire title to the disputed mineral interests in Nevada, at the 
present  time  issues  surrounding  the  ownership  of  those  mineral  interests  remain.  See  “Item  2.  Properties  – 
Manhattan  Prospect;  Nevada,  USA:  Gold  Exploration.”    We  have  been  assigned  only  portions  of  the  ownership 
interest in these properties, and have located 56 of our own unpatented claims in the area.  We have recorded notice 
of our joint venture agreement concerning the prospect, and the 2004 Settlement Agreement with Argus Resources, 
Inc. (“Argus”), Nevada Manhattan Mining, Inc. (“NMMI”) and Moran Holdings, Ltd., in Nye County, Nevada.
During  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2005,  we  sent  a  team  to  Panama  to  explore  our  Panamanian  mineral 
concessions in the Faja de Oro District due, in part, to performance obligations stipulated in an agreement between 
us and our partners in Panama dated September 2005.  It was later determined that the concession applications and 
the concession originally issued for the original exploitation concession were not of a status with the Panamanian 
government that exploration could be pursued without further processing of the concession applications in Panama 
and the official re-issuance of the exploitation concession.  The issuance of these documents was the responsibility 
of the Panama companies, and the Panama companies were unable to produce written evidence of such issuance, in 
violation of our agreement with them.  After extensive correspondence with the Panama companies regarding these 
concessions,  management  determined  that  it  was  unable  to  conduct  exploration  activities  in  Panama  absent  the 
formal issuance of these concessions by the Panamanian government.  In 2007, the Panama companies declared us 
to  be  in  default;  we  protested  and  declared  the  Panama  companies  to  be  in  default.    We  have  since  initiated 
arbitration with the International Center of Dispute Resolution (“ICDR”), the international division of the American 
Arbitration Association, seeking damages of $995,000.  There can be no assurance of a positive outcome for this 
arbitration  and,  in  the  event  the  outcome  is  positive,  there  can  be  no  assurance  as  to  the  collectability  of  assets 
pursuant to a judgment.  We do not intend to pursue any further exploration activities in Panama.
Page 11 of 110
During  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2010,  2009,  2008,  2007,  2006,  and  2005,  we  incurred  exploration  and 
business development and general and administrative expenses as follows:
Exploration and Business 
Development Expenses 
General and Administrative Expenses
Fiscal Year Ended May 31,
2010
2009
$64,541
$61,979
2008
$107,164
2007
(unaudited)
$80,263
2006
(unaudited)
$84,207
2005
(unaudited) 
$334,658
$1,060,289
$1,013,858
$1,374,817
$1,069,686
$860,332
$918,131
Exploration and business development expenses consist of filing fees, legal agreement expense, subcontractor fees 
associated  with  exploration  activities,  salaries,  wages  and  benefits  associated  with  exploration  activities,  asset 
retirement  costs,  and  other  miscellaneous  expenses  directly  related  to  exploration  activities.    General  and 
administrative  expenses  during  this  time  consisted  primarily  of  accounting  and  consulting  fees,  legal  fees, 
administrative salaries, wages and benefits, travel and other general office costs.
Title of Mining Claims in the United States
It  has  been  our  practice  to  obtain  policies  of  title  insurance  upon  our  patented  mining  claims  as  they  have  been 
acquired.  However, title insurance has generally been acquired in the amount of the purchase price of the mineral 
interests acquired.  Such coverage would not afford adequate protection against the loss of mineral values, or the 
expenditure  of  funds  on  exploration  should  a  title  defect  create  a  loss.    If  commercial  mineral  deposits  were 
discovered  on  our  patented  mining  claims,  the  value  of  such  deposits  would  almost  certainly  greatly  exceed  the 
original purchase price of those mineral interests, as the purchase price was often predicated on then current surface 
values.  Title insurance coverage would almost certainly be inadequate to compensate for the loss of such values.  
The value of the surface land package in the area of our patented mineral claims has tended to increase substantially 
with time making it more difficult to establish a loss should a defect to title be discovered.
There are unavoidable risks in holding unpatented mining claims located under the United States General Mining 
Law,  including  potential  challenges  to  the  validity  of  any  claimed  discovery,  a  challenge  as  to  whether  claimed 
discoveries would satisfy the prudent man rule, potential errors in location or recording, and the risk of changes in 
the law or regulations.  Claims upon which no actual discovery exists are held by virtue of the doctrine of pedis 
possessio,  which  involves  the  occupation  of  claimed  mining  ground  while  engaged  in  a  diligent  search  for  a 
discovery of valuable minerals.  There can be no guarantee that pedis possessio rights would be recognized as to any 
or  all  of  our  unpatented  mining  claims  in  Colorado  or  Nevada  if  challenged  by  a  third  party.    There  can  be  no 
guarantee that any claimed discovery on unpatented grounds would survive challenge by the federal government, if 
the government sought to challenge our title or right to occupy the ground.  No challenges are currently outstanding 
either by adverse locators, or by the Federal government.
Colorado
Calais, its predecessors and their joint venture partners, have periodically dedicated substantial time and effort to 
detect and to cure any title problems which have been identified concerning the patented mining claims. These past 
efforts have included full record title searches on key prospects.  Recently, we have worked with one of our lenders 
to  remove  additional  title  exceptions  from  the  lender’s  policy  issued  to  them.    These  searches  have  focused, 
however, on the Caribou Mine interests and the Cross Mine interests, which were the subject of past or historical 
mining activity.  The majority of the patented acreage owned or controlled by the Company is located at Caribou, 
Colorado, and past exploration activity has focused on both the Caribou and Cross Mine project areas. We have 
relied  upon  title  insurance  and  title  searches  focusing  on  the  period  1974  to  date,  and/or  updating  information 
contained in the title policies as issued or re-issued.  See also “Item 2. Properties.”
Page 12 of 110
Nevada
We have received a litigation title commitment and updated commitment on the patented properties which are a part 
of the Manhattan prospect in Nevada, and initial title reports, on the unpatented claims, from a qualified Nevada 
landman.  These reports have been utilized in the initiation of the first stages of title curative work. As described in 
more  detail  in  “Item 2.  Properties  -    Manhattan  Prospect;  Nevada, USA:  Gold  Exploration” we  cannot offer  any 
assurance that we can obtain full and complete title to the 28 patented mining claims included in the Manhattan 
prospect.  However,  we  have  received  record  title  to  a  percentage  of  such  patented  claims  and  have  recorded  a 
Settlement Agreement granting us the right to purchase NMMI’s interest in the claims, and our 24.5% joint venture 
interest, and granting Calais exclusive operational rights.  Additional title curative work must still be completed to 
justify a significant expenditure on exploration of the property.  Such work is now in the early stages of completion. 
Likewise,  we  cannot  offer  any  assurance  that  we  can  obtain  good  title  to  the  28  patented  mining  claims  that 
constitute a portion of the Manhattan prospect.  See also “Item 2. Properties.”
Employees
As  of  the  end  of  our  2009  fiscal  year,  we  had  two  full-time  employees:  David  Young,  our  President  and  Chief 
Executive Officer, and Thomas Hendricks, our Vice President of Exploration and Corporate Development. We have 
used  and  continue  to  use  independent  contractors  for  our  mineral  operations  and  certain  day-to-day  business 
operations, as necessary.  In January 2011, R. David Russell was appointed to our Board of Directors and he was 
elected  as  the  Chairman.    He  also  assumed  the  position  of  Chief  Executive  Officer.  David  Young  remains  the 
President of the Company and, in January 2011, was appointed the Chief Operating Officer.
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS.
Not required for Smaller Reporting Companies.
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not required for Smaller Reporting Companies. 
 
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES.
Executive Offices
As of May 31, 2009, and the date of this report, our U.S. corporate offices were located in Lakewood, Colorado. We 
currently lease approximately 200 square feet at a rate of $262 per month for our corporate offices on a month-to-
month basis from a non-affiliated third party.
Caribou project, Colorado, USA: Gold/Silver Exploration
Caribou Project 
 
Calais owns or controls 129 patented claims (consolidating separate interests in the same claim as a single claim) 
and 105 unpatented mineral claims in a 3.5 square mile area, which comprise the Consolidated Caribou District. In 
general, these claims can be classified as:
•  The Calais Patented Claims, which comprise the Caribou and Cross Projects. These claims include most of 
the currently disturbed and proposed development property at the Cross Mine (which is an underground 
mine). Calais owns the mineral rights to all these claims; and
•  The  Caribou  Property  (Upper)  Claims  represent  the  majority  of  the  Consolidated  Caribou  District  land 
holdings.  Aardvark  Agencies,  Inc.  (“AAI”)  is  the  “nominee  owner”  of  a  portion  of  the  claims,  which
Page 13 of 110
comprise the Caribou Property. As “nominee owner”, AAI holds record title to the parcel, however Calais 
retains the right to occupy, explore, mine, develop, build, and/or re-acquire the property.  AAI is controlled 
by Marlowe Harvey, a former officer, director and significant shareholder of the Company. Following a 
series  of  transactions  between  AAI,  Mr. Harvey,  Calais,  and  Mr.  Hendricks, which  resulted  in  litigation 
brought  by  Mr. Hendricks  against  Mr.  Harvey,  AAI,  Mr. Hendricks  and  Calais  entered  into  a  mutual 
release and settlement agreement effective July 18, 2000.  This agreement, which was modified in 2004, 
provides that we have the right to reacquire the claims held by AAI for a debenture (which we have already 
paid  to  AAI)  and  for  a  payment  from  Calais  to  AAI  of  “a  cash  amount  equal  to  pay  the  capital  gains 
triggered by the transfer” to Calais (which his ultimately deducted from the debenture).  In March 2004, 
Mr. Harvey and his affiliates entered into a settlement agreement with Calais which, among other things, 
included a more precise definition of Calais’ right (which expires August 31, 2011, but can be extended for 
an additional ten years if AAI’s right to convert the debenture is extended as well) to repurchase the interest 
of AAI in the Caribou prospect, including the payment of Cdn$747,728 for the reacquisition, and AAI’s 
right  to  convert  that  debenture  before  it  is  paid.    That  agreement,  also  defined  Calais’  right  to  borrow 
against, enter in and upon the mineral interests in the Caribou prospect owned by AAI, construct buildings 
and mines on those prospects, and remove and sell minerals from Caribou for Calais’ own account.
The unpatented mining claims are located on federal lands and are subject to federal as well as state jurisdiction, and 
the requirements of the U.S. General Mining Law. Patented and unpatented claims are listed in Exhibit 99.1 filed 
with this report. 
 
We are engaged in the location of additional unpatented mining claims.  There is no guarantee that additional federal 
lands  will  remain  open  to  location,  or  that  the  General  Mining  Law  will  not  be  repealed  or  amended.  Repeated 
attempts have been made in Congress over recent decades to repeal or to modify the General Mining Law. 
 
The vast majority of exploration to date on Calais’ lands has taken place on patented claims.  Under the General 
Mining Law, as amended, unpatented claims may only be validly located by the making of a discovery, within the 
meaning of that law, upon open lands within the exterior boundaries of the claims.  Though mineralization has been 
encountered on some of the unpatented claims, there can be no guarantee that there is a valid discovery on any of 
those claims.  The patenting of mining claims, done with relative ease during the period 1872-1920, is now very 
difficult,  and  most  patent  applications  are  either  suspended  or  prohibited  from  being  filed.    Thus,  there  is  no 
likelihood for the acquisition of a fee title to any of the unpatented lands, and unpatented claims now held are held 
subject to potentially adverse changes in laws and regulations governing them.  
 
As  of  May  31,  2005  through  May  31,  2010,  we  had  recorded  the  following  amounts  for  mineral  interests  and 
Furniture, fixtures and equipment (net of depreciation and impairments) on the Caribou project:  
 
 
 
 
Mineral Interests 
Furniture 
Fixtures and 
Equipment 
 
Location of Property 
 
The Property is approximately 35 minutes from the city of Boulder, to the town of Nederland along Colorado State 
Highway 119. The road access from Nederland to the Project is about 15 minutes, over 4.7mi (7.6km) of County 
Road 128. The Project has year around access. The Project site is adjacent to the county road. See Figure 2-1.
Fiscal Year Ended May 31, 
2008 
2007
$495,573
(unaudited)
(unaudited)
(unaudited)
2010
2009
$313,073
$279,956
2006
2005
$-
$-
$-
$-
$-
$-
$-
$-
$-
Page 14 of 110
Figure 2-1
Caribou Project Location Map
Royalties, Agreements and Encumbrances 
 
Calais’  129  patented  claims  were  acquired  in  approximately  three  dozen  acquisitions  over  a  period  of  39  years. 
Calais  has  obtained  a  master  title  policy  covering nearly  all  of  the  project  properties,  including properties  in  the 
permit area.  The major acquisitions for patented lands within the resource area and permit area are described below. 
Additionally, three claims are leased from the Duane Smith Trust, also discussed below.  See Exhibit 99.1 which is 
filed with this report. 
 
Significant Patented Claim Acquisitions 
 
Cross Property Acquisition – Dofflemyer Group 
 
The Cross Property, consisting of 15-patented claims, was acquired in August 1987 by Hendricks Mining Co., from 
the  Dofflemyer  family  by  Warranty  Deed.    These  claims  were  subsequently  transferred  to  Calais  Resources 
Colorado, Inc. by deed dated March 30, 1998.  Twelve of theses patented claims (Cross lode, Cross No. 2, Cross 
mill site, Crown Point lode, Juliet lode, Mammoth lode, Protection lode, Rare Metals lode, Rare Metals mill site, 
Romeo lode, Syndicate lode and Tacoma lode) are located in the area of modern underground development and/or 
permit disturbance area. 
 
Potosi Group Acquisition
Page 15 of 110
The Potosi properties, consisting of 4-patented claims, were acquired in February 1988 by Hendricks Mining Co., 
from  the  William  M.  Warren  and  Aquarius  Mining  Co.  by  Warranty  Deed.    These  claims  were  subsequently 
transferred to Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. by deed dated March 30, 1998.  These patented claims (Alpine lode, 
Gold Coin lode, Potosi lode, and Worcester lode) are in located in the area of resource potential.  
 
Wolcott Group Acquisition 
 
The Wolcott properties, consisting of 4-patented claims, were acquired in February 1988 by Hendricks Mining Co., 
from  the  Wolcott  family  by  Warranty  Deed.    These  claims  were  subsequently  transferred  to  Calais  Resources 
Colorado, Inc. by deed dated April 8, 1998.  These patented claims (5/8 interest Garfield lode, Ready Cash lode, 
Silver Brick lode, and Defiance lode) are located near the area of resource potential. Only the Garfield lode touches 
the area of resource potential. 
 
Tallman Group 
 
The Tall properties, consisting of 4 patented claims, were acquired in November 1987 by Hendricks Mining Co., 
from  the  Tallman  family  by  Warranty  Deed.    These  claims  were  subsequently  transferred  to  Calais  Resources 
Colorado, Inc. by deed dated April 8, 1998.  Of these patented claims (3/8 interest Garfield lode, Ponderosa lode, 
Monticello lode and Chief lode) only the Garfield lode touches the resource area. 
 
Aardvark Patented Claim Acquisitions 
 
New York Lode and Millsite; the Brazilian lode and Millsite 
 
The  New  York  lode  and  mill  site  were  acquired  by  the  Company  from  William  M.  Warren  and  Richard  A. 
Sigismond by Warranty Deed in October 1997 as part of a larger acquisition.  Only the New York mill site claim is 
within the area of resource potential and the permit area.  The Brazilian lode and Brazilian mill site claims were 
acquired by Aardvark Agencies, Inc. (“AAI”) by Sheriff’s deed (after assignment of the Certificate of Purchase from 
LNRS, LLC, the successors in title by Sheriff’s sale to the interest of Nederland Mines, Inc.) on December 17, 1998. 
The Brazilian lode claim is in the area of resource potential and the Brazilian mill site claim is within the permit area 
(a small portion is in the area of resource potential). 
 
The  New  York  mill  site,  Brazilian  lode  and  Brazilian  mill  site  patented  claims  were  transferred  (together  with 
others,  totaling  78  properties)  to  AAI  as  part  of  a  larger  financing  transaction  involving  AAI.    An  agreement 
executed  in  1999  assigned  a  100%  interest  in  the  right  to  acquire  35  claims  from  third  parties  to  AAI  for  $0.5 
million.  An agreement executed in 2000 assigned a 100% interest in an additional 43 claims to AAI for $3.5 million 
($1.2 million cash and $2.3 million note).  Both transfers were made subject to a recorded right to redeem and re-
acquire held by the Company and further subject to a note and deed of trust in the amount of $2.3 million, held by 
the  Company.    The  Company  has  10-years  to  redeem  or  re-acquire  the  properties.    As  discussed  above,  in 
March 2004,  Mr. Harvey  and  his  affiliates  entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  with  Calais  which,  among  other 
things, included a more precise definition of Calais’ right (which expires August 31, 2011, but can be extended for 
an additional ten years if AAI’s right to convert the debenture is extended as well) to repurchase the interest of AAI 
in the Caribou prospect, including the payment of Cdn$747,728 for the reacquisition, and AAI’s right to convert that 
debenture before it is paid.  AAI is delinquent on the $2.3 million note to the Company.  No royalties were assigned 
or  transferred to  AAI.    The Deed of  Trust,  recorded February 1999, from  AAI  to  the Public  Trustee  of  Boulder 
County, for the benefit of the Company, securing an original principal indebtedness of $2.3 million affects the New 
York mill site, Brazilian lode and Brazilian mill site patented claims.  This Deed of Trust is purported to subordinate 
to the lien filed below. 
 
In August 2003, AAI and the Company entered into deeds of trust against the Caribou property in connection with a 
loan  for  $4.5  million  (the  “Broadway  Loan”)  from  Broadway  Mortgage  Corporation,  Michael  E.  Haws,  Kemp 
Hanley, R. Britton Colbert, Accounts Plus, Inc. and Riviera Holdings, LLC.  The Broadway Loan was acquired after 
a series of assignments by Brigus Gold Corp. as part of the Company’s debt restructuring described below. 
 
Duane Smith Trust Lease
Page 16 of 110
The Duane Smith Trust has leased 3-patented claims to Hendricks Mining Co.  The claims are the Laramie County 
lode, Homestead lode and Gilpin County lode, totaling 9.77ac (3.95ha).  Portions of the three claims are part of the 
permit area.  Portions of the Smith properties are traversed by the historical mine access road, this road pre-dates the 
location and patent of the Smith claims. 
 
The  Smith  property  was  originally  leased  by  Calais’  predecessors  in  August  1987.    The  Smith  property  was  re-
leased to Calais in 2003 for a period of 15-years, and may be extended for three additional five-year periods.  The 
lease specifically grants to the lessee the right to haul, process, mine, transport, store, mill, treat, or transport on or 
across  the  Leased  Premises  supplies,  ore,  rock,  minerals,  waste,  concentrates  or  other  material  from  adjacent  or 
nearby properties worked or owned by lessee and/or its assigns.  These rights shall be known as the “Cross Mining 
Rights”. Each party shall have the right to utilize existing, historical access roads, crossing the properties for all 
purposes. 
 
The lease provides for a 3.5% NSR royalty on all minerals, ores, metals, concentrates, or other materials extracted 
and shipped from the Leased Premises.  As no mining has or is scheduled to occur on these claims, and all activities 
involve historical access, no production royalties are incurred.  The lease specifies for a minimum advance royalty 
of $3,000/yr. for years one through five, $4,000/yr. for years six through ten, $5,000/yr. for years 11 through 15.  
The first 5-year lease extension is $7,500/yr. and then escalated thereafter.  The minimum advance royalty may be 
offset with paid production royalties.  The Company is responsible for all property and personal taxes on the leased 
property. Additionally,  any  severance or  production  taxes,  levied  on  the  leased  claims,  are  apportioned.   We  are 
obligated  to  maintain  liability  insurance,  accidental  injury  or  death  insurance  and  workman’s  compensation 
insurance for the term of the lease.  These leased claims are encumbered by the July 2003 Deed of Trust from Calais 
for the benefit of Broadway Mortgage Company described above. 
 
Congo Chief Acquisition 
 
On October 26, 2005, we acquired the 20-acre Congo Chief patented lode mining claim from the Estate of John W. 
Snyder for a price of $280,000.  This large, patented lode claim was in the immediate vicinity of other claims held 
by us and by AAI.  We acquired the claim with the assistance MFPI Partners, LLC, which provided funding for the 
acquisition, and which holds a first deed of trust on the subject property in the amount of $258,956.  This note was 
originally  payable  on  February  21,  2006,  subject  to  any  applicable  extensions.    We  defaulted  on  the  note  and 
negotiated with MFPI Partners and were unable to reach a formal resolution to the default.  In February 2010 this 
note was acquired by Brigus Gold as part of our debt restructure discussed below.  
 
Royalties 
 
Calais Patented Claims 
 
All  of  the Patented  Claims  carry  a 2% NSR  royalty  expiring no  earlier  than  January  27, 2018.   The 2% royalty 
expires at later dates as to other claims among the 129 patented claims and 105 unpatented claims, which royalty is 
also subject to the repurchase agreement.  The Company has negotiated with the main royalty holder regarding an 
extension of the royalty agreements.  The January 1993 agreement allows repurchasing the 2% NSR royalty at any 
time during the term for $1.5 million.  The royalties are payable to Thomas S. Hendricks, the estate of Marjorie J. 
Hendricks and John R. Henderson. 
 
The New York mill site claim carries a 2% NSR until April 2018.  The April 1998 document allows repurchasing 
1% of the 2% NSR royalty at any time during the term for $0.75 million.  The royalties are payable to Thomas S. 
Hendricks, the Estate of Marjorie J. Hendricks and John R. Henderson. 
 
Additionally, several of the mineral interests acquired by us or AAI are subject to royalty reservations in favor of 
prior owners of those interests, some of which are discussed above.  A total of nine of the patented mining claims 
bear net smelter return royalties in amounts varying from 1.325% to 3.5% of net smelter returns.  The terms of these 
royalties vary from perpetual to a lifetime interest only. 
 
An additional royalty interest may affect 15 claims in the vicinity of the Cross Mine.  A royalty buy down which 
occurred in the 1980’s reduced the applicability of this 5% royalty to periods when the gold price was above $800
Page 17 of 110
per ounce.  The price of gold has recently risen above this level for the first time since the buy down occurred.  On 
April  4,  2008,  this  royalty  was  renegotiated  with  the  holder,  Tusco  Incorporated.    The  new  terms  of  the  royalty 
agreement allow for a complete purchase of the royalty from Tusco for $150,000 payable at any time through April 
4,  2028  (or  three  years  after  the  death  of  the  president  of  Tusco).    As  consideration  for  the  execution  of  the 
agreement, we issued 250,000 common shares of our stock to Tusco.  An additional payment of $1,500 per month 
will be made to Tusco during the term of this agreement or, if shorter, the lifetime of the president of Tusco.   
 
The payment of royalties upon production, if it occurs, can negatively affect the economics of a prospective mining 
operation, and may hinder our ability to finance such operations.  As no production decision has been reached as to 
Calais’  mineral  interests  at  Caribou,  the  impact  of  existing  royalty  agreements  upon  our  ability  to  develop  any 
mineralization discovered has not been determined.  
 
The Duffy Note 
 
On August 1, 2005, the Company issued a note (the “Duffy Note”) payable to a group of shareholders, Duane A. 
Duffy, Glenn E. Duffy, Luke Garvey and James Ober, (collectively, the “Duffy Group”),  for $807,650, in exchange 
for  $681,000  originally  infused  into  the  Company  as  Share  Capital,  and  interest  accrued  from  the  date  of  each 
infusion totaling $126,650.  The Duffy Note was secured by a trust deed on the majority of the patented properties 
titled in the Company. By October 31, 2005, the Company was in default. Since then, the note was renegotiated and 
restructured several times until February 2010, when the principal and accrued interest totaled approximately $1.1 
million.  
 
In March 2010, the Duffy Note was acquired by Brigus Gold Corp. as part of the Company’s debt restructure as 
described below. 
 
Defaults 
 
Prior  to  February  1,  2010,  Calais  was  in  default  on  approximately  $10.6  million  of  indebtedness  based  on  the 
following:
Note Amount
(approximate)
$7,700,000 
1,450,000 
   $380,000 
       9,530,000 
  1,100,000 
$10,630,000
Broadway Loan  
Additional Caribou Loan  
Congo Chief Note  
Purchase Agreement  
Duffy Note  
Total Debt  
 
Brigus Gold (Apollo Gold) Transaction 
 
On December 9, 2009, Apollo Gold Corporation (now Brigus Gold Corp., “Brigus”) entered into a letter of intent 
(the “New LOI”) with the Company and Elkhorn Goldfields LLC (“Elkhorn Goldfields”) pursuant to which Elkhorn 
Goldfields agreed to purchase all the outstanding capital stock in Montana Tunnels Mining, Inc., a wholly owned 
subsidiary  of  Brigus  (“Montana  Tunnels”).  Brigus  agreed  to  sell  all  of  the  capital  stock  of  Montana  Tunnels  in 
exchange  for  (i)  promissory  notes  held  by  Elkhorn  Goldfields  and  certain  investors  in  Elkhorn  Goldfields  or  its 
affiliates (the “Lenders”) from Calais and AAI with an outstanding balance of approximately $7,700,000 relating to 
the  Broadway  Loan  (the  “Original  Notes”),  (ii)  Elkhorn’s  and  the  Lenders’  rights  with  respect  to  an  additional 
amount of approximately $1.45 million loaned to Calais (the “Additional Caribou Loan”) and (iii) a promissory note 
held by Elkhorn Goldfields and the Lenders from Calais with an outstanding balance of approximately $380,000 
(the “Congo Chief Note” and, together with the Original Notes and the Additional Caribou Loan, the “Notes”).  The 
Original  Notes  and  the  Congo  Chief  Note  are  secured  by  certain  deeds  of  trust  registered  against  the  Caribou 
property. 
 
On  February  1,  2010,  Brigus,  Elkhorn  Goldfields  and  Calais  entered  into  a  definitive  purchase  agreement  (the 
“Purchase  Agreement”).   Pursuant  to  terms  of  the  Purchase  Agreement,  Brigus  sold  all  of  the  capital  stock  of
Page 18 of 110
Montana  Tunnels  in  exchange  for  the  Notes.   The  Elkhorn Goldfields’  and  the  Lenders’  security  interests  in  the 
properties against which the Original Notes and the Congo Chief Note are secured were transferred to Brigus as part 
of the transaction.  The Original Notes matured on July 31, 2005 (although they were never repaid) and bear interest 
at  the  rate  of  12.9%  per  annum.   The  Congo  Chief  Note  matured  on  February  21,  2006  (although  it  was  never 
repaid) and bears interest at the rate of 12% per annum or a default rate of 18% per annum.  Pursuant to the Purchase 
Agreement, Brigus agreed to forebear on the Original Notes and the Congo Chief Note (each of which, as noted 
above, is past due) until February 1, 2011.  In connection with the Purchase Agreement, Calais agreed to execute 
and  deliver  a  promissory  note  to  Brigus  evidencing  the  Additional  Caribou  Loan  (the  “Additional  Unsecured 
Note”).  The Additional Unsecured Note bears interest at the rate of eight percent per annum and has a maturity date 
of February 1, 2011.   
 
On March 12, 2010, Brigus, Calais, and the Duffy Group entered into a purchase agreement (the “Duffy Purchase 
Agreement”) pursuant to which Brigus agreed, subject to the terms and conditions contained in the Duffy Purchase 
Agreement, to issue 1,592,733 common shares to the Duffy Group in exchange for the assignment of their rights, 
title and interest in and to, among other things, the Duffy Note. 
 
The Duffy Group’s security interests in the property against which the Duffy Note is secured were transferred to 
Brigus as part of the transaction.  Pursuant to the terms of the Duffy Purchase Agreement, Calais agreed to issue 
common shares to the Duffy Group in payment of $435,347 of the outstanding balance of principal and accrued 
interest and fees of the Duffy Note (the “Calais Share Issuance”).  Immediately following the Calais Share Issuance, 
the outstanding balance of the Duffy Note (including accrued interest thereon) was $653,021. 
 
The Duffy Note matured on December 31, 2009 and was not repaid.  On January 2, 2010, the Duffy Group called 
the  Duffy  Note  due  and  payable  and  provided  notice  to  Calais  of  the  payment  default  on  the  Duffy  Note.    In 
accordance with the terms of the Duffy Note, following an uncured default on the Duffy Note, the Duffy Note bears 
interest at the rate of 24%.  Pursuant to the Duffy Purchase Agreement, Brigus agreed to forebear from enforcing its 
right to collect principal and interest outstanding under the Duffy Note until March 12, 2011 and reduce the interest 
rate  on  the  Duffy  Note  during  that  period  to  8%.    In  addition  to  the  foregoing  provision,  the  Duffy  Purchase 
Agreement includes customary representations, warranties, covenants and indemnities for transactions of this type. 
 
Pursuant to a Forbearance Agreement dated January 15, 2011, Brigus extended the forbearance period of the Notes 
and  the  Duffy  Note  from  February  1,  2011,  to  the  earlier  of  June  30,  2011  or  the  occurrence  of  certain  events, 
including insolvency or bankruptcy of the Calais, the borrower.  During this extended forbearance period, the Notes 
will accrue interest at 8% per annum.  In connection with the Forbearance Agreement, Calais agreed that it would 
not  undertake  certain  actions,  including  the  issuance  of  stock,  without  Brigus’  prior  approval.    Although,  the 
Company has issued stock without obtaining formal written approval from Brigus, the Company has kept Brigus 
apprised of its activities. 
 
In an Extension Agreement dated June 8, 2011, Brigus agreed to extend the forbearance period to October 31, 2011 
in  exchange  for  a  cash  payment  of  $1,000,000.  The  funds  will  be  applied  to  accrued  but  unpaid  interest  on  the 
Notes. 
 
Shareholder Payable 
 
In connection with an Exploration Agreement dated December 31, 2008 (the “Exploration Agreement”) between the 
Company and DRDMJ, LLC, a company owned and controlled by R. David Russell, on December 20, 2008, the 
Company issued a one-year note payable to R. David Russell, who at the time was a shareholder of the Company 
and is currently the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, in the amount of $405,410 in 
consideration for cash of approximately $300,000. The cash was to be used for development of the Cross Mine and 
processing ore at the Gold Hill mill.  In August 2009 the Company defaulted on its agreement with Mr. Russell and 
issued 5,067,650 shares of our common stock valued at $861,501 as consideration for our default under the terms of 
the  agreement  which  was  dissolved.    We  have  recorded  additional  expense  of  $456,090  in  connection  with  this 
default. 
 
Geology and Mineralization
Page 19 of 110
This  portion  of  Colorado  is  underlain  by  Precambrian  basement  rocks  comprising  the  North  American  Craton, 
which  has  been  intruded  by  Late  Cretaceous  igneous  units.    The  basement  rocks  experienced  several  periods  of 
Precambrian deformation ranging from deep, ductile to more shallow brittle features.  Deeply rooted structural zones 
within the Precambrian rocks are linked to the development of the much younger Colorado Mineral Belt (CMB).  
This belt consists of a northeast-southwest regional trend of mineralization and ore deposits that is approximately 
250mi (402km) long and 80mi (129km) wide.   
 
The Project lies near the northeast limit of the CMB.  It is hosted within the Precambrian Idaho Springs Gneiss and 
the Late Cretaceous Caribou Monzonite.   
 
The  origin  of  mineralization  at  the  Project  has  been  explained  by  two  different  models.    These  both  involve 
hydrothermal  processes  but  differ  as  to  whether  the  deposit  was  formed  within  a  predominantly  mesothermal  or 
epithermal environment.   
 
Mineralization is hosted within several distinct veins striking both east-west and north-northeast.  Individual veins 
range in width from inches to tens of feet and consist of open space fill zones containing quartz and disseminated 
sulfides  flanked  by  mineralized  and  non-mineralized  alteration  zones.    Overall,  the  zone  of  mineralization  and 
alteration has an average width of 5ft (1.5m).  Altered host rocks within and adjacent to veins show more limited 
sulfide mineralization due to a lesser amount of rock fracturing and open space fill.   
 
Precious  metals  grades  in  the  Project  typically  run  0.05-1.0oz/st-Au  (1.7-34.3g/t-Au)  and  0.2-30.0oz/st-Ag  (6.8-
1,029g/t-Ag).    Weathering  has  partially  oxidized  sulfide  minerals  to  all  depths  tested  to  date.    The  veins  are 
distributed within two main  sets, those that strike predominately east-west and those striking north-northeast.  A 
large number of these veins have been outlined throughout the modern exploration history of the Project.  The major 
zones of mineralization and their location within the Consolidated Caribou areas are summarized in Table 2-1.
Table 2-1:  Major Zones of Mineralization
Caribou
Northwestern  Silver Point
(Golconda?)
Congo 
Chief 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
St. 
Louis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X
Page 20 of 110
Cross 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X
Mineralized Zone 
Crown Point Vein 
Cross Vein 
Rare Metals Vein 
Romeo Vein 
Juliet Stockwork 
Anaconda Vein 
Apache Vein System 
 
South 
  Main 
Intermediate 
 
North 
 
Potosi Vein 
Gold Coin Vein 
No Name Vein 
Golconda Vein 
Nelson System Veins 
 
 
  West 
Poor Man Vein 
North Poor Man Vein 
5-30 Vein 
Caribou Park Zone 
Pandora Mine Vein 
St. Louis Vein
East 
Intermediate
X
X
The dominant controls on gold, silver, lead and zinc mineralization at the project are structural channeling along 
dilatational fault and vein planes within an environment chemically favorable for the precipitation of electrum and 
base metal sulfides.  Deep-seated regional structures appear to have been active at the time of mineralization and 
have played a vital role in the structural preparation of the host rocks and channeling of the mineralizing fluids.  The 
fluids and their contained metals are believed to have been derived either from a deeper magmatic source rock or 
from deep metamorphic processes associated with the Laramide Orogeny.   
 
Location of Mineralization 
 
The gold and silver-bearing veins of the project are located within the Grand Island Mining District at the northern 
limit of the Colorado Mineral Belt. Mineralization is hosted within several distinct veins striking both east-west and 
north-northeast.  The  main  vein  outcroppings  are  located  above  Coon  Track  Creek  in  and  around  Caribou  Hill. 
Mineralization tested to date is confined to quartz/sulfide veins hosted with Precambrian Idaho Springs Gneiss and 
the Tertiary Caribou Monzonite. 
 
A large number of gold-silver veins have been outlined throughout the modern exploration history of the project.  
 
Future Payments 
 
The  table  below  summarizes  our  future  obligations  related  to  the  prospect  area.  Failure  to  make  the  minimum 
payments as presented below might result in the loss of the mining claims, royalty interests, or leases underlying the 
prospect area.
Patented 
Unpatented 
Royalties 
Leases 
Totals
2010 
$10,518(1) 
14,700 
18,000 
5,200 
$48,418
2011 
$11,114(1) 
14,700 
18,000 
5,200 
$49,014
2012 
$11,114 
14,700 
18,000 
5,200 
$49,014
2013 
$11,114 
14,700 
18,000 
5,200 
$49,014
2014 
$11,114 
14,700 
18,000 
6,200 
$50,014
(1) Already paid 
 
Environmental Liabilities and Permitting 
 
The Project holds an active mine permit under the Colorado Division of Reclamation Mining and Safety (CDRMS) 
Permit M1977410, issued Nov 3, 1980. This permit, which limits ore extraction to 70,000 stpy, approximately 200 
stpd (63,500 tpy) and land disturbances to less than 2 ac (0.8 ha) total. Current mine disturbance is 2.0 ac (0.8 ha). A 
$15,400 bond is held by CDRMS for final reclamation of the property. 
 
Required Permits and Status 
 
The  mine  can  currently  produce  run  of  mine  (RoM)  ore  for  shipment  to  a  mill.  The  mine  activities  are  a  legal 
nonconforming use under the Boulder County Land Use Code. Additionally, Calais holds the following permits:
•  Explosives permit No. 5-CO-013-33-1H-00625 
•  Water Quality NPDES permit CO-00322751; 
•  MSHA ID 0502730; 
•  Colorado Air Pollution Emissions Notice (APEN) Permit No. 09BO0439F; 
•  Stormwater Plan Permit No. COR040242; and 
•  County building and grading permits.
We have announced plans to expand our operations at the Cross Mine. Proposed activities include the development 
of a new mine access and expanded underground mine workings; construction and operation of an on-site surface 
mill; construction of an ore storage building; development of a new access and safety road connecting two currently 
disconnected mine areas; implementation of site drainage controls, and other site improvements.  An amendment to 
the  existing  CDMRS  permit  is  required  for  these  expansion  activities,  as  well  as  an  increase  in  the  posted 
reclamation  bond.    The  permit  disturbance  will  be  increased  to  9.35  ac  (3.78  ha).  The  current  CDRMS  permit
Page 21 of 110
surface disturbance may be expanded to a maximum of less than 10 ac (4 ha).  RoM production greater than 70,000 
stpy (63,500 tpy) or surface disturbance of 10 ac (4 ha) or more acres requires Calais to obtain a new permit.  Along 
with the amendment to the mine permit, the proposed expansion activities require a Special Use Review under the 
Boulder County Land Use Code.  A Special Use Review Application was submitted in April 2008 and approved in 
September 2008.  Management believes the proposed mine expansion can meet the applicable criteria of the County 
Land Use Code; however, additional county building permits, county grading permits, and amendments to existing 
stormwater  permits,  NPDES  permits,  and  APEN  permits  may  be  required  following  approval  of  the  expansion 
plans. 
 
Compliance Evaluation 
 
Management  believes  the  Cross  Mine  complies  with  all  applicable  state  and  federal  regulations  as  well  as 
contemporaneous reclamation of permitted disturbed areas and surrounding historic mining disturbances. 
 
Seasonality 
 
The surface exploration season begins in early May and continues through late November. Underground work can 
continue year around. 
 
Surface Rights 
 
Most of the claims which constitute the project property are patented private property titled in Calais, or Aardvark 
subject to Calais’ operational and re-acquisition rights. 
 
Power Supply 
 
Electrical power to the mine is furnished by the Public Service Company Colorado via a 25kV, 3MW, 3-phase AC 
overhead line from Nederland. Current power delivery at the site is three phase 480V, 300kVA capacity. 
 
Water Supply 
 
Potable water is provided by a 275ft (84m) deep well drilled in front of the shop building. Calais also owns a one-
eighth share of the historic Farmer’s Ditch Company. The water is adjudicated to the Caribou Mine portion of the 
project under a plan for augmentation approved by the Division 1 Water Court, and usable under the terms of that 
decree.  Calais  also  has  other  water  rights  available  for  lease.  The  portal  discharges  a  small  amount,  which  by 
Colorado law is considered to be an unregulated use of water unless it is put to beneficial use in which case, a water 
right must be obtained. 
 
Buildings & Ancillary Facilities 
 
There are several buildings located on the property. At the Cross Mine portal, a shop building incorporates an office, 
small warehouse, a one bay repair shop and a small mine dry housing safety equipment. A large warehouse building 
is located near the portal, which provides storage for drill core, the main mine air compressor and various larger 
mining supplies. At the Caribou site there is a large 2-story structure housing a shop, offices, dry and parts storage. 
At  the  Comstock  site,  there  is  a  hoist  building  and  a  large  metal  warehouse.  There  is  also  a  headframe  at  the 
Comstock mine. These buildings are in good condition. Two small cabins are also located nearby but these buildings 
are currently not in use.  
 
Tailings Storage Area 
 
There are no tailings on the mine property and the Company has no current plans to process any potential mineral 
reserves on site until the proper permits are in place. 
 
Waste Disposal Area
Page 22 of 110
Most of the underground development waste rock has been used to create valley fill platforms, which provide level 
surface for the mine facilities. There are no specific mine waste dumps located on the mine property – Caribou does 
have a large waste rock area.  
 
Since the mine claims are located on private property and the topography is favorable, continued valley fill waste 
can be used to accommodate future underground development material allowing sufficient buffer zones to nearby 
drainages.  The recently revised Boulder County permit allows the storage of the waste rock on the site. 
 
History 
 
Ownership 
 
The Project property has a 135-year history of ownership.  The mine was first discovered and developed by C.M. 
Carol in about 1876 during the silver boom at the nearby Caribou Mine and was reported to have been worked until 
about 1886.   
 
In 1890, George Teal, a prominent Colorado mining man, hired Ernest LeNeve Forester, to reopen the mine.  This 
was designed to be a test-mining program over a two-month period to evaluate the potential profitability.  At this 
time, the property consisted of one patented claim, the Cross Survey #518(Foster and Carrol 1890).   
 
The  next  period  of  mine  ownership  began  in  1918  when  Teal  partnered  with  Todd  Dofflemyer,  purchased  the 
property and founded the Cross Gold Mining Company.  By 1937, the property included three patented claims, three 
unpatented claims and one mill site claim (Teal 1937).  By 1939, the property had grown to include 11-patented 
claims, two unpatented claims and two mill site claims (Burlingame 1939).  A reported disagreement between Teal 
and Dofflemyer forced the closure of the mine in late 1939.   
 
The  mine  remained  inactive  and  flooded  until  1974  when  Thomas  Hendricks  obtained  a  long-term  mining  lease 
from the Dofflemyer family, which included a 10% NSR.  Hendricks then entered a joint venture agreement with 
Columbine Minerals of Denver Co. who funded the dewatering and rehabilitation of the mine (Hendricks 1998).  
 
In 1983, Hendricks entered into a joint venture agreement with Power Petroleum, a Canadian registered company, 
but  could  not  re-open  operations  due  to  the  prohibitively  high  Dofflemyer  royalty.      Hendricks  and  Power 
Petroleum,  therefore,  chose  to  place  the  mine  on  care  and  maintenance.    The  Project  remained  on  care  and 
maintenance until 1986 when Hendricks entered into joint venture agreement with East West Minerals of Sidney, 
Australia.   
 
During  the  East  West  partnership,  the  Dofflemyer  family  agreed  to  sell  their  ownership  and  their  10%  NSR  for 
$750,000.  All of these claims were then subject to a 5% NSR royalty, if the price of gold were to exceed $800/oz-
Au and payable to Tusco (Barrett and Schuiling 1988).   
 
By May of 1989, East West Minerals had lost a significant investment in an unrelated property and was forced to 
withdraw  from  the  joint  venture.    Additionally,  Power  Petroleum’s  interest  was  purchased  for  $200,000  and  the 
Columbine Minerals 5% NSR was purchased for $122,000.  Once East West pulled out Hendricks purchased their 
entire interest in the Project.   
 
Over  the  next  several  years  Hendricks’s  partnered  with  several  others  and  focused  primarily  on  continued 
exploration and resource development.  By 1997, Hendricks entered an option  agreement with Calais for an earned 
ownership of the project, and in 1998, Calais completed its full acquisition of the Project.   
 
Past Exploration and Development 
 
Because  of  working  capital  shortages,  we performed  limited  exploration  work  on  the  Caribou  project  during  the 
fiscal years ended May 31, 2005 through 2010.   The following table sets forth the amounts spent by the Company 
on exploration activities on the Caribou property during those fiscal years:
Fiscal Year Ended May 31,
Page 23 of 110
2010
2009
2008
2007
(unaudited)
$36,322
2006
(unaudited)
$23,967
2005
(unaudited)
$1,351
$77,741
$37,631
$42,470
Exploration Expenses 
 
Cross Project 
 
The Cross Project has experienced three major phases of underground development followed by an extended period 
of exploration drilling.   
 
The first phase occurred during the initial discovery and subsequent mine development from about 1876 to 1886.  
The mine development during this period is described as a shaft 140ft (43m) deep with sublevels at -50ft (15m) and 
-100ft (30m) all located within the Cross Vein.  The -100ft (30m) level was connected to surface by a 200ft (61m) 
cross cut.  The ore recovered during this mining phase is believed to have been toll processed at a nearby stamp mill, 
which serviced several other small mines active in the area.  
 
A second major phase of mine development occurred between 1933 to 1939 under the ownership of the Cross Gold 
Mining Company.  During this period, development included an 850ft (259m) crosscut, a winze 235ft (72m) long 
and  development  on  the  -75ft  (23m)  level,  the  -150ft  (46m)  level  and  the  -225ft  (69m)  level.    The  Cross  Gold 
Mining Company had developed within the Cross, Crown Point and Rare Metals Veins and mentioned underground 
exploration to intersect the Romeo Vein.  At this time, all mine work had focused mainly on ore development and 
very little actual mining had been conducted.  No mill existed on the site and development ore was shipped to the 
ASARCO smelter in Leadville, Colorado.   
 
The third era began in June of 1973 and continued to 1983.  This work was focused primarily on mining of known 
veins as well as the development of newly discovered veins.  Several new veins were developed including the East 
and West Romeo Veins where much of the production was focused.  Ore was trucked to the former Allied Flourspar 
Mill in Boulder Co. that had been retrofitted to produce a flotation concentrate.  The precious metal concentrate was 
shipped  to  the  smelters  of  Cominco  at  Trail  B.C,  and  ASARCO  smelters  in  East  Helena,  Montana  and  El  Paso 
Texas.  Burdened by a 15% NSR and declining gold prices, mining was suspended in 1986.   
 
In 1983 a new phase of exploration work began which included extensive underground sampling and drilling.  The 
drilling  was  conducted  both  underground  and  on  surface.    The  underground  targets  were  the  deeper  and  lateral 
extensions of the known veins and the surface targets were down dip projections of outcrop exposures and lateral 
continuations of known veins.   
 
In 1988, an underground development program was begun on the newly discovered Apache Vein.  A cross cut was 
driven  on  the  portal  level  northwest  from  the  western  end  of  the  Rare  Metals  vein  for  100ft  (30m)  where  it 
intersected the Apache Vein.  Drifting on the Apache vein continued to the west for approximately 150ft (46m).  
Within this distance three raises and one sublevel were also driven.  In 1993, the underground drifting and sampling 
program was reinitiated along the Apache and North Apache Veins at the portal level.  Approximately 800ft (244m) 
of drifts, raises and sublevels were completed.  This further expanded the known mineralization along the Apache 
Vein and confirmed the width and grade of the North Apache Vein.   
 
Between late 1982 and 1998 a total of 116 drillholes were completed totaling 62,384ft (19,015m).  This entire drill 
core remains on site.   
 
Currently, the Cross Project has been developed on four main levels and ten additional sub-levels.  The primary 
underground access is from a portal, which services a winze accessing all the lower levels.  All levels are outfitted 
by rail track.  The first level at the winze is the 9,693ft (2,954m) elevation and daylights to the portal.  This level has 
approximately 2,700ft  (823m) of drifting which access the Rare Metals, Cross, Crown Point, West Romeo, Apache 
and  North  Apache  Veins.    The  second  level  at  the  winze  is  the  9,637ft  (2,937m)  elevation.    This  level  has 
approximately 1,150ft (350m) of drifting which accesses the Rare Metals, North Rare Metals, Cross, Crown Point 
and West Romeo Veins.  The third level at the winze is the 9,575ft (2,918m) elevation.  The level has approximately 
750ft (229m) of development drifting which accesses the Rare Metals, Cross, Crown Point and West Romeo Veins.  
The  fourth  level  at  the  winze  is  the  9,509ft  (2,898m)  elevation.    This  level  has  approximately  740ft  (226m)  of 
drifting which accesses the Rare Metals, Cross, Crown Point, East Romeo and Hopewell Veins.  All total there are 
currently 5,340ft (1,628m) of drift development, approximately 52 raises and at least 12 stopes.  The underground
Page 24 of 110
workings were surveyed and well documented during 1988 and this information was carefully drafted on 1:20 scale 
level plans.  The underground was last accessible during the 1990 drilling program.  By 1993 it was flooded to the 
portal level as it remains today.   
 
Caribou Project 
 
Between 1980 and 1984 a new surface facility was constructed at the portal of the Idaho Tunnel.  The Idaho Tunnel, 
which is the 500ft (152m)–level of the Caribou was re-opened and re-equipped over a 4,000ft (1,219m) length to the 
Caribou shaft.  Included in this installation was a 4.16kV underground distribution system, including 2 substations.   
 
The  Caribou  shaft  was  dewatered  and  rebuilt  to  the  1,230ft  (375m)-level.    Core  drilling  occurred  on  the  500ft 
(152m)-level and the 1,230ft (375m)-level.  The Company also performed geologic mapping and sampling during 
this time.  Two tunnels were also driven on 500ft (152m)-level, one to crosscut the North Poorman vein and the 
other to crosscut the Golconda vein.  However, development to the Golconda vein ended approximately 85ft (26m) 
from the vein.   
 
Historic Production 
 
Cross Mine 
 
Historic  production  from  the  Cross  Mine  (which  is  an  underground  mine)  has  occurred  during  two 
development/mining phases.  During the mid to late 1930s the Cross Mine experienced a sustained period of mainly 
development work.  At this time, the main crosscut, winze and four levels of drifting were completed.  A minor 
amount of stoping is noted in the literature but there are no records of actual production.  The historical records note 
the lack of a mill on site however, no reference of toll milling from nearby facilities is indicated.   
 
During the period of 1973 to 1990 the Cross Mine was reopened and retrofit for small scale production.  The earliest 
production occurred in 1976 the when mine was producing about 10stpd (9tpd), by 1980 a production rate of 80stpd 
(73tpd) had been achieved and the mine employed 11 workers.  The ore was being trucked to the former Allied 
Flourspar  Mill  in  Boulder  Co.,  which  had  been  retrofit  to  produce  a  flotation  concentrate.    The  precious  metal 
concentrate was shipped to the smelters of Cominco at Trail, B.C., and ASARCO smelters in East Helena, Montana 
and El Paso Texas.   
 
This  production  was  primarily  from  within  the  Cross,  Crown  Point,  East  Romeo,  West  Romeo,  Juliet  and  Rare 
Metals Veins.  Hendricks Mining Co. (1991) reports that total production between 1977 and 1986 was in the order 
of 27,000st (24,500t).  During that period, the mine is reported to have produced 5,000oz of gold, 125,000oz of 
silver and several hundred thousand pounds of lead and zinc (Barrett and Schuiling 1988).  Burdened by a 15% NSR 
and gold prices which had declined from $600/oz to $400/oz by 1983, the mining was suspended. 
 
Caribou Mine 
 
Historic  production  at  the  Caribou  Mine  (which  is  an  underground  mine)  commenced  in  1869  and  continued 
uninterrupted until the War Closure Act of 1940.  Operations resumed in 1945 and continued until 1955 when the 
owner  closed  the  mine.    Concentrate  was  shipped  to  the  Caribou  Consolidated  smelter  in  Nederland  until  1919, 
when  the  smelter  burned  down.    Subsequent  production  was  shipped  to  the  ASARCO  smelter  in  Leadville, 
Colorado.  Over  the  history  of  operations,  the  Caribou  Mine  veins  produced  20Moz  of  silver,  and  a  substantial 
amount of gold.  A total of 31 veins were mined.   
 
Exploration Programs 
 
Exploration work  at  the  Project  has  consisted primarily  of  a  series  of development  drifts  and  raises,  surface  and 
underground geologic  mapping,  rock  chip and  continuous  channel  sampling  and  diamond  core drilling  programs 
from surface and underground over a period of many years.   
 
These exploration programs mapped, sampled and diamond core drilled extensions to all known veins, discovered 
several  new  veins  and  indicated  several  areas  of  anomalous  mineralization.    A  total  of  181  drillholes  totaling
Page 25 of 110
149,102ft  (45,446m)  were  completed  over  ten  years  by  seven  different  drill  contractors.    The  exploration  work 
described above resulted in the delineation of anomalous gold mineralization located within at least 14 veins, each 
of which average 3ft (1m) in true thickness along 300ft (91m) of strike length and 350ft (107m) of down dip extent.   
 
Mineralogical Test Program 
 
The  Company  had  a  metallurgical  test  program  completed  on  the  project.    The  testwork  included  sample 
compositing, composite characterization, Bond’s ball millwork index determination, flotation tests, thickening and 
filtration  studies.    The  objectives  of  the  metallurgical  study  were;  (1)  to  determine  if  a  bulk-sulfide  concentrate 
should be produced or two separate concentrates, namely lead and zinc concentrate, should be produced, and (2) 
generate data for sizing major equipment for the optimum flowsheet.  This work yielded the following results:
•  The composite sample prepared from the four individual samples, assayed 17.3g/t Au, 315g/t Ag, 0.18%
Cu, 1.20% Pb and 1.16% Zn;
•  The sample had a Bond’s ball mill work index of 15.29; 
•  Both bulk-sulfide flotation and sequential lead and zinc flotation schemes were evaluated.  The bulk-sulfide
flotation was determined to be best for maximizing precious metals recoveries;
•  Several  process  variables  were  evaluated  for  the  bulk-sulfide  flotation  scheme.    They  included  primary 
grind, pH, supplementary collectors and frothers and cleaner flotation.  The optimum process conditions 
were determined to be a primary grind of P80 of 100 mesh or finer, pH of 9 to 10 and reagent suite of 
potassium  amyl  xanthate  and  methyl  isobutyl  carbonyl.    Cleaner  flotation  resulted  in  significant  loss  of 
precious metals to the cleaner tailing;
•  The rougher bulk-sulfide flotation will recover approximately 11% of the weight and ±90% of gold and
±85% of silver values; and
•  Thickening and filtration tests were performed on both flotation concentrate and tailings to size thickeners
and filters.  The tailings can be used for backfilling the mine.
Resource Estimation  
 
The Caribou project is without known resources or reserves and the Company’s activities are exploratory in nature. 
There are no assurances that the Company will identify any economically viable mineral deposits on the Caribou 
project.  
 
Exploration Programs 
 
The  mine  is  on  “care  and  maintenance”  until  sufficient  capital  funding  is  obtained  to  initiate  our  exploration 
programs and potential restart of operations at the Cross Mine.  The project has remained on “care and maintenance” 
through the date of this report.
Manhattan Prospect; Nevada, USA: Gold Exploration
Property Description and Location 
 
The property is located in the southern portion of the Toquima Mountains approximately one mile east of the town 
of Manhattan, Nye County, Nevada, as shown in Figure 2-2.
Page 26 of 110
Figure 2-2
Manhattan Project Location Map
Property Ownership 
 
In December 1994, we paid Marlowe Harvey $1,176,000 for a 51% interest in various mineral interests known as 
the  Manhattan  prospect.    We  later  discovered  that  Mr. Harvey  did  not  own  any  part  of  the  record  title  to  any 
patented and unpatented claims which were a part of the Manhattan prospect.  We are attempting to determine title 
to these the joint venture interests, to acquire other of the joint venture interests, to take steps to cure title to the 
Manhattan prospect, and to determine whether Mr. Harvey’s claimed royalty interest exists, if it is applicable, and to 
quantify it.  To this end, beginning in October 2003 with an updated review in February 2008, we received title 
information relating to these prospects. It has been determined that a significant number of the original unpatented 
claim position was lost when the owner, claiming a default, vended title to third parties.  42 of the former Anthony 
Selig claims were re-located in the name of White Caps Mines, Inc., an entity owned or controlled by Mr. Harvey, 
and we have since acquired record title to the re-located claims by deed.  
 
On March 8, 2004, we entered into an agreement (the “Harvey Settlement”) with Marlowe Harvey and his related 
entities by which Mr. Harvey and his related entities agreed to assign their interests in the Manhattan prospect to 
Calais and agreed to convey to Calais (not later than December 31, 2005) the entire right, title and interest in the 
Manhattan prospect  from  all  parties  (“marketable  title”).    We  agreed  to  pay  one  of Mr. Harvey’s  related  entities 
250,000 shares of Calais restricted stock upon receipt of marketable title.  We agreed to undertake certain drilling 
obligations  after  receiving  good  title,  and  to  issue  2,500,000  shares  of common  stock  (or  if  greater a  number  of
Page 27 of 110
shares equal to 5% of the outstanding common shares on a fully-diluted basis) to Argus Resources, Inc. (“Argus”), 
one of Mr. Harvey’s related entities, upon identification of gold or gold equivalent mineral resources (as determined 
in accordance with Canadian standards) exceeding 2,000,000 ounces (or a proportionate number of shares if placed 
into  production  prior  to  identification  of  mineral  resources  exceeding  2,000,000  ounces).    To  our  knowledge, 
Mr. Harvey has not attempted the curative measures necessary to provide marketable title to the mineral interests to 
us  and,  even  if  he  commences  this  work,  we  cannot  offer  any  assurance  that  he  will  be  able  to  do  so.    We  are 
continuing  our  own  efforts  to  pursue  curative  action  with  the  intent  of  commencing  active  exploration  of  the 
properties beyond mapping and surface reconnaissance.  
 
Based  on  a  preliminary  review  of  this  information  and  assignments  that  we  received  in  July 2004  from  Mr.  and 
Mrs. Harvey  and  certain  affiliated  companies  as  a  part  of  the  Harvey  Settlement  (which  assignments  Calais  has 
recorded in the Nye County, Nevada records), it appears that the record ownership of the various prospects is as 
follows:
•  The 28 patented mining claims appear to be owned by Calais (which received assignment of these claims 
from  Argus  Resources,  Inc.  in  July  2004)  as  to  a  60%  undivided  interest,  and  by  NMMI  as  to  a  40% 
undivided interest;
•
•
42 unpatented mining claims appear to be owned by Calais (which received assignment of these claims 
from White Cap Mines, Inc. (owned by Mr. Harvey) in July 2004);
56  unpatented  mining  claims  appear  to  be  owned  by  an  individual  named  Anthony Selig  or  entities 
associated with Mr. Selig (the “Selig Claims”); and
•  The remaining claims appear to be owned by Calais or by Calais and NMMI in the 60-40 ratio described 
above  for  the  patented  claims  (the  “Argus  Unpatented  Claims”).    Our  ownership  of  these  claims  was 
received by a July 2004 assignment from Argus Resources.
Mr. Selig  has  denied  any  obligation  to  convey  any  portion  of  the  claims  directly  to  us,  but,  has  admitted  an 
obligation to convey his interest in claims listed in a 1997 agreement between Selig and NMMI to NMMI. Selig is 
fully aware of the outcome of the Calais/NMMI litigation, and he and his counsel have indicated a willingness to 
tender the NMMI deed to the District Court in and for Nye County if properly directed to do so.  We believe that the 
settlement of the NMMI litigation reached in September 2000 (the “2000 Settlement Agreement”) results in NMMI 
being obligated to convey its interests in the prospects to Calais, subject to the terms of the settlement, including 
payment of royalties to NMMI from production.  These claims would also be subject to the Manhattan Project Joint 
Venture  (“MPJV”)  as  discussed  below.    We  are  currently  unable  to  locate  any  person  with  authority  to  act  for 
NMMI; management is evaluating the possible invocation of the jurisdiction of the District Court to accept the Selig 
deed on behalf of the joint venture, and subject to the terms of the recorded settlement.  We also plan to deposit the 
remaining funds due to NMMI with the registry fund of the Nye County, Nevada District Court, as NMMI itself 
cannot be located or contacted.  
 
As indicated above, we have only recently been able to commence any title review of the property.  The record title 
consists of a number of inconsistent and incompatible documents.  Consequently, there can be no assurance that the 
preliminary conclusions reached above are accurate or complete.  We have been advised that a quiet title suit will be 
necessary in order to initiate a full exploration program, with which conclusion management has agreed. 
 
We cannot offer any assurance that we will be able to obtain legal title to the mineral interests that we believed we 
acquired in December 1994 and pursuant to the Harvey Settlement and resulting deeds.  We do not intend to expend 
any funds on exploration of this property until the title situation has been resolved to our satisfaction.  We have 
begun  active  efforts  to  begin  necessary  curative  actions  sufficient  to  allow  active  exploration  to  commence, 
including 2011 updates of the litigation title commitment and land status reports as to the unpatented claims, both of 
which are pending completion.  There is no assurance that the curative actions will be successful.
Page 28 of 110
Mineral Titles 
 
The Project is comprised of 183 unpatented (3,370ac/1,363ha) and 28 patented (428ac/173ha) claims, 211 claims in 
all totaling 3,798ac (1,537ha).  See Exhibit 99.2 filed with this report.  
 
The  mining  law  of  1872  established  a  process,  which  a  claimant  may  bring  a  claim  to  patent.    When  patented, 
ownership of the land and mineral rights transfers from the Federal Government to the claimant.  The U.S. Bureau 
of Land Management (BLM) and the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) manage the lands covered by unpatented claims.   
 
To  maintain  unpatented  mining  claims  in  good  standing,  a  claim  holder  must  make  annual  maintenance  fee 
payments to the BLM of $140.00 per claim, plus a $10.00 per claim process fee, for a total of $150 per claim.  Fees 
are payable in the county in which the claims are located. 
 
We  believe  that  all  claim  filings  are  current  and  that  the  claims  are  valid  until  August  31,  2011,  when  the  next 
annual maintenance fee payments and filings are due.   
 
The  table  below  summarizes  our  future  obligations  related  to  the  prospect  area.  Failure  to  make  the  minimum 
payments as presented below might result in the loss of the mining claims, underlying the prospect area.  
2014
2011
2012
Patented 
Unpatented 
Totals
2010
$564 
25,760 
$26,234
$571 
25,760 
$26,331
$581 
26,198 
$26,779
2013
$591 
26,643 
$27,234
$601 
27,096 
$27,697
Ownership of Project claims is divided into two areas:
•  Manhattan South Project Area (MSPA).  This areas consists of 28 patented claims and 127 unpatented
•  Manhattan North Project Area (MNPA).  This area consists of 56 unpatented claims.
claims; and
The Manhattan South Project Area (MSPA) 
 
The MSPA consists of 28 patented claims (Table 2.2.1) and 127 unpatented claims totaling 2,678ac (1,083ha) more 
or less.  These claims are located within a historic mining district, and as a result, some of these have been subject to 
numerous assignments and litigation through the years.   
 
The Manhattan North Project Area (MNPA) 
 
The Manhattan North project area has 56 unpatented claims totaling 1,120 acres more or less.  The claims, known as 
the Wild Horse claims, numbered 1-57 (no #11 claim), were located by Calais on or around Feb-Apr 2004.  The 
claims are located on BLM administered lands, Calais is the claimant and owns a 100% interest in these claims.   
 
Legal Issues 
 
Overview Regarding Unpatented Claims 
 
As  is  the  case  for  all  companies  in  the  United  States,  there  are  unavoidable  risks  in  holding  unpatented  mining 
claims located under the General Mining Law.  These include potential challenges to the validity of any claimed 
discovery,  a  challenge  as  to  whether  claimed  discoveries  would  satisfy  the  prudent  man  rule,  potential  errors  in 
location or recording, and the risk of changes in the law or regulations.  Claims upon which no actual discovery 
exists are held by virtue of the doctrine of pedis possessio, which involves the occupation of claimed mining ground 
while  engaged  in  a  diligent  search  for  a  discovery  of  valuable  minerals.    There  can  be  no  guarantee  that  pedis 
possessio rights would be recognized as to any or all of the unpatented mining claims in Nevada if challenged by a 
third party.  There can be no guarantee that any claimed discovery on unpatented grounds will survive challenge by 
the federal government, if the government sought to challenge title or right to occupy the ground.
Page 29 of 110
Royalties, Agreements and Encumbrances  
 
Royalties 
 
At the MSPA, there is a 2% NSR royalty payable to the MPJV on production from:
•  All patented claims;  
•  The Argus Unpatented Claims; and 
•  The Surviving Selig Claims.  This royalty is payable against the buyout price established in the NMMI
litigation settlement.
The Harvey Settlement grants us the right to acquire up to 4% of applicable 5% net smelter royalties to Mr. Harvey 
(or  his  assignee)  as  recorded  in  the  Nevada  property  agreements  for  $3  million  per  1%  acquired;  however,  we 
dispute the existence, amount and applicability of the claimed 5% net smelter royalties. 
 
There are no royalties associated with the Wild Horse Claims located in the MNPA.   
 
Encumbrances 
 
Manhattan Property Joint Venture (MPJV) 
 
MSPA is potentially subject to the following encumbrances:
•  The Manhattan South Project Area’s origination is the Manhattan Properties Joint Venture as formed in 
June 1993 between NMMI (24.5%), Marlowe Harvey/Maran Holding, Inc. (“Harvey”) (51%), and Argus 
Resources, Inc. (“Argus”) (24.5%).  The initial joint venture property consisted of 28 patented claims and 
29 unpatented claims.
•
•  Concurrent with the MPJV formation, 13 of the original claims were encumbered for a $532,000 note in 
favor of Anthony C. Selig (Anthony Selig Note).  Selig, who was a contract purchaser of the properties, 
was  granted  the  Deed  of  Trust  for  his  role  in  allowing  a  40%  interest  in  certain  of  the  unpatented  and 
patented claims to be transferred from Argus to NMMI.  The Selig Entities were the original owners of the 
patented and unpatented mining claims comprising the Manhattan Properties, or had contracts to acquire 
those interests on various terms under agreements which were themselves subject to several amendments 
over time.  In March 1997, NMMI entered into a Sale and Purchase agreement with the Selig Entities to 
repurchase  the  Anthony  Selig  Note  for  $375,000.    NMMI  (Manhattan  Properties  Joint  Venture’s  24.5% 
partner)  fulfilled  the  terms  of  the  note  with  payments  on  March  1997  and  June  1997.    Calais  is  in 
possession of this satisfied note, which has not yet been released of record.  The Selig entities have not yet 
released the quitclaim deed to the 1997 properties which is currently being held by Selig’s attorney.   
In 1997, NMMI encumbered the Manhattan Property joint venture through NMMI’s 24.5% share.  NMMI 
entered  into  a  Subscription  Agreement  with  Silenus  Limited  on  April  14,  1997.    The  Subscription 
Agreement  required  NMMI  to  grant  Silenus  Limited  a  $2,000,000  deed  of  trust  encompassing  the 
Manhattan Property until the Debentures issued to Silenus are converted, redeemed or paid in full.  Further 
title investigation has determined that the Silenus deed of trust, executed by NMMI, has been recorded and 
does purport to encumber any after-acquired title of NMMI.  Calais, which was the majority interest holder 
in the venture at that date, questions the ability of Silenus to encumber the joint venture property and the 
Calais and Argus interests in those properties. All of the above Manhattan South Project Area properties 
(28 patented and 131 unpatented claims) may be encumbered by the Silenus lien.  The existence and status 
of the Silenus lien, and whether it attaches to any venture properties, is a material concern regarding title to 
the Manhattan South Project Area and must be resolved before a significant expenditure on exploration of 
the  properties  is  undertaken.   Not  all  of  the  unpatented  claims  purporting  to  be  encumbered  are  current 
claims, or, claims titled in NMMI at the time of the purported encumbrance.
•  The 2000 Settlement Agreement provides for Calais Resources and Argus Resources to pay to NMMI and 
Jeff Kramer (an officer of NMMI) $300,000 total plus 5% interest (four $75,000 annual payments, the first 
payment  at  closing  and  a  payment  on  each  anniversary  of  closing).    This  payment  was  to  reimburse 
NMMI’s payment of the Anthony Selig Note paid by NMMI in June 1997.  Four $37,500 payments were 
made to Jeff Kramer and only two $37,500 payments were made to NMMI, as NMMI could not be located
Page 30 of 110
after  the  initial  two  payments  were  made;  Calais  made  tender  of  the  funds,  but  all  correspondence  was 
returned as un-deliverable.  Two contractual payments, totaling $75,000, have not been made to NMMI.  
NMMI has no address and no living officers or directors have been located.  Calais has resolved to deposit 
the remaining payments totaling $75,000 with the District Court as part of a proposed curative action.
•  The 42 unpatented claims, originally located by White Cap Mines, Inc., (and which were themselves re-
locations of prior Selig claims) were conveyed to Calais Resources Nevada, Inc. in July 2004, by quitclaim 
deed dated July 20, 2004, recorded August 10, 2004, between White Cap Mines, Inc. (Marlowe Harvey, 
President) and Calais Resources Nevada, Inc.  The 42 unpatented claims were originally located in Range 
44E  and  are  currently  listed  in  Range 41E in  the  Nye  County  Recorders  records  and the  BLM-LR2000 
claim  reports.    Further  survey  work,  and  or  claim  location  work  may  be  required.    Work  to  correct  the 
description of the proper range in documents recorded in Nye County and with the BLM was completed in 
2008.  The claims are believed to have been properly located on the ground in Range 44E, and it is further 
believed that Nevada curative statutes allow correction of the error in the recorded documents.
•  WC-114,  WC-115,  WC-116,  WC-117  unpatented  claims  are  titled  to  Argus  Resources,  Inc.    Further 
curative  title  work  is  required,  which  may  consist  of  a  clerical  error  at  BLM,  which  received  a  deed 
transferring these interests to Calais.
•  WC#14, WC#16, WC#18, WC#20, WC#106, WC#108, WC#110, WC#112 and WC# 145 are dual claimed
by Calais and Selig.  Further curative title work is required.
•  Calais has also entered into the Harvey Settlement Agreement discussed above.
The Manhattan North Project Area (MNPA) 
 
There are 2 senior claims immediately north of the common corner of Sections 4, 5, 8 and 9 of T8N, R44E.  The 
claims are Wild Cat and Wild Cat #1, located in 1981, currently owned by Jason and Mark Pauley.  This is the area 
of Wild Horse claims # 44, 47, 48, and 51.  These claims are senior to the Wild Horse claims.   
 
There are claims contiguous to the Wild Horse claims.  While these claims do not encumber the project area, they 
bound the project area. 
 
Round  Mountain  (Smoky  Valley  Common  Operation  –  Joint  Venture  between  Kinross  Gold  Corporation  and 
Barrick Gold Corporation) controls a large block of claims contiguous to the north, northeast and east of the Wild 
Horse claims.  These are the MAN claims.  Round Mountain controls claims to the south of the Wild Horse claims.  
These  are  the SAL  claims.    In  addition,  Round  Mountain  controls  claims  to  the  west  of  the Wild Horse  claims.  
These are the SEP claims. 
 
Newcrest Resources controls claims to the south east of the Wild Horse claims, immediately adjacent to the Round 
Mountain claims.   
 
Geology and Mineralization 
 
The geology at the Manhattan project consists of a three main rock types.  The most abundant are Paleozoic age, 
foliated quartzites, marbles, schists and phyllites.  These are cut by Cretaceous age granitic intrusive rocks.  Both of 
which were subsequently cut by a Tertiary age caldera complex and its associated volcanic rocks.  Faulting of the 
Paleozoic age rocks related to later tectonic events add to their complexity. 
 
There  are  four  types  of  mineralization  found  in  the  Manhattan  project  area.    These  are  1)  Gold-quartz  veins;  2) 
Folded and faulted replacement gold deposits within the meta-sedimentary rocks; 3) Disseminated gold with pyrite 
and  arsenopyrite  in  limestone;  4)  Gold  associated  with  arsenic,  mercury,  and  stibnite.    All  of  these  styles  of 
mineralization appear to be concentrated along faults structures and bedding.  The mineralization is believed to have 
occurred during three events dated at 75Ma, 45Ma, and 16Ma (Shawe et al 1986).  The main mineralization in the 
White Caps Mine area is the gold associated with mercury and arsenic.   
 
Exploration 
 
In the past, exploratory drilling was conducted in the Manhattan South area focused on defining resources within the 
Cambrian  aged White  Caps  Limestone  unit  near  the White  Caps  Mine.    Several  exploration  companies  over  the
Page 31 of 110
years  have  drilled  mostly  reverse  circulation  (RC)  drillholes.    The  most  comprehensive  program  was  conducted 
from  1982  through  1984  targeting  a  shallow,  bulk  tonnage  open  pit  type  mineralization.    A  few  of  these  holes 
encountered  discrete,  high-grade  gold  zones  but  wider  intercepts  of  disseminated  gold  mineralization  were  not 
found.   
 
In 1995, Calais commissioned a magnetotellurics survey over the entire property.  The results of this survey showed 
a series of anomalies that occur in a linear trend parallel to the general strike of the Paleozoic rocks in the Manhattan 
South area.  A drill program was completed in 1997 to target the magnetotellurics anomalies.  The results showed 
that anomalous gold mineralization is associated with some of the magnetic anomalies.   
 
The Manhattan North area is an exploration target that was staked in 2004.  This is an area of northwest-southeast 
striking veins and mineralized shear zones with anomalous gold values.   
 
Environmental Liabilities and Permitting 
 
There are no current activities requiring permits.  Mine tailings located on or near several of the properties have not 
been the subject of evaluation.  The majority of those tailings had been previously conveyed by prior owners to 
Anthony C. Selig.  The areas of dumps and tailings conveyed to Anthony Selig were surveyed and described prior to 
conveyance in several 1989 deeds.  Calais has been contacted by the State of Nevada, Division of Minerals and the 
United States Forest Service regarding environmental remediation on the Manhattan project.  See “Item 3. Legal 
Proceedings – Nevada Environmental Issues.”  
 
Required Permits and Status 
 
Calais has not applied for nor holds any permits for exploration or mining activities on Calais owned or controlled 
lands  in  Nevada.    Calais  has  no  posted  bonds  with  Nevada  Department  of  Environmental  Protection  (NDEP)  or 
BLM.  The most recent exploration program was conducted in the 1997. 
 
The BLM manages surface disturbances associated with mining activities under 45 CFR 3809 and Nevada manages 
the  reclamation  of  mining  activities  under  NRS  519A,  with  the  intent  of  preventing  undue  and  unnecessary 
degradation to lands in Nevada.  Prior to exploring any Calais owned or controlled lands, an Exploration Plan of 
Operation and Reclamation Permit Application, satisfying the requirements of the BLM and NDEP must be filed, 
along with appropriate permit fees and reclamation bond.  
 
Similarly, prior to mining any Calais owned or controlled lands, a Plan of Operations, satisfying the requirements of 
the  BLM  and  NDEP,  describing  the  proposed  operations,  detailing  operating  practices  that  prevent  undue  and 
unnecessary degradation, and presenting the reclamation practices that will be undertaken must be filed, along with 
the  appropriate  fees  and  reclamation  bond.    Prior  to  the  authorization  of  the  Plan  of  Operations,  a  National 
Environmental  Policy  Act  (NEPA)  analysis  is  typically  required  to  describe  the  proposed  activities  and  disclose 
potential  environmental  impacts.    This  analysis  can  take  the  form  of  an  environmental  assessment  (EA)  or 
environmental impact statement (EIS).  
 
Accessibility, Climate, Local Resources, Infrastructure and Physiography 
 
Topography, Elevation and Vegetation 
 
The Manhattan Project lies within the Basin and Range physiographic province of Central Nevada.  This province 
consists of northerly trending mountain ranges with 2,000ft to 5,000ft (610m to 1,500m) of topographic relief above 
relatively  broad  and flat  intervening valleys.    The  Manhattan  Project  is  located on  the southwestern  flank of  the 
Toquima Mountain range at elevations between 7,600ft to 8,000ft (2,300m to 2,400m) above mean sea level.  The 
topography is considered “mature” and generally of moderate-relief.  The northern boundary of the South Manhattan 
area is located near the headwaters of a seasonally flowing stream in Consolidated Canyon.  Vegetation is sparse 
consisting of Pinion Juniper and sagebrush.
Page 32 of 110
Operating Season 
 
The  typical  exploration  season  would  be  from  mid-March  through  the  end  of  November.    If  snow  removal 
equipment is used, the exploration season can be extended through the winter months.   
 
Surface Rights 
 
Calais’ interests cover surface rights to the 428ac (173ha) included within the 28 patented claims.  Surface access is 
provided to the remaining 3,370ac (1,364ha)  of federal land by the 1872 Mining Law.  Applications for exploration 
activities must be filed with the appropriate agencies if surface disturbance is to occur.  Calais has completed a land 
exchange involving a trade of one patented claim of lesser mineral interest for a claim of greater interest and of 
equal or greater size. 
 
Power and Water Supply 
 
Currently, there is no electric service or water supply at either the White Caps or Consolidated Mines.   
 
Buildings, Ancillary Facilities and Mines 
 
There are no usable buildings or facilities at the property.  All mines on the prospect are underground mines. 
 
Tailings Storage Area 
 
There is a small tailing disposal area located at the White Caps mine site.  The tailings are dry and cover an area of 
about one half acre.  The runoff of the tailing area is currently uncontrolled.  There are several potential areas for 
valley  fill  type  tailings  disposal.    Several  areas  of  tailings  and  dumps  in  the  vicinity  of  several  of  the  patented 
properties were previously conveyed by prior owners to Anthony C. Selig. 
 
Waste Disposal Area 
 
There are several small waste disposal piles at both the White Caps and Consolidated Manhattan Mines.  All are 
located in close proximity to the old shaft or winze openings and all combined contain approximately 250,000st 
(227,000tonnes) of material.  There are no obvious signs of any acid generation and sulfides are rarely visible in the 
piles, most of the material consists of unaltered country rock. 
 
History 
  
Ownership 
 
The  Manhattan  Project  centered  on  the  historic  White  Caps  Mine,  which  operated  continuously  from  1906  until 
1942, and intermittently from 1942 until 1964.  The Keystone claims and the Jumbo Mine Group claims comprise 
the historic White Caps Mine.  After the discovery of the White Caps mine in 1905, the first formal company to own 
the property was the White Caps Mining Company, formed in 1915 (Gibbs 1985).  In 1925, the White Caps Mining 
Company sold the property to the White Caps Gold Mining Company.  The White Caps Gold Mining Company 
leased  the  property  in  1931  to  W.J.  Fancher  a  former  mine  superintendent  for  the  White  Caps  Gold  Mining 
Company.  Between 1933 and 1934, 25 to 30 unnamed leasers operated in the White Caps Mine between the 800-
level and the surface (Mining World).  Although substantial work has been done to consolidate and rationalize titles 
to the unpatented and patented claims, additional curative work will be necessary. 
 
Past Exploration and Development 
 
Exploration work on the Manhattan Project claims consists of geologic mapping, rock chip sampling, geophysical 
surveys, drilling and underground drifting.  The majority of the modern bedrock mapping was conducted by Shawe 
during the period between 1984-2004.  Shawe also conducted rock chip sampling of the quartz veins in the North 
Manhattan area prior to his report on the same in 1986.
Page 33 of 110
Several  exploration  companies  over  the  years  have  drilled  the  property  mainly  using  reverse  circulation  drilling.  
The most comprehensive program was conducted from 1982 through 1984 by Freeport Mineral Company.  They 
completed 72 drillholes near the historic mining areas to test shallow and deep-seated mineralization potential near 
the White  Caps,  Manhattan, Consolidated  and  Litigation  Hill  Mines.    A  few  of  these holes  encountered  discrete 
high-grade gold zones but broader intercepts of disseminated gold mineralization were not found.  A significant drill 
intercept was encountered in drill hole WC-49.  This drillhole reported 25ft of 0.698oz/st (23.9g/t) from 465ft to 
490ft (142m to 149m) in depth.   
 
In 1986, NMMI drilled over 10 holes up to 120ft (37m) deep with a truck mounted reverse-circulation drill.  The 
program was targeting shallow mineralization and the results were not encouraging.  In 1988, NMMI drilled five 
more holes with a truck mounted rotary drill rig targeting deeper mineralization than previously.  These drill holes 
were  all  between  200ft-525ft  (61m-160m)  deep.    The  results  of  this  program  encountered  several  intercepts  of 
anomalous gold but no coherent zones of mineralization were established.   
 
In September 1993, a 1,200ft (366m) decline was driven by Harrison Western for NMMI in an attempt to intercept 
the high-grade gold intercept identified by Freeport in drillhole WC-49.  The decline was completed in March 1994.  
It was successful in locating the gold mineralization but did not encounter the high-grade intercept.  This decline 
could be used for future drill programs.   
 
Historic Production 
 
The White Caps Mine was the largest producer in the Manhattan district.  The mine operated from 1905 until 1964 
and is reported to have produced approximately 120koz of gold (Anderson 1990).  Other mines within the project 
area include the Nevada Manhattan, the Manhattan Consolidated, the Jumbo, the Bath, and the Union Consolidated 
Mines.    All  of  these  together  are  reported  to  have  produced  an  estimated  30koz  of  gold  (Anderson  1990).  
Koschmann and Bergandahl (1968) report that a total of 280koz of gold were mined from lode claims within the 
Manhattan  district.    However,  they  do  not  quantify  exactly  which  mines  were  included  within  the  “Manhattan 
District”.   
 
Field Surveys and Expenditures 
 
In  the past,  exploratory drilling  focused  on  defining resources  within  the  Cambrian  aged  limestone unit near  the 
White Caps Mine.  Several exploration companies over the years have drilled mostly reverse circulation to test for 
gold and silver mineralization.  The most comprehensive program was conducted from 1982 through 1984 targeting 
a shallow, bulk tonnage open pit type mineralization.  A few of these holes encountered discrete high-grade gold 
zones but broader intercepts of disseminated gold mineralization were not found.   
 
In 1995, Calais commissioned a magnetotellurics survey over the property.  The results of this survey showed a 
series of anomalies that occur in a linear trend parallel to the general strike of the Paleozoic rocks.  A drill program 
was  completed  in  1997  to  target  the  magnetic  anomalies.    The  results  showed  that  anomalous  mineralization  is 
associated  with  some  of  the  anomalies.    Overall,  the  drilling  success  rate  was  very  low  with  only  one  drillhole 
reaching the intended target due to poor ground conditions.  
 
The Manhattan North area is an exploration target that was staked in 2004.  This is an area of northwest-southeast 
striking veins and mineralized shear zones with anomalous gold values.   
 
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  amounts  spent  by  the  Company  on  exploration  activities  during  fiscal  2005 
through 2010 on the Manhattan prospect:
Fiscal Year Ended May 31,
2010
2009
2007
2006
2005
(unaudited)
$22,779
(unaudited)
$27,702
(unaudited)
$2,040
$27,076
$18,831
Exploration 
Expenses
2008
$36,125
Page 34 of 110
$- 
$-
(unaudited)
(unaudited)
(unaudited)
As  of  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2005  through  May  31,  2010,  we  had  recorded  the  following  amounts  for 
mineral  interests  and  furniture,  fixtures  and  equipment  (net  of  depreciation  and  impairments)  on  the  Manhattan 
prospect:
Fiscal Year Ended May 31,
2010
2007
2006
2009
2008
2005
$- 
$-
$- 
$-
$- 
$-
$- 
$-
$- 
$-
Mineral Interests 
Furniture, Fixtures and 
Equipment 
 
Resource Estimation  
 
The  Manhattan  project  is  without  known  resources  or  reserves  and  the  Company’s  activities  are  exploratory  in 
nature.  There are  no  assurances  that  the  Company  will  identify  any  economically  viable  mineral  deposits on  the 
Manhattan project.  
 
Exploration Conclusions 
 
The Manhattan project is a historical producing gold mine with subsequent exploration drilling.  Recent attempts to 
define a disseminated shallow gold resource were never fully completed.  However, numerous relatively narrow and 
high-grade intercepts have been found.  Further efforts to define a deeper gold resource have been hampered by 
drilling reverse circulation from surface due to the depth of the mineralization and poor drilling conditions within 
the overlying rocks. 
 
Proposed Work   
 
We do not intend to perform any significant work on the mineral interests constituting the Manhattan prospect until 
(if ever) the uncertainties relating to the title to those mineral interests are resolved.  Consequently, as of the date of 
this report, we have not allocated an exploration budget for those prospects.
Panama Prospect: Gold Exploration
Acquisition Details
Pursuant  to  an  agreement  dated  October 6,  2000,  we  received  an  option  to  purchase  a  40,000-acre  mineral 
concession  in  an  historic  gold  producing  district  of  Panama  with  Panama  Mining  of  Golden  Cycle  of  Panama 
Incorporated (“PMGC”). We acquired concessions to 61,000 acres in the eastern Veraguas district of Panama in 
2001  through  a  five-year  lease  agreement  with  PMGC  and  a  related  company,  Golden  Cycle  of  Panama,  Inc. 
(“GCP”).    The  prior  agreements  were  cancelled  in  a  new  Purchase  Option  Agreement  we  entered  into  on 
February 28, 2003.  As consideration for the Purchase Option Agreement, we (1) issued 200,000 shares of stock to 
the  two  owners  of  PMGC  and  GCP  (Mr.  and  Mrs. Gary  Zook  as  to  50%  and  Herbert  Hendricks  as  to  50%) 
(including 100,000 shares initially issued in 2000); (2) paid $10,000 total amount to the two owners of PMGC and 
GCP; and (3) assumed $15,750 of the seller’s payables to third parties.  We also committed to perform certain work 
on the prospects. As a result of an extension agreement entered into on January 31, 2004, we had an obligation to 
complete  a  $250,000  exploration  program  for  lode  deposits  by  September 25,  2004,  and  an  additional  $250,000 
program to explore for placer gold deposits and install a pilot placer operation. We also hired a shareholder of the 
sellers, Herbert Hendricks, to oversee the project, and we paid him $3,500 per month through June 2004 (when we 
terminated the contract) to do so.  Herbert Hendricks is the brother of our vice-president, Thomas Hendricks, but 
they do not share the same home; they make independent business decisions, and are not otherwise affiliated.
Subsequent to the extension agreement of January 31, 2004, it was determined that the concession applications and 
the concession originally issued for the original exploitation concession were not of a status with the Panamanian 
government that exploration could be pursued without further processing of the concession applications in Panama, 
and  the  official  re-issuance  of  the  exploitation  concession.    We  also  determined  that  we  were  not  interested  in 
pursuing placer deposits on the concessions, in which PMGC and GCP continued to be interested.
Page 35 of 110
Effective  on  September  15,  2005  we  entered  into  a  “Further  Extension  and  Restatement  of  Purchase  Option 
Agreement-Republic  of  Panama  Concessions”  wherein  we  and  PMGC  and  GCP  amended  and  restated  all  prior 
agreements. The parties agreed to split the hard rock portions of the concession applications (to us) and the placer 
portions of the concessions (to PMGC and GCP).  We surrendered our entitlement under the prior agreements to 
explore and develop the Panama concessions.  In addition, the responsibility of validating the Panama concessions 
and  applications,  and  of  recording  necessary  evidence  of  the  new  agreement  was  allocated  to  PMGC  and  GCP.  
Highlights of the September 15, 2005 agreement (the “September Agreement”) are as follows:
--we were granted a 1-year option to acquire the hard rock concessions for a price of $4.5 million US; 
 
--we were granted the full and exclusive right to access, explore, develop and mine the hard rock portions 
of the concessions; 
 
--PMGC and GCP represented and warranted that it had full title to the concessions and applications, and 
made  additional  representations  and  warranties  regarding  its  ability  to  enter  into  the  agreement,  and  to 
properly register the agreement, and to complete processing of the concessions and applications; 
 
--PMGC and GCP were granted a 2% NSR royalty on production from the concessions creditable against 
the option purchase price; 
 
--we undertook to make payments to PMGC and GCP of $65,000, which payments were made; 
 
--we undertook to pay PMGC and GCP $25,000 per year beginning on September 15, 2006 and on each 
September 16 thereafter through 2015; 
 
--we committed to spend $175,000 on qualified exploration expenditures prior to September 15, 2006, and 
$100,000 per year thereafter, with certain carryover credit provisions; and 
 
--PMGC and GCP made extensive warranties and representations concerning the status of the concessions 
and applications.
Subsequent  to  the  execution  of  the  agreement,  we  engaged  in  extensive  correspondence  with  PMGC  and  GCP 
concerning the status of the concessions.  We were also subjected to repeated demands by PMGC and GCP to fund 
environmental  studies,  legal  costs  and  other  matters  related  to  the  processing  of  the  concessions,  which 
responsibilities were allocated to PMGC and GCP under the September Agreement. 
 
We ultimately determined that we could not pursue active exploration work on the concessions without the formal 
issuance of the concessions by Panamanian authorities.  We received vague and partially responsive replies to our 
requests for the completion of the processing of the concessions, and for status reports concerning the same.  In the 
spring of 2007, we received repeated requests for funding from PMGC and GCP for the purpose of “saving” and/or 
processing  the  concessions.  We  initially  funded  these  requests,  but  became  disturbed  concerning  the  repeated 
demands,  which  appeared  to  be  outside  of  the  September  Agreement,  and  ultimately  refused  to  fund  additional 
demands without provision of the documentation required by the September Agreement. 
 
In late spring and early summer of 2007, PMGC and GCP declared us to be in default.  We protested the default in 
writing, and declared PMGC and GCP to be in default under the September Agreement.  Shortly thereafter, PMGC 
and GCP took the position that the Panama agreements, including the September Agreement, were void or of no 
legal effect in Panama, despite their own representations to the contrary in those agreements. 
 
We have since initiated arbitration with the International Center for Dispute Resolution, the international division of 
the American Arbitration Association.  We are seeking a declaration concerning the currency and validity of the 
concessions, and, in the alterative, damages of $995,000. 
 
The  arbitration  is  still  pending  before  the  ICDR,  and  the parties  are  in negotiations  concerning  resolution  of  the 
dispute.    If  negotiations  fail,  an  arbitrator  will  be  appointed  and  the  arbitration  will  proceed.    Management  has 
determined that it lacks confidence in PMGC and GCP concerning their performance under existing agreements, and
Page 36 of 110
has  stated  a  strong  preference  to  be  bought  out  of  its  interest  under  the  September  Agreement,  or  to  otherwise 
terminate its involvement with the Panama concessions and operations. 
 
There is no guarantee of a positive outcome of the arbitration or in determining our position in the concessions under 
the September Agreement.  There is no guarantee, even if the outcome of the arbitration is positive, that we could 
recover a judgment against the assets of PMGC and/or GCP.  If we are determined to hold a valid interest in the 
concessions under the terms of the agreement, there is no guarantee, given the past inability of PMGC and GCP to 
perform their contractual obligations, that the Panama concessions and applications will be processed to the point of 
being  valid  and  enforceable  within  Panama  pursuant  to  Panamanian  mining  law  then  applicable.    In  2007,  we 
determined that, regardless of the outcome of the arbitration, we will not undertake any exploration programs or 
mining operations in Panama.  Since the initiation of the arbitration, we have been able to obtain only second-hand 
information concerning the properties, and PMGC and GCP have been uncooperative in providing any information. 
We  and  our  management  have  reason  to  believe  that  PMGC  and  GCP  have  continued  to  deal  with  the  Panama 
concessions and concession applications as if our interest under the September Agreement did not exist.
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
Other than discussed below, as of the date of this report, we are not involved as a plaintiff or defendant in any active, 
pending  or  (to  our  knowledge)  threatened,  legal  proceedings  which  would  be  material  to  our  operations.  Also, 
except  as described  below, we  are not  aware  of  any  material  legal  proceedings  to which  any  director, officer  or 
affiliate of the Company, any owner of record or beneficially of more than five percent of our common stock, or any 
associate of any such director, officer, affiliate of the Company or security holder is a party adverse to the Company 
or any of our subsidiaries or has a material interest adverse to the Company or our subsidiaries.
On March 8, 2004, we entered into an agreement with Marlowe Harvey, his wife Judy Harvey, and several related 
entities by which Calais and Mr. and Mrs. Harvey resolved a number of issues that had arisen between them. Under 
the agreement,
•   Mr. Harvey and Calais agreed on a more precise definition of Calais’ right (which expires August 31, 2011, 
but can be extended for an additional ten years if AAI’s right to convert its debenture is extended as well) to 
repurchase the interest of AAI in the Caribou properties, including the price payable for the reacquisition (a
total of Cdn$747,728) and AAI’s right to convert that debenture before it is paid;
•   Further defining Calais’ right to borrow against, enter in and upon those properties, construct buildings and
mines on those properties, and remove and sell minerals from those properties for Calais’ own account;
•   Mr. Harvey and his related entities agreed to assign their interests in the Manhattan prospect to Calais and 
completed this assignment in July 2004.  In addition, Mr. Harvey and his related entities also agreed to convey 
to Calais (not later than December 31, 2005) the entire right, title and interest in the Manhattan prospect from 
all parties (“marketable title”).  To our knowledge, Mr. Harvey and his related entities have not commenced 
the work necessary to obtain marketable title.  Upon receipt of marketable title, Calais agreed to pay one of
Mr. Harvey’s  related  entities  250,000  shares  of  Calais  restricted  stock.    Calais  agreed  to  undertake  certain
drilling obligations after receiving good title, and to issue 2,500,000 shares of common stock (or if greater a 
number of shares equal to 5% of the outstanding common shares on a fully-diluted basis) to Argus Resources, 
Inc.,  one  of  Mr. Harvey’s related  entities,  if  Calais  identifies  gold  or  gold  equivalent  mineral  resources  (as
determined in accordance with Canadian standards) exceeding 2,000,000 ounces (or a proportionate number of 
shares if placed into production prior to identification of mineral resources exceeding 2,000,000 ounces).
•   Mr. Harvey and his related entities agreed to comply with their shareholder filing obligations in the United
States and Canada (if any) not later than April 30, 2004.
Mr. Harvey also agreed to return a stock option agreement to Calais which evidenced the option to acquire
82,500 shares of Calais common stock granted to him in November 2002. That option expired on November 
15, 2004, and had an exercise price of US$0.80 per share. Mr. Harvey did not comply with this obligation.
•   Calais agreed to propose to its shareholders at its next shareholder meeting that the conversion price of the 
debentures be repriced from Cdn$1.23 to US$.55.  This proposal was defeated by the shareholder vote held at
the shareholder meeting on November 10, 2004.
•   Calais agreed to retain Mr. Harvey as a consultant for one year at US$3,000 per month. Mr. Harvey resigned
as a consultant as of June 1, 2004.
Page 37 of 110
•   Calais was granted the right to acquire up to 4% of applicable 5% net smelter royalties to Mr. Harvey (or his
assignee)  as  recorded  in  the  Nevada  property  agreements  for  $3  million  per  1%  acquired;  however,  Calais
disputes the existence, amount and applicability of the claimed 5% net smelter royalties.
To facilitate the settlement, Thomas S. Hendricks agreed to transfer to Mr. Harvey a debenture for Cdn$984,000 that 
Mrs. Harvey had assigned to him in 2000.  Mr. Hendricks executed the assignment of this debenture and delivered 
both the original debenture and the assignment to Calais to hold pending Mrs. Harvey’s acceptance of that debenture 
in  a  manner  that  complies  with  applicable  securities  laws.   To  date, Mrs. Harvey  has  refused  to  return  to  Calais 
documents  that  Calais  believes  is  necessary  to  show  compliance  with  securities  laws,  and  Mrs. Harvey  has  not 
proposed any alternative procedure.  Consequently, the debenture is still registered in Mr. Hendricks’ name and will 
remain  so  registered  until  Mrs. Harvey  provides  Calais  with  sufficient  evidence  of  compliance  with  applicable 
securities laws.
In  addition,  Calais,  Mr. Harvey,  and  his  related  entities  entered  into  mutual  releases.  Calais  has  previously 
announced that it does not intend to expend any significant exploration dollars on the Manhattan prospect until such 
time as it has received further assurances as to title.
At the present time, we have no evidence that Mr. Harvey or his related entities have complied with their obligations 
under  the  settlement  agreement  (other  than  tendering  certain  assignments  to  Calais  of  certain  portions  of  the 
Manhattan  project),  or  that  they  have  commenced  doing  the  work  necessary  to  deliver  marketable  title  to  the 
Manhattan project, both as required by the settlement agreement.
Subsequent to May 31, 2009, on December 15, 2010, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreements with AAI 
and Mrs. Harvey for said debentures wherein the parties agreed that Ms. Harvey would accept as full payment for 
her two debentures totaling $2,998,257, for cash of $149,368 in cash and a total of 8,890,638 shares of our restricted 
common stock.   The cash was paid on December 15, 2010 and the shares were issued on December 20, 2010 to an 
escrow agent to hold the shares until the Cease Trade Order in British Columbia has been revoked.
Further,  under  the  December  15,  2010  settlement,  Argus  accepted  as  full  payment  for  its  debenture  (originally 
totaling  $220,723)  659,730  shares  of  our  restricted  common  shares.  These  shares  were  issued  on  December  20, 
2010.
See also “Item 2. Properties - Panama Prospect: Gold Exploration - Acquisition Details” for information about the 
pending arbitration relating to disputes involving our former Panama prospect.
Nevada Environmental Issues
We  have  been  approached  by  the  State  of  Nevada,  Division  of  Minerals  (“Nevada  Division  of  Minerals”),  with 
regard  to  the  need  for  safeguarding  and  public  notification  of  several  dozen  mine  openings  in  the  area  of  our 
properties  in  Nevada  and  are  working  with  the  Nevada  Division  of  Minerals  to  set  forth  a  plan  of  remediation.  
Management’s current cost estimates for this remediation are in the range of $25,000 - $35,000.
In addition, we have been contacted by the United States Forest Service (“USFS”) with regard to the potential need 
for environmental remediation related to exploration activities that took place on federal lands within our mining 
claims.  Management’s preliminary estimates indicate that costs are not expected to exceed $15,000 with respect to 
this remediation.
We have recorded an environmental remediation liability of $50,000, which management believes is the most likely 
cost  outcome  for  these  activities.    This  environmental  remediation  liability  is  an  estimate  and  it  is  reasonably 
possible  that  this  estimate  could  change  in  the  near  term  or  that  costs  to  remediate  these  claims  could  exceed 
management’s estimates.  Management intends to undertake a program to rectify these issues during the summer 
months of 2011.
Page 38 of 110
Securities and Exchange Commission Proceedings 
 
The  United  States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  issued  an  order  suspending  trading  in  the  Company’s 
common stock for the period from February 24, 2011 through March 9, 2011 because we have been delinquent in 
the  filing  of  periodic  reports  since  2004.  Also on  February  24,  2011, the  SEC  issued  an  order  instituting  public 
administrative proceedings against the Company pursuant to Section 12(j) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
(the “Exchange Act”) to suspend for a period not exceeding twelve months or revoke the registration of the our 
common  stock  under  Section  12  of  the  Exchange  Act.  See  “Item  5.  Market  for  Registrant’s  Common  Equity, 
Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.” 
 
ITEM 4. (Removed and Reserved).
PART II
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 
AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES.
Market Information
Our Common Shares were approved for quotation on the OTC Bulletin Board in the United States, under the symbol 
“CAAUF”  on  February 1,  1999.    Effective  September  7,  2005,  our  common  stock  was  deleted  from  the  OTC-
Bulletin Board in the United States, and our common stock was quoted only on the Pink Sheets (now known as the 
OTC Pink) under the symbol CAAUF.PK.  We are still trading in the United States under this symbol.  On February 
9, 2005, we were notified by the British Columbia Securities Commission (BCSC) that a cease trade order had been 
issued for the Company due to the lack of timely financial reporting.  The cease trade order does not allow residents 
of British Columbia and other Canadian jurisdictions to trade shares of Calais Resources.  We are still under this 
cease trade order.  We believe the completion of the audited financial reports, and other documents, the payment of 
outstanding filing fees as well as scheduling an Annual General Meeting within three months after the date the cease 
trade order is lifted will allow us to request the order to be lifted.  We cannot commit to the timing of the lifting of 
the  order,  if  ever,  since  we  cannot  control  the  decisions  or  timing  of  the  decisions  of  the  BCSC  regarding  the 
outcome of the request to revoke the cease trade order.
On February 24, 2011, the SEC issued an order suspending trading in the Company’s common stock for the period 
from February 24, 2011 through March 9, 2011 because we have been delinquent in the filing of periodic reports 
since  2004.  Prior  to  the  suspension,  our  common  stock  was  quoted  on  the  OTC  Pink  under  the  ticker  symbol 
“CAAUF.”  A  copy  of  the  SEC’s  order  is  publicly  available  at  www.sec.gov  under  Litigation  –  Trading 
Suspensions.
Also  on  February  24,  2011,  the  SEC  issued  an  order  instituting  public  administrative  proceedings  against  the 
Company pursuant to Section 12(j) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”) to suspend for a 
period  not  exceeding  twelve  months  or  revoke  the  registration  of  our  common  stock  under  Section  12  of  the 
Exchange Act.  A copy of the SEC’s order is publicly available at www.sec.gov under Litigation – Administrative 
Proceedings.    A  pre-hearing  conference  was  held  on  April  4,  2011  with  an  administrative  law  judge  from  the 
Securities and Exchange Commission.  A second conference was held on May 10, 2011.  The judge has ordered a 
third conference for June 24, 2011 to determine whether it will be possible for the Company to bring its periodic 
filings with the SEC current before the judge must issue an initial decision.
The high and low bid prices as quoted, during the applicable periods, on the Pink Sheets and OTC-Bulletin Board 
for the Company’s Common Shares for the last six completed fiscal years is as follows.  These quotations reflect 
inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission and may not represent actual transactions:
Bid Prices
Page 39 of 110
2010
2007
High 
$ 0.20 
$ 0.25 
$ 0.14 
$ 0.12
High 
$ 0.67 
$ 0.51 
$ 0.22 
$ 0.18
Low 
$ 0.03 
$ 0.07 
$ 0.06 
$ 0.03
Low 
$ 0.15 
$ 0.18 
$ 0.11 
$ 0.11
Period 
1st Quarter 
2nd Quarter 
3rd Quarter 
4th Quarter 
 
 
Period 
1st Quarter 
2nd Quarter 
3rd Quarter 
4th Quarter
High 
$ 0.20 
$ 0.11 
$ 0.11 
$ 0.13
High 
$ 0.35 
$ 2.50 
$ 1.15 
$ 0.75
2009
2006
Low 
$ 0.10 
$ 0.01 
$ 0.01 
$ 0.02
Low 
$ 0.10 
$ 0.01 
$ 0.10 
$ 0.10
2008
2005
High 
$ 0.15 
$ 0.11 
$ 0.28 
$ 0.20
High 
$ 1.20 
$ 0.72 
$ 0.51 
$ 0.35
Low 
$ 0.06 
$ 0.05 
$ 0.06 
$ 0.10
Low 
$ 0.65 
$ 0.38 
$ 0.28 
$ 0.18
Our Common Shares are issued in registered form and are not registered to trade in the United States in the form of 
American Depository Receipts (ADR’s) or similar certificates.
Holders of Common Equity
As of June 7, 2011, the number of stockholders of record was 443.
Dividends
We have not declared any dividends since incorporation and we do not anticipate that we will declare any dividends 
in the foreseeable future. Our present policy is to retain future earnings (if any) for use in our operations and the 
expansion of our business.
Equity Compensation Plans
The Company does not have any formal equity compensation plans; however, we have issued stock to employees, 
consultants, officers and directors as compensation for services, and we anticipate we will continue to do so in the 
future. See “Item 11. Executive Compensation.”
Canadian Tax Matters  
 
Exchange Controls 
 
There is no law, governmental decree or regulation in Canada that restricts the export or import of capital or affects 
the  remittance  of  dividends,  interest  or  other  payments  to  a  non-resident  holder  of  common  shares  other  than 
withholding tax requirements.  Any such remittances to United States residents are subject to withholding tax.  See 
“Taxation” below. 
 
There  is  no  limitation  imposed  by  the  laws  of  Canada  or  by  the  charter  or  other  constituent  documents  of  the 
Company on the right of a non-resident to hold or vote the common shares, other than as provided in the Investment 
Act.  The  following  discussion  summarizes  the  principal  features  of  the  Investment  Act  for  a  non-resident  who 
proposes to acquire the common shares. 
 
The  Investment  Canada  Act  generally  prohibits  implementation  of  a  reviewable  investment  by  an  individual, 
government  or  agency  thereof,  corporation,  partnership,  trust  or  joint  venture  (each  an  “entity”)  that  is  not  a 
“Canadian”  as  defined  in  the  Investment  Canada  Act  (a  “non-Canadian”),  unless  after  review,  the  Director  of 
Investments appointed by the minister responsible for the Investment Canada Act is satisfied that the investment is 
likely to be of net benefit to Canada.  An investment in the common shares by a non-Canadian other than a “WTO
Page 40 of 110
Investor”  (as  that  term  is  defined  by  the  Investment  Canada  Act,  and  which  term  includes  entities  which  are 
nationals of or are controlled by nationals of member states of the World Trade Organization) when the Company 
was  not  controlled  by  a  WTO  Investor,  would  be  reviewable  under  the  Investment  Canada  Act  if  it  was  an 
investment  to  acquire  control  of  the  Company  and  the  value  of  the  assets  of  the  Company,  as  determined  in 
accordance with the regulations promulgated under the Investment Canada Act, was $5,000,000 or more, or if an 
order for review was made by the federal cabinet on the grounds that the investment related to Canada’s cultural 
heritage or national identity, regardless of the value of the assets of the Company.  An investment in our common 
shares by a WTO Investor, or by a non-Canadian when the Company was controlled by a WTO Investor, would be 
reviewable under the Investment Canada Act if it was an investment to acquire control of the Company and the 
value  of  the  assets  of  the  Company,  as  determined  in  accordance  with  the  regulations  promulgated  under  the 
Investment Canada Act was not less than a specified amount, which as specified in 2010 was any amount in excess 
of Cdn$299 million.  A non-Canadian would acquire control of the Company for the purposes of the Investment 
Canada Act if the non-Canadian acquired a majority of the common shares.  The acquisition of one third or more, 
but less than a majority of the common shares would be presumed to be an acquisition of control of the Company 
unless  it  could  be  established  that,  on  the  acquisition,  the  Company  was  not  controlled  in  fact  by  the  acquirer 
through the ownership of the common shares. 
  
Certain  transactions  relating  to  the  common  shares  would  be  exempt  from  the  Investment  Canada  Act, 
including:  (a) an acquisition of the common shares by a person in the ordinary course of that person’s business as a 
trader  or  dealer  in  securities;  (b)  an  acquisition  of  control  of  the  Company  in  connection  with  the  realization  of 
security  granted  for  a  loan  or  other  financial  assistance  and  not  for  a  purpose  related  to  the  provisions  of  the 
Investment Canada Act; and (c) an acquisition of control of the Company by reason of an amalgamation, merger, 
consolidation  or  corporate  reorganization  following  which  the  ultimate  direct  or  indirect  control  in  fact  of  the 
Company, through the ownership of the common shares, remained unchanged. 
 
Taxation 
 
Material Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences 
 
Management of the Company considers that the following discussion fairly describes the material Canadian federal 
income tax consequences applicable to a holder of common stock of the Company who is a resident of the United 
States and who is not a resident of Canada and who does not use or hold, and is not deemed to use or hold, his shares 
of  common  stock  of  the  Company  in  connection  with  carrying  on  a  business  in  Canada  (a  “non-resident 
shareholder”). 
 
This summary is based upon the current provisions of the Income Tax Act (Canada) (the “ITA”), the regulations 
thereunder (the “Regulations”), the current publicly announced administrative and assessing  policies of Revenue 
Canada, Taxation and all specific proposals (the “Tax Proposals”) to amend the ITA and Regulations announced by 
the Minister of Finance (Canada) prior to the date hereof.  This description is not exhaustive of all possible Canadian 
federal income tax consequences and, except for the Tax Proposals, does not take into account or anticipate any 
changes in law, whether by legislative, governmental or judicial action. 
 
Dividends 
 
Dividends paid on the common stock of the Company to a non-resident will be subject to withholding tax.  The 
Canada-U.S. Income Tax Convention (1980) provides that the normal 25% withholding tax rate is reduced to 15% 
on dividends paid on shares of a corporation resident in Canada (such as the Company) to residents of the United 
States, and also provides for a further reduction of this rate to 5% where the beneficial owner of the dividends is a 
corporation which is a resident of the United States which owns at least 10% of the voting shares of the corporation 
paying the dividend.  The Company is required to withhold the applicable tax from the dividend payable to the non-
resident shareholder, and to remit the tax to the Receiver General of Canada from the account of the non-resident 
shareholder.
Page 41 of 110
Capital Gains 
 
In general, a non-resident of Canada is not subject to tax under the ITA with respect to a capital gain realized upon 
the actual or deemed disposition of a share, including a deemed disposition on death, provided that the non-resident 
shareholder did not hold the common share as capital property used in carrying on a business in Canada.  Non-
residents of Canada who dispose of shares of the Company will be subject to income tax in Canada with respect to 
capital gains if:
(a) 
(b) 
(c)
the non-resident holder; 
persons with whom the non-resident holder did not deal with at arm’s length; or 
the non-resident holder and persons with whom the non-resident holder did not deal with at arm’s 
length,
owned not less than 25% of the issued shares of any class or series of the Company at any time during the five-year 
period preceding the disposition.  In the case of a non-resident holder to whom shares of the Company represent 
taxable Canadian property and who is resident in the United States, no Canadian taxes will be payable on a capital 
gain realized on such shares by reason of the Canada-U.S. Income Tax Convention (1980) (the “Treaty”) unless the 
value of such shares is derived principally from real property situated in Canada.  However, in such a case, certain 
transitional relief under the Treaty may be available. 
 
Material United States Federal Income Tax Considerations 
 
The  following  discussion  summarizes  the  material  United  States  federal  income  tax  consequences, under  current 
law,  applicable  to  a  U.S.  Holder  (as  defined  below)  of  the  Company’s  common  stock.  This  discussion  does  not 
address consequences peculiar to persons subject to special provisions of federal income tax law, such as tax-exempt 
organizations, qualified retirement plans, financial institutions, insurance companies, real estate investment trusts, 
regulated  investment  companies,  broker-dealers,  nonresident  alien  individuals  or  foreign  corporations,  and 
shareholders  owning  common  stock  representing  10%  of  the  vote  and  value  of  the  Company.  In  addition,  this 
discussion does not cover any state, local or foreign tax consequences. 
 
The  following  discussion  is  based  upon  the  sections  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1986,  as  amended  (the 
“Code”),  Treasury  Regulations,  published  Internal  Revenue  Service  (“IRS”)  rulings,  published  administrative 
positions of the IRS and court decisions that are currently applicable, any or all of which could be materially and 
adversely changed, possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time. In addition, this discussion does not consider the 
potential effects, both adverse and beneficial of recently proposed legislation which, if enacted, could be applied, 
possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time.  Holders and prospective holders of the Company’s common stock are 
urged to consult their own tax advisors about the federal, state, local and foreign tax consequences of purchasing, 
owning and disposing of shares of common stock of the Company. 
 
U.S. Holders 
 
As  used  herein,  a  “U.S.  Holder”  is  defined  as  (i)  citizens  or  residents  of  the  U.S.,  or  any  state  thereof,  (ii)  a 
corporation or other entity created or organized under the laws of the U.S., or any political subdivision thereof, (iii) 
an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of source or that is otherwise subject 
to U.S. federal income tax on a net income basis in respect of the common stock, or (iv) a trust whose administration 
is  subject  to  the  primary  supervision  of  a  U.S.  court  and  which  has  one  or  more  U.S.  fiduciaries  who  have  the 
authority  to  control  all  substantial  decisions  of  the  trust,  whose  ownership  of  common  stock  is  not  effectively 
connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States and shareholders who acquired their stock 
through the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise as compensation. 
 
Distributions on Shares of Common Stock 
 
U.S.  Holders  receiving  dividend  distributions  (including  constructive  dividends)  with  respect  to  the  Company’s 
common  stock  are  required  to  include  in  gross  income  for  United  States  federal  income  tax  purposes  the  gross 
amount of such distributions to the extent that the Company has current or accumulated earnings and profits, without 
reduction  for  any  Canadian  income  tax  withheld  from  such  distributions.  Such  Canadian  tax  withheld  may  be
Page 42 of 110
credited,  subject  to  certain  limitations,  against  the  U.S.  Holder’s  United  States  federal  income  tax  liability  or, 
alternatively, may be deducted in computing the U.S. Holder’s United States federal taxable income by those who 
itemize deductions. (See more detailed discussion at “Foreign Tax Credit” below.) To the extent that distributions 
exceed current or accumulated earnings and profits of the Company, they will be treated first as a return of capital 
up to the U.S. Holder’s adjusted basis in the common stock and thereafter as gain from the sale or exchange of such 
shares. Preferential tax rates for long-term capital gains are applicable to a U.S. Holder which is an individual, estate 
or  trust.  There  are  currently  no  preferential  tax  rates  for  long-term  capital  gains  for  a  U.S.  Holder  which  is  a 
corporation.  Dividends  paid  on  the  Company’s  common  stock  will  not  generally  be  eligible  for  the  dividends 
received deduction provided to corporations receiving dividends from certain United States corporations. 
 
Foreign Tax Credit 
 
A U.S. Holder who pays (or has withheld from distributions) Canadian income tax with respect to the ownership of 
the Company’s common stock may be entitled, at the option of the U.S. Holder, to either a deduction or a tax credit 
for such foreign tax paid or withheld. Generally, it will be more advantageous to claim a credit because a credit 
reduces  United  States  federal  income  taxes  on  a  dollar-for-dollar  basis,  while  a  deduction  merely  reduces  the 
taxpayer’s income subject to tax. This election is made on a year-by-year basis and applies to all foreign taxes paid 
by (or withheld from) the U.S. Holder during that year. Subject to certain limitations, Canadian taxes withheld will 
be eligible for credit against the U.S. Holder’s United States federal income taxes. Under the Code, the limitation on 
foreign taxes eligible for credit is calculated separately with respect to specific classes of income. Dividends paid by 
the Company generally will be either “passive category income” or “general category income”, depending on the 
particular U.S. Holder’s circumstances. Foreign tax credits allowable with respect to each class of income cannot 
exceed the U.S. federal income tax otherwise payable with respect to such class of income. The consequences of the 
separate  limitations  will  depend  on  the  nature  and  sources  of  each  U.S.  Holder’s  income  and  the  deductions 
appropriately allocated or apportioned thereto. The availability of the foreign tax credit and the application of the 
limitations on the credit are fact specific and holders and prospective holders of common stock are urged to consult 
their own tax advisors regarding their individual circumstances. 
 
Disposition of Shares of Common Stock 
 
A U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss upon the sale of shares of common stock equal to the difference, if any, 
between (i) the amount of cash plus the fair market value of any property received; and (ii) the shareholder’s tax 
basis in the common stock. This gain or loss will be capital gain or loss if the shares are a capital asset in the hands 
of  the  U.S.  Holder,  and  such  gain  or  loss  will  be  long-term  capital  gain  or  loss  if  the  U.S.  Holder  has  held  the 
common  stock  for  more  than  one  year.  Gains  and  losses  are  netted  and  combined  according  to  special  rules  in 
arriving at the overall capital gain or loss for a particular tax year. Deductions for net capital losses are subject to 
significant limitations. For U.S. Holders who are individuals, any unused portion of such net capital loss may be 
carried over to be used in later tax years until such net capital loss is thereby exhausted. For U.S. Holders which are 
corporations (other than corporations subject to Subchapter S of the Code), an unused net capital loss may be carried 
back three years from the loss year and carried forward five years from the loss year to be offset against capital gains 
until such net capital loss is thereby exhausted. 
 
Other Considerations 
 
The  Company  has  not  determined  whether  it  meets  the  definition  of  a  “passive  foreign  investment  company”  (a 
“PFIC”). It is unlikely that the Company meets the definition of a “foreign personal holding company” (a “FPHC”) 
or a “controlled foreign corporation” (a “CFC”) under current U.S. law.  
 
If more than 50% of the voting power or value of the Company were owned (actually or constructively) by U.S. 
Holders who each owned (actually or constructively) 10% or more of the voting power of the Company’s common 
shares  (“10%  Shareholders”),  then  the  Company  would  become  a  CFC  and  each  10%  Shareholder  would  be 
required  to  include  in  its  taxable  income  as  a  constructive  dividend  an  amount  equal  to  its  share  of  certain 
undistributed  income  of  the  Company.  If  (1)  more  than  50%  of  the  voting  power  or  value  of  the  Company’s 
common shares were owned (actually or constructively) by five or fewer individuals who are citizens or residents of 
the United States and (2) 60% or more of the Company’s income consisted of certain interest, dividend or other 
enumerated types of income, then the Company would be a FPHC. If the Company were a FPHC, then each U.S.
Page 43 of 110
Holder (regardless of the amount of the Company’s common shares owned by such U.S. Holder) would be required 
to  include  in  its  taxable  income  as  a  constructive  dividend  its  share  of  the  Company’s  undistributed  income  of 
specific types. 
 
If 75% or more of the Company’s annual gross income has ever consisted of, or ever consists of, “passive” income 
or if 50% or more of the average value of the Company’s assets in any year has ever consisted of, or ever consists 
of, assets that produce, or are held for the production of, such “passive” income, then the Company would be or 
would  become  a  PFIC.  The  Company  has  not  provided  assurances  that  it  has  not  been  and  does  not  expect  to 
become  a  PFIC.  Please  note  that  the  application  of  the  PFIC  provisions  of  the  Code  to  resource  companies  is 
somewhat unclear.  
 
If the Company were to be a PFIC, then a U.S. Holder would be required to pay an interest charge together with tax 
calculated  at  maximum  tax  rates  on  certain  “excess  distributions”  (defined  to  include  gain  on  the  sale  of  stock) 
unless such U.S. Holder made an election either to (1) include in his or her taxable income certain undistributed 
amounts of the Company’s income or (2) mark to market his or her Company common shares at the end of each 
taxable year as set forth in Section 1296 of the Code.  
 
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding  
 
U.S. information reporting requirements may apply with respect to the payment of dividends to U.S. Holders of the 
Company’s shares. Under Treasury regulations currently in effect, non-corporate holders may be subject to backup 
withholding at a 28% rate with respect to dividends when such holder (1) fails to furnish or certify a correct taxpayer 
identification  number  to  the  payor  in  the  required  manner,  (2)  is  notified  by  the  IRS  that  it  has  failed  to  report 
payments  of  interest  or  dividends  properly  or  (3)  fails,  under  certain  circumstances,  to  certify  that  it  has  been 
notified by the IRS that it is subject to backup withholding for failure to report interest and dividend payments. 
 
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
The following table provides a listing of securities issued by the Company during the period from May 31, 2005 to 
May 31, 2010 which were not registered under the Securities Act of 1933.  We relied upon the exemption from 
registration contained in Section 4(2) of the Securities Act as these persons were deemed to be sophisticated with 
respect to the investment in the securities due to their financial condition and involvement in our business and had 
access to the kind of information which registration would disclose.
Date of 
Sale
Name of Purchaser
Title of Securities
Expiration
Consideration
Date
($)
Fiscal 2005 
1 accredited investor 
01/05 
1 accredited investor 
03/05 
 
 
Fiscal 2006 
1 accredited investor 
07/05 
4 accredited investors 
08/05 
1 accredited investor 
02/06 
5 accredited investors 
04/06 
3 accredited investors 
04/06 
 
 
Fiscal 2007 
1 accredited investor 
06/06 
1 accredited investor 
07/06 
1 accredited investor 
07/06 
1 accredited investor 
07/06 
1 accredited investor 
07/06 
1 accredited investor 
11/06 
4 accredited investors 
03/07 
1 accredited investor 
05/07 
 
 
Fiscal 2008 
11/07
10 accredited investors
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
 
 
Units (a) 
Note Payable 
Units (a) 
Common stock 
Units (a) 
 
 
Units (a) 
Common stock 
Warrants 
Units 
Units  
Common stock 
Common stock 
Common stock 
 
 
Units (a)
Shares of
Stock
100,000 
1,100,000 
 
 
750,000 
- 
1,500,000 
93,649 
875,000 
 
 
250,000 
3,782,955 
- 
- 
- 
23,750 
500,000 
55,000 
 
 
7,775,000
Page 44 of 110
Number of 
Warrants
100,000 
1,100,000 
 
 
750,000 
1,000,000 
1,500,000 
 
875,000 
 
 
250,000
1,000,000 
2,000,000 
1,782,955 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
7,775,000
Warrants 
Exercise 
Price ($)
0.25 
0.30
01/25/07 
03/24/10
06/29/10 
10/01/10 
02/06/08
04/28/08
06/30/08
12/15/07 
12/15/10 
07/27/08
11/30/12
0.25 
0..25 
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25 
0.25 
0.25
0.12
25,000 
220,000 
 
 
150,000 
807,650 
300,000 
44,952 
175,000 
 
 
50,000
6,413 
90,000 
9,900 
 
 
622,000
(b) 
(b) 
 
 
(b) 
(c) 
(b) 
(d) 
(b) 
 
 
(b) 
(e) 
(e) 
(e) 
(e) 
(d) 
(f) 
(g) 
 
 
(b)
Name of Purchaser
Expiration
Consideration
Shares of
Number of 
Warrants 
1,950,000 
750,000 
2,211,250 
2,550,000 
1,250,000 
1,185,496 
- 
 
 
1,062,500 
1,562,500 
1,021,550 
480,000
Date of 
Sale 
5 accredited investors 
12/07 
1 accredited investor 
12/07 
4 accredited investors 
01/08 
4 accredited investors 
02/08 
1 accredited investor 
03/08 
4 accredited investors 
04/08 
1 accredited investor 
05/08 
 
 
Fiscal 2009 
4 accredited investors 
06/08 
4 accredited investors 
07/08 
4 accredited investors 
08/08 
4 accredited investors 
10/08 
 
 
Fiscal 2010 
05/10 
06/09 
08/09 
08/09 
09/09 
09/09 
02/10 
02/10 
04/10 
05/10 
 
 
(a)   Each Unit consisting of one share of restricted common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock. 
(b) 
(c)  The four purchasers collectively received a note payable in the amount of $807,650 and warrants to purchase shares of common stock, as
Title of Securities 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Common stock 
 
 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
Units (a) 
 
 
Common stock 
Units (a) 
Common stock 
Units (a) 
Common stock 
Common stock 
Common stock 
Units (a) 
Common stock 
Common stock
Stock 
1,950,000 
750,000 
2,211,250 
2,550,000 
1,250,000 
1,185,496 
250,000 
 
 
1,062,500 
1,562,500 
1,021,000 
480,000 
 
 
4,000,000 
1,249,900 
511,000 
1,200,000 
5,067,650 
1,000,000 
10,306,790 
250,000 
100,000 
1,600,000
4 directors 
4 accredited investors 
1 accredited investor 
5 accredited investors 
4 accredited investors 
1 accredited investor 
4 accredited investors 
1 accredited investor 
1 accredited investor 
1 accredited investor
($) 
156,000 
90,000 
176,900 
204,000 
100,000 
154,114 
32,500 
 
 
85,000 
125,000 
153,233 
38,400 
 
 
360,000 
174,986 
86,870 
60,000 
861,501 
170,000 
927,611 
12,500 
5,000 
100,000
Date 
12/31/12 
12/21/12 
01/14/13 
02/04/13 
02/04/13 
03/31/13 
 
 
 
06/12/13 
07/07/13 
08/01/13 
10/08/13
- 
1,249,900 
­ 
1,200,000 
- 
- 
- 
250,000 
- 
-
- 
08/01/21 
- 
08/26/12 
- 
- 
- 
08/26/12 
- 
-
(b) 
(d) 
(b) 
(b) 
(b) 
(f) 
(h) 
 
 
(b) 
(b) 
(f) 
(b) 
 
 
(d) 
(f) 
(i) 
(b) 
(g) 
(d) 
(j) 
(b) 
(b) 
(b)
Issued for cash consideration.
Warrants 
Exercise 
Price ($)
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12
0.12 
 
0.20 
 
 
 
0.20
indicated.  Consideration was $641,000 in cash and $126,650 in accrued interest. 
Issued for services. 
Issued in conjunction with the investor’s purchase of a mortgage owed by Calais to a third party.  Consideration was $514,070 in cash and 
$42,451  in  accrued  interest.    This  investor received  three  types  of  warrants  to purchase  shares  of  common  stock  as  indicated  above,  in 
addition to shares of common stock  
Issued in connection with forgiveness of default and restructuring of a note payable. 
Issued in connection with a settlement agreement. 
Issued for mineral interest and royalties. 
Issued for settlement of debt. 
Issued for payment of note.
(d) 
(e)
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j)
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA.
Not required by Form 10-K for Smaller Reporting Companies.
ITEM 7.  MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The  following  discussion  and  analysis  of  the  results  of  operations  and  financial  condition  should  be  read  in 
conjunction  with  the  accompanying  Consolidated  Financial  Statements  as  well  as  the  Note  Regarding  Forward-
Looking Statements included elsewhere in this annual report.
Except for an annual report for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010 filed May 9, 2011 and the quarterly reports for 
the fiscal year ended May 31, 2011 filed May 20, 2011 through May 26, 2011, the Company had not filed financial 
statements  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (“SEC”)  since  filing  its  Form  10-QSB  for  the  quarter 
ended August 31, 2004.  The Company is preparing additional quarterly and annual reports covering the periods 
from August 31, 2004 through February 28, 2009 and the three quarterly filings for the fiscal year ended May 31, 
2010, and intends to file those reports with the SEC as soon as practicable. We have included certain information 
herein which exceeds the requirements of Regulation S-X with respect to disclosure to be included in a Form 10-K. 
We  have  included  such  information  to  give  consideration  to  the  periods  for  which  we  have  not  filed  financial 
statements  with  the  SEC  and,  therefore,  have  attempted  to  include  information  we  believe  is  helpful  to  give  an
Page 45 of 110
accurate representation of our operations and financial condition, including financial statements for the fiscal years 
ended May 31, 2009 and 2008.
OVERVIEW
Calais seeks to explore its land holdings in Colorado and Nevada for various mineral interests, primarily gold and 
silver.  Since inception, we have not achieved any revenues from operations and we do not expect to receive any 
such revenues in the near future until such time, if ever, we successfully mine and produce precious metals which 
we can sell to market.  While we do not currently have any substantive operations on our projects, from time to time, 
we have secured cash from various sources in the form equity and debt investments and we have used this cash to 
fund our working capital needs.  At the present time, we need additional funding in order to pursue our intended 
activities.
Our  contemplated  operations  on  our  Caribou  prospect  and  our  Nevada  prospect  require  a  significant  amount  of 
financing which is not currently available to us.  Thus, our plan of operations (to explore our mineral prospects) is 
entirely dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing from equity or debt placements.  At the present time, 
we  have  no  commitment  from  any  person  to  provide  any  portion  of  such  financing  and  we  cannot  offer  any 
assurance that we will be able to obtain such financing on reasonable terms, if at all.
Recent Events
As reported in our Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 27, 2005, during our 
2005  fiscal  year,  we  experienced  severe  financial  difficulties  wherein  we  were  left  substantially  without  cash, 
employees or legal or audit services.  Since that time, we have made several private placements of equity securities 
in  order  to  pay  pressing  debt  obligations,  including  aged  accounts  payable  and  substantial  sums  owed  to  legal, 
accounting and audit service providers.  We also refinanced and changed the terms of our debt agreements in order 
to postpone payments until such time as we could secure additional financing.  Further, we ceased certain operating 
activities for substantially all of the six subsequent fiscal years from the fiscal year ended May 31, 2005 through the 
fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2010.    During  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2009,  2008,  2007,  2006  and  2005,  we 
generated  net  losses  of  $2.9  million,  $2.9  million,  $2.3  million  (unaudited),  $2.8  million  (unaudited),  and  $4.4 
million (unaudited), respectively, and did not generate revenue in any of these periods.  We ended the 2009 fiscal 
year with an accumulated deficit during the exploration stage of $42.7 million.
From inception through the fiscal year ended May 31, 2004, we accounted for all activities using Canadian GAAP.  
During this time, our functional currency for reporting purposes was the Canadian dollar.  Because the company’s 
operations, management team and land holdings exist substantially within the United States, management deemed it 
appropriate  to  change  our  functional  reporting  currency  to  the  U.S.  dollar  and  our  basis  for  accounting  to  U.S. 
GAAP, in accordance with ASC Topic 830.
Results of Operations
2009
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009, we generated a net loss of $2.9 million.  The primary components of this 
loss were as follows:
General and administrative expense of $1.0 million which includes:
•
•
$0.8  million  in  wages  and  benefits  expense,  $325,000  of  which  related  to  officer  salaries  with  the 
remaining  amount  arising  from  the  pro-rated  vesting  of  four  million  restricted  shares  of  common  stock 
granted to our Board of Directors as payment for services between June 1, 2005 and August 31, 2008 
$0.2 million in consulting and professional fees, primarily related to fees related to legal fees and expenses 
for accounting-related services
Page 46 of 110
Exploration and business development expenses of $0.1 million which primarily consisted of permits and licenses 
and property lease costs.
Other income and expenses of $1.8 million which includes:
•
•
$1.3 million in interest and financing fees, of which substantially all related to interest on outstanding debt 
instruments.   
$0.5 million in impairment charges related to the write-off of mineral interests in recognition of the fact 
that future cash flows from these mineral interests were not likely given then-current economic facts and 
circumstances.    We  were  adversely  affected  by  tightened  credit  markets  and  reduced  availability  of 
alternate funding resulting from the global economic downturn.  We were also operating in a net negative 
cash  position.    Accordingly,  we  impaired  all  of  our  remaining  mining  interests,  which  were  our  Tusco 
Property and Congo Chief holdings.
2008
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2008, we generated a net loss of $2.9 million.  The primary components of this 
loss were as follows:
General and administrative expense of $1.4 million which includes:
•
•
•
$0.8  million  in  consulting  and  professional  fees,  of  which  approximately  $475,000  related  to  audit  and 
accounting-related services as we attempted to become current with our filings with the U.S. Securities and 
Exchange  Commission  as  well  as  the  British  Columbia  Securities  Commission  (“BCSC”).    We  again 
experienced  severe  financial  difficulties  that  rendered  us  substantially  without  cash  and,  therefore,  were 
unable to complete these activities.  We also experienced increased legal fees (approximately $165,000) 
during this period for work with respect to our properties and title issues, as well as increased engineering 
consulting fees (approximately $105,000) as we sought to regain compliance with the BCSC by completing 
a 43-101 technical report on our Nevada and Colorado properties. 
$0.5  million  in  wages  and  benefits  expense,  $325,000  of  which  related  to  officer  salaries  with  the 
remaining  amount  arising  from  the  pro-rated  vesting  of  four  million  restricted  shares  of  common  stock 
granted to our Board of Directors as payment for services between June 1, 2005 and August 31, 2008 
$0.1 million of other general office expense
Exploration and business development expenses of $0.1 million which primarily consisted of mining claims, filing 
fees, and permits and licenses.
Other  income  and  expenses  of  $1.4  million,  consisting  primarily  of  interest  and  financing  fees,  of  which 
substantially all related to interest on outstanding debt instruments.  In addition, we incurred a $30,000 loss resulting 
from the settlement of an asset purchase transaction.  We had agreed to purchase the asset for $60,000 by issuing 
750,000  shares  of  our  common  stock  and  issued  the  shares  to  the  seller.    When  we  later  decided  to  rescind  the 
transaction, we received a promissory note for $60,000, but the shares were then worth $90,000.
2007 (unaudited)
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2007, we generated a net loss of $2.3 million.  The primary drivers of this loss 
were as follows:
General and administrative expense of $1.0 million which includes:
•
$0.5 million in consulting and professional fees, of which approximately half related to legal fees.  The 
remaining consulting and professional fees expense related to engineering consulting fees as we sought to
Page 47 of 110
regain compliance with the BCSC by completing a 43-101 technical report on our Nevada and Colorado 
properties. 
$0.4  million  in  wages  and  benefits  expense,  $325,000  of  which  related  to  officer  salaries  with  the 
remaining  amount  arising  from  the  pro-rated  vesting  of  four  million  restricted  shares  of  common  stock 
granted to our Board of Directors as payment for services between June 1, 2005 and August 31, 2008. 
$0.1 million of other general office expense.
•
•
Exploration  and  business  development  expenses  of  $0.1  million  which  primarily  consisted  of  environmental 
services, filing fees, and permits and licenses.
Other  income  and  expenses  of  $1.1  million  in  interest  and  financing  fees,  of  which  substantially  all  related  to 
interest on outstanding debt instruments.
2006 (unaudited)
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2006, we generated a net loss of $2.8 million.  The primary components of this 
loss were as follows:
General and administrative expense of $0.9 million which includes:
•
• 
•
$0.4 million in consulting and professional fees, of which approximately half related to legal fees.  The 
remaining  consulting  and  professional  fees  expense  related  partially  to  accounting  fees  and  partially  to 
engineering  consulting  fees  as  we  sought  to  regain  compliance  with  the  BCSC  by  completing  a  43-101 
technical report on our Nevada and Colorado properties. 
$0.3 million in wages and benefits expense, all of which related to officer salaries.  
$0.2 million of other general office expense.
Exploration  and  business  development  expenses  of  $0.1  million  which  primarily  consisted  of  filing  fees  and 
property lease costs.
Other  income  and  expenses  of  $1.8  million  in  interest  and  financing  fees,  of  which  substantially  all  related  to 
interest on outstanding debt instruments.
2005 (unaudited)
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2005, we generated a net loss of $4.4 million.  The primary components of this 
loss were as follows:
General and administrative expense of $0.9 million which includes:
•
• 
•
$0.4 million in consulting and professional fees, of which approximately half related to legal fees.  The 
remaining  consulting  and  professional  fees  expense  related  partially  to  accounting  fees  and  partially  to 
engineering consulting fees as we continued exploration in Panama (early in the fiscal year) pursuant to our 
agreements  with  our  partners  in  Panama  and  as  we  sought  to  regain  compliance  with  the  BCSC  by 
completing a 43-101 technical report on our Nevada and Colorado properties. 
$0.4 million in wages and benefits expense, all of which related to officer salaries.  
$0.1 million of other general office expense.
Exploration and business development expenses of $0.3 million in exploration costs, which were incurred early in 
the year as we continued to explore our properties in Panama, Nevada and Colorado.
Page 48 of 110
Other  income  and  expenses  of  $3.1  million  which  primarily  includes  interest  and  financing  fees,  of  which 
substantially all related to interest on outstanding debt instruments.
Subsequent Events
2010 Fiscal Year 
 
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010, we generated a net loss of $3.2 million.  The primary components of this 
loss were as follows: 
 
General and administrative expense of $1.1 million which includes:
•
•
•
$0.8  million  in  wages  and  benefits  expense,  $325,000  of  which  related  to  officer  salaries  with  the 
remaining amount arising from the pro-rated vesting of 4 million restricted shares of common stock granted 
to our Board of Directors as payment for services between June 1, 2005 and August 31, 2008. 
$0.2  million  in  consulting  and  professional  fees,  primarily  related  to  fees  related  to  investor  relations 
services as well as ongoing legal fees. 
$0.1 million of other general office expense.
Exploration and business development expenses of $0.1 million which primarily consisted of property lease costs.  
 
Other income and expenses of $2.0 million which includes:
•
•
•
•
$2.0 million in interest and financing fees, of which substantially all related to interest on outstanding debt 
instruments  as  well  as  interest  arising  from  a  February  2010  debt  restructure,  wherein  Brigus  Gold 
purchased  substantially  all  of  our  short-term  and  long-term  debt,  as  described  in  “Liquidity  and  Capital 
Resources” below. 
$0.4  million  loss  related  to  default  on  an  exploration  development  agreement  we  entered  into  with  an 
investor and our now-current Chief Executive Officer.  Under the agreement, we received cash proceeds 
during fiscal year 2009.  Due to a substantial increase in the price of our common stock between the date of 
the cash contributions under the agreement and the date the stock was issued to the other parties in the 
agreement in fiscal year 2010, we recognized a loss of $0.4 million during our 2010 fiscal year. 
$0.3 million gain related to debt settlements, primarily driven by gains associated with the February 2010 
debt restructure, as described in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below. 
$0.1 million gain recognized on the sale of slag at our Nevada property.
2011 Fiscal Year (nine months ended February 28, 2011) 
 
During the nine months ended February 28, 2011, we generated a net loss of $855,431, as compared to a net loss of 
$2,887,400 during the nine month prior period.  The decrease of $2,031,969 or 70% resulted from higher interest 
and financing fees and wages and benefits expense in the 2010 period as compared to 2011, as discussed further 
below.  In addition, we recognized an increased gain on debt settlements and stock subscriptions in the 2011 period 
compared  to  the  2010  period.    These  expense  decreases  were  partially  offset  by  increases  in  consulting  and 
professional fees during the nine months ended February 28, 2011 as compared to the nine months ended February 
28, 2010. 
 
General and Administrative Expense 
 
For the nine months ended February 28, 2011, general and administrative expense was $1,668,883 as compared to 
$824,797 in the corresponding 2010 period.  The increase for the nine months ended February 28, 2011 of $844,086 
(102%)  was  due  to  increased  consulting  and  professional  fees  that  were  offset  in  part  by  decreased  wages  and 
benefits expense as discussed further below.
•  Consulting and professional fees.  Consulting and professional fees were $1,231,345 for the nine months 
ended  February  28,  2011  as  compared  to  $202,472  in  the  corresponding  2010  period.  This  increase  of
Page 49 of 110
$1,028,873 or 508% relates primarily to fundraising activities in the current 2011 period compared to the 
2010 prior period.  In addition, the increase relates to increased fees for accounting and other professional 
services  incurred  as  we  began  the  process  of  attempting  to  regain  compliance  with  our  SEC  reporting 
requirements.
•  Wages  and  benefits  expense.    Wages  and  benefits  expenses  were  $266,783  for  the  nine  months  ended 
February 28, 2011 as compared to $569,056 in the corresponding 2010 period. This decrease of $302,273 
or 53% relates to the issuance of restricted shares of common stock granted to our Board of Directors as 
payment for services in the 2010 period.  This expense did not recur in the 2011 period.
Other Income and Expenses
•  Gain  on  settlements  of  debts.    During  the  nine  months  ended  February  28,  2011  management  began  to 
execute against a plan to settle its trade debts and convertible debentures.  As a result, a gain of $2,927,784 
was  recognized  as  compared  to  $314,528  in  the  corresponding  2010  period.  The  gain  during  the  2011 
period  relates  more  specifically  to  the  settlement  of  four  convertible  debentures  and  the  settlement  of 
accrued  wages  with  our  Company  President.    In  addition,  the  gain  recognized  during  the  2011  period 
includes settlement of certain trade payables for fractional amounts. 
 
Interest and financing fees.  During the nine months ended February 28, 2011 we recorded interest and 
financing fees of $626,649 as compared to $1,968,915 in the corresponding 2010 period. This decrease of 
$1,342,266  or  68%  results  from  our  February  2010  debt  restructure,  wherein  we  consolidated  our 
outstanding notes payable at a lower interest rate, and incurred approximately $927,000 in interest charges 
in the prior period related to the debt restructuring.
•
Going Concern
The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on the financial statements for the years ended May 
31,  2009  and  2008,  includes  explanatory  paragraphs  that  express  substantial  doubt  or  uncertainty  regarding  our 
ability to continue as a going concern.  Since inception through May 31, 2009, we have generated cumulative net 
losses of $42.7 million and we anticipate that we will experience losses in future periods.  Our ability to establish 
ourselves as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to either refinance our current outstanding obligations or 
obtain additional funding, or both, and there are no assurances that either of these can occur in the foreseeable future 
or at all.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Because we have not yet commenced our intended primary operations and are not yet generating revenue from any 
source,  our  liquidity  is  completely  reliant  on  our  ability  to  generate  cash  through  capital-raising  activities,  as 
discussed  further  below.    These  capital-raising  activities  have  historically  provided  us  with  cash  for  our  limited 
operations  and  have  been  the  source  of  financing  for  the  accumulation  of  mineral  interest  properties.    However, 
because our liquidity is so reliant on these activities and because, to date, we have been unable to generate revenue, 
our current liabilities have consistently exceeded our current assets during the last six fiscal years, thereby creating 
working capital deficits in those years.  As of May 31, 2009, 2008, 2007, 2006, and 2005, we had working capital 
deficits  of  $12.6  million,  $10.7  million,  $3.3  million  (unaudited),  $2.3  million  (unaudited),  and  $1.4  million 
(unaudited), respectively.
From time to time, we have made private placements and undertaken certain debt financing arrangements in order to 
fund property acquisition and mineral exploration operations.  However, these activities have not yielded sufficient 
funds  to  bring  our  operations  to  a  point  where  we  can  generate  revenue.    In  the  future,  we  expect  that  we  will 
continue to be dependent on our financing activities to fund any and all of our operations until such time as we are 
able to generate revenue from the sale of minerals, mineral interests or interests in other assets that we currently 
own.  If we are unable to establish mineralization or reserves through our exploration activities, we may not be able 
to attract joint venture partners, industry partners, or other investors who will be willing to provide us the necessary 
capital on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
Page 50 of 110
As of May 31, 2009, we had $nil in cash and cash equivalents, which was not sufficient to fund ongoing operations.  
Net cash used in, or provided by, operating, investing and financing activities for the fiscal years ended May 31, 
2009, 2008, 2007, 2006, and 2005 were as follows:
Net cash used in operating activities 
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities 
Net cash provided by financing activities
2009
$  (423,308)
 $ 
- 
 $  407,753
Year Ended May 31,
2008
$(1,432,790)
 $ 
- 
 $ 1,448,345
2007
(unaudited) 
 $(1,085,469) 
 $ 
(33,117) 
 $ 1,042,256
2006
(unaudited) 
 $  (874,980) 
 $  (253,456) 
 $ 1,204,014
2005
(unaudited) 
 $(1,037,742) 
 $  129,032 
 $  464,647
Net  cash  used  in  operating  activities.    Net  cash  used  in  operating  activities  are  attributable  to  our  net  income 
adjusted for non-cash charges as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows and changes in working 
capital as discussed above.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities.  Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities primarily 
relate to purchases of mineral interests (fiscal years 2007, 2006, and 2005) and dispositions of fixed assets (2006, 
2005).    The  dispositions  of  fixed  assets  were  non-recurring  in  nature  and  were  primarily  a  means  to  provide 
additional cash to the company.
Net cash provided by financing activities.  Net cash provided by financing activities for each fiscal year is reflective 
of the net result of our capital-raising activities, as described further below.
We anticipate that we will continue to general negative cash flows from operating and investing activities for the 
foreseeable future.
Capital Raising Activities
To date, the vast majority of our business operations has centered on raising capital financing sufficient to acquire 
mineral interests and begin exploration.  We expect to continue this focus on raising capital until such time as we are 
able to explore and, if warranted, exploit mineral resources on our properties and begin generating revenue from 
operations.  There can be no assurance that we will ever generate such revenue.
2009
2008
Secured note payable
2007
2006
2005
During  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2009,  2008,  2007,  2006,  and  2005,  we  have  raised  approximately  $4.9 
million through a number of private placement involving both debt and equity securities.  A summary of the capital 
infused into the Company is as follows: 
 
 
 
Duffy Group - 
 
MFPI (“Mortgage) - 
 
 
Other notes payable and capital 
lease 
Other private placements - 
 
 
 
 
Capital raising activities - Debt
Units of common stock and 
warrants in exchange for cash 
Total capital raised
(unaudited) 
 
 $ 
 
- 
  
   1,020,500 
  
-
$  184,084
- 
150,000 
-
$  425,084 
 
258,489 
  
   1,170,500 
  
282,000
(unaudited 
 
 $
258,489 
-
-
245,000 
 $  486,000
50,000 
 $ 1,070,500
248,400 
  
 $  530,400
(unaudited)
-  $  241,000
1,258,900 
 $ 1,592,984
970,000 
 $ 1,228,489
2,772,300 
 $ 4,908,373
-
- 
- 
282,000
Secured note payable 
Shareholder advances
$
Total
- 
- 
-
•
In December 2004, the Company received $486,000 in cash from a group of shareholders (the Duffy Group 
(“Duffy”)), originally provided to the Company as share capital.  In June 2005, the Company received and
-
Page 51 of 110
additional $241,000 in cash from Duffy, originally provided to the Company as share capital.  On August 1, 
2005, the Company issued a note payable to Duffy in exchange for $681,000 originally provided to the 
Company as share capital, and interest accrued from the date of each capital raise.  In December 2007, the 
Company  restructured  the  Duffy  note,  which  resulted  in  proceeds  of  $184,084  which  were  used  to  pay 
accrued interest on the note.
•  On December 16, 2005, the Company issued a note payable to MFPI Partners, LLC for $258,489, with the
proceeds used for the purchase of the Congo Chief Lode Mining Claim. 
In July 2006, the Company entered into an agreement with MFPI Capital Partners (“Calim”), which, among 
other financial transactions, provides for non-interest bearing cash advances.  During 2007, the Company 
received cash totaling $1,020,500 under this agreement.  During 2008, the Company received cash totaling 
$150,000 under this agreement.
On  February  1,  2010,  Apollo    Gold,  Inc.  (a  subsidiary  of  Apollo  Gold  Corporation,  which  became  Brigus  Gold 
Corp.,  “Brigus”)  acquired  $10,253,878  of  the  Company’s  outstanding  notes,  including  the  Broadway  Loan,  the 
Congo Chief note, and amounts owed to MFPI Capital Partners and MFPI Partners. On March 12, 2010, the Duffy 
Group  entered  into  an  agreement  with  Brigus  and  Calais  whereby  the  Duffy  Group  received  shares  of  Calais 
common stock in connection with partial forgiveness of debt to Calais, and the remaining amounts owed to Duffy 
were assigned to Brigus. 
 
Capital raising activities - Other Private Placements of Units of Common Stock and Warrants
We issued units to a number of accredited investors, each unit consisting of one share of restricted common stock 
and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock.  From fiscal 2005 through 2009, the Company issued Units 
as follows:
2009
2008
2006
970,000 
 $ 
  
5,469,845 
  $0.147-$0.20 
  
$0.25 
   06/10-01/20
2005
245,000 
 $ 
  
1,200,000 
   $0.20-$0.25 
   $0.20-$0.25 
   02/10-03/10
2007
50,000 
 $ 
250,000 
  
$0.20 
  
  
$0.25 
   12/07-12/10
Total
$  2,772,300
   25,761,095
248,400 
$ 
3,105,000 
  
$0.08 
  
  
$0.12 
   06/13-08/21
$  1,258,900 
   15,736,250 
$0.08 
  
  
$0.12 
   11/12-04/13
Cash consideration 
Number of Units 
Unit price 
Warrant exercise price 
Warrant expiration 
 
During fiscal 2010, the Company issued 3,150,000 Units for total cash consideration of $177,500, with the Unit 
prices ranging from $0.05 to $0.0625.  The warrants included in the Units, which are exercisable at $0.20 per share, 
expire at various dates from August 2012 to February 2013. 
  
2011 Fiscal Year Liquidity Events 
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 
At February 28, 2011, we had $75,615 in cash and cash equivalents. 
 
Settlements 
 
During the nine months ended February 28, 2011, we have executed against a plan to settle our trade payables with 
certain of our vendors as well as wages and other payables owed to current and former employees of ours, either by 
paying outstanding balances in full or by entering into agreements for mutually agreed-upon settlement amounts.  
Since May 31, 2010, we have recognized net gains of $2,614,853 related to settlements and releases on our trade 
payables and wages payable in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.  In addition, we have issued 4,370,420 
shares of restricted stock related to these settlements.
Page 52 of 110
Debenture Settlements 
 
On  December  15,  2010,  we  entered  into  two  agreements  related  to  the  settlement  of  a  total  of  four  convertible 
debentures  in the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  $4,306,347  in  exchange  for  a  total  of  $259,149  in  cash  and  the 
issuance of a total of 9,550,368 restricted shares of our common stock.   
 
Note Payable  
 
On January 15, 2011, we received forbearance under the terms of an agreement effectively extending the maturity 
date of our 8% $10,253,878 debt payable through June 30, 2011.  This debt was originally due on February 1, 2011 
and is secured by a lien on our Caribou property.  On June 8, 2011, Brigus agreed to extend the June 30, 2011 date 
to October 31, 2011 upon payment of $1,000,000 by June 30, 2011. The funds will be applied to accrued but unpaid 
interest on the debt. 
 
Common Stock 
 
Common Stock Sales – Since May 31, 2009, we have issued a total of 99,232,184 shares of common stock.  Since 
May  31,  2009,  we  have  issued  46,846,370  shares  of  common  stock  for  total  cash  proceeds  of  $3,472,400  and 
52,385,814  shares  of  our  common  stock  in  connection  with  the  settlement  of  debt  and  accrued  liabilities,  for 
services, and as payment for trade accounts payable as further below. 
 
Subsequent to Fiscal 2011- Subsequent to May 31, 2011 In June 2011 we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common 
stock at $0.20 per share to an accredited investor for net cash proceeds of $200,000. 
 
Fiscal 2011 Transactions – During the fiscal year ending May 31, 2011, we have issued 72,946,844 shares of our 
common stock as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In June 2010, we issued 9,500,000 shares of our common stock valued at $0.08 per share or $760,000 to 
our  Directors  as  compensation  for  their  services.  These  amounts  had  been  previously  accrued  in  our 
balance sheet as accrued salaries and wages. 
In August 2010, we sold 650,000 shares of our common stock at $0.08 per share to the wife of our current 
Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) for $52,000 as part of a private placement. 
In June 2010, we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per share for accounting services 
provided in May 2010 totaling $50,000. 
In June and August 2010 we issued a total of 1,500,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per share in 
connection with the payment of $76,539 in accounts payable. 
In  September  2010,  we  issued  4,500,000  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.06  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $270,000.   
In October 2010 we issued 5,753,334 shares of our common stock at $0.06 per share to accredited investors 
for net cash proceeds of $345,200.  
In  October  2010,  we  issued  2,270,420  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.10  per  share  to  our  Company 
President in connection with settlement of accrued liabilities owed to him. We have recorded a gain in the 
amount  of  $227,042  in  connection  with  this  issuance.  In  addition  we  issued  2,000,000  shares  of  our 
common stock at $0.0762  to our former CFO in connection with the settlement of accrued liabilities owed 
to  him  in  the  amount  of  $152,468.  We  have  not  recorded  any  gain  or  loss  in  connection  with  this 
settlement. 
In  November  2010,  we  issued  1,066,666  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.075  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $80,000. In addition we issued 17,651,667 shares of our common stock at 
$0.06 per share for net cash proceeds of $1,059,100. 
In December 2010, we issued 9,550,368 shares of our common stock at $0.15 per share to accredited in 
connection with the settlement of four convertible debentures totaling $1,432,555. 
In  December  2010,  we  issued  536,666  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.06  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $32,200. In addition we issued 2,666,666 shares of our common stock at 
$0.08 per share to accredited investors for net cash proceeds of $200,000.
Page 53 of 110
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In December 2010, we issued 2,102,500 shares of our common stock at $0.17 per share in connection with 
fundraising and consulting services valued at $357,425. 
In December 2010, we issued 100,000 shares of our common stock at $0.17 per share in connection with  
the settlement of previously accrued liabilities. 
In January 2011 we issued 2,033,333 shares of our common stock valued at $0.17 per share in connection 
with fundraising and consulting services valued at $345,667 
In January 2011, we issued 66,666 shares of our common stock at $0.06 per share to an accredited investor 
in for net cash proceeds of $4,000. 
In  February  2011,  we  issued  2,464,706  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.17  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $300,000. 
In March 2011, we issued 40,000 shares of our common stock at $0.06 per share to an accredited investor 
for net cash proceeds of $2,400. 
In April 2011, we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per share to an accredited investor 
for net cash proceeds of $50,000. 
In May 2011 we issued 7,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.10 per share to an accredited investor 
for net cash proceeds of $700,000.
Fiscal 2010 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2010 we issued 25,285,340 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In August 2009 and February, April and May 2010, we raised $177,500 in cash from accredited investors 
for  the  sale  of  units  comprising  3,150,000  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  and  warrants  to  purchase 
1,450,000 of common shares.   The Common stock prices ranged from $0.05 to $0.0625 per share and the 
warrants  had  an  exercise  price  of  $0.20  per  share  with  expiration  dates  ranging  from  August  2012  to 
February 2013. 
In August 2009, we issued units to the Duffy Group in connection with extension of Duffy notes.  The units 
consisted of 1,249,900 shares of restricted Common stock and warrants to purchase an equal number of 
common shares.  The Common stock price was $0.14 per share and the warrants had an exercise price of 
$0.12 with an expiration date of August 2021.  
In August 2009, we issued 511,000 shares of restricted Common stock in connection with a settlement of a 
$42,436 note payable to Walsh Environmental Sciences. 
In  September  2009,  we  issued  5,067,650  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  in  connection  with  the 
settlement of a note payable due a shareholder related to our default on an exploration and development 
agreement.  The Common stock price was $0.17 per share. In connection with the issuance of these shares 
we have recorded a loss on default of the exploration agreement in the amount of $456,901; this amount 
has been included in other (income) loss on our consolidated income statement. 
In  September  2009,  we  issued  1,000,000  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  in  connection  with  a 
consulting agreement.  The Common stock price was $0.17 per share. We have recognized the expense of 
$170,000 ratably over the term of the agreement.  
In  February  2010,  we  issued  10,306,790  shares  of  restricted  common  stock  to  the  Duffy  Group  in 
connection  with  the  restructuring  of  $1,088,367  of  notes  payable  to  Duffy  Group.    The  Duffy  Group 
entered into an agreement with Brigus and Calais whereby the Duffy group received these shares for the 
forgiveness of $435,347 in debt, with the remaining balance of $653,021 owed, assigned to Brigus.  The 
Company recorded a gain on the settlement of the Duffy note of $359,992. The common stock price was 
$0.09 per share.  
In May 2010, we issued 4,000,000 shares of restricted common stock to members of our board of directors 
as compensation, for the period of June 2006 through August 2009.  The common stock price was $0.09 
per share.
Warrants  –  Since  May  31,  2009,  we  have  issued  9,450,000  warrants  to  purchase  our  common  shares  as 
discussed below.
Page 54 of 110
•  Fiscal  2010  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2010,  we  issued  1,450,000  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.20 expiring in 2012 and 2013. The warrants were issued in connection 
with unit sales, each unit consisting of one common share and one warrant.
•  Fiscal  2011  Transactions  –  During  the  year  ended  May,  31,  2011  we  issued  7,000,000  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.12 expiring in May 2012. The warrants were issued in connection with 
unit sales, each unit consisting of one common share and one warrant.
Subsequent to May 31, 2011 – In June 2011 we issued 500,000 shares to purchase our common stock at $0.30 per 
share. These warrants were issued in connection with the sale of 1,000,000 common stock units in June 2011 and 
expire in June 2012.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes aggregate information about our contractual cash obligations as of May 31, 2009 
and the periods in which payments are due:
Payments due by period
Less than 1
year
$  9,975,281 
23,200 
  
- 
  
  
- 
 
$
 9,998,481
1-3 years
- 
46,783 
- 
50,000 
96,783
$ 
  
  
  
 $
$ 
  
  
  
 $
3-5 years
- 
46,000 
- 
- 
46,000
Contractual obligations
Long-term obligations 
Operating lease obligations 
Royalties 
Environmental remediation obligation 
Total
Total
$  9,975,281 
509,066 
  
  
150,000 
  
50,000 
 $  10,684,347
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
More than 5
years
- 
393,083 
150,000 
- 
543,083
$ 
  
  
  
 $
Our  discussion  and  analysis  of  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations  are  based  upon  our  Consolidated 
Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.  
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, 
liabilities, revenues and expenses as well as disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities.  We base our accounting 
estimates  on  historical  experience  and  other  factors  that  we  believe  to  be  reasonable  under  the  circumstances.  
However,  actual  results  may  vary  materially  from  these  estimates  due  to  factors  beyond  our  control  or  due  to 
changes in these assumptions or conditions.  The following is a summary of our critical accounting estimates we 
have made in preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes are reported for timing differences between items of income or expense in the consolidated 
financial  statements  and  those  reported  for  income  tax  purposes  in  accordance  with  ASC  740,  “Income  Taxes,” 
which requires the use of the asset/liability method of accounting for income taxes.  Deferred income taxes and tax 
benefits are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement 
carrying  amounts  for  existing  assets  and  liabilities  and  their  respective  taxes  bases  for  tax  loss  and  credit  carry-
forwards.    Deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  measured  using  enacted  tax  rates  expected  to  apply  to  taxable 
income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.  We provide for 
deferred  taxes  for  the  estimated  future  tax  effects  attributable  to  temporary  differences  and  carry-forwards  when 
realization is more likely than not.
Page 55 of 110
Impairments
We  evaluate  long-lived  assets  for  impairment  whenever  events  or  changes  in  circumstances  indicate  that  the 
carrying amounts of an asset or group of assets may not be recoverable, pursuant to the provisions of ASC Topic 
360, “Property, Plant and Equipment.”  Our evaluations take into consideration historical results, current business 
conditions and trends in order to identify situations in which the carrying value of assets may not be recoverable.  If 
such reviews indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable, we estimate the undiscounted 
sum of the expected cash flows of such assets to determine if such sum is less than the carrying value of such assets 
in  order  to  ascertain  if  an  impairment  exists.  If  an  impairment  exists,  then  we determine  the  fair  value  by  using 
quoted  market  prices,  if  available  for  such  assets,  or  if  quoted  market  prices  are  not  available,  we  discount  the 
expected future cash flows of such assets. 
 
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2005, our cash balances declined and we began operating in a net negative 
cash position.  Despite several attempts to raise additional cash through the use of private placements and debt, we 
were  unable  to  secure  enough  funding  to  build  adequate  infrastructure  suitable  for  mining  our  properties  and 
bringing minerals to market for sale.  Likewise, our mineral assets were not proven at that time and estimates of 
future cash flows from these mines were zero. 
 
We acquired additional mining properties during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2006 and 2007.  During those fiscal 
years,  we  were  able  to  secure  some  debt  and  equity  financing  and  were  actively  exploring  these  properties.  
However, during our fiscal year ended May 31, 2009, we were affected by tightened credit markets and reduced 
availability  of  alternate  funding  resulting  from  a  global  economic  downturn.    We  were  also  operating  in  a  net 
negative cash position at that time.  Accordingly, we impaired all of our remaining mining interests during the fiscal 
year ended May 31, 2009, resulting in an impairment charge of $495,573.
Share-Based Compensation
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model and the straight-line attribution approach to determine the fair value 
of stock-based awards in accordance with FASB ASC 718, “Compensation.”   The option pricing model requires 
the  input  of  highly  subjective  assumptions,  including  the  option’s  expected  life  and  the  price  volatility  of  the 
underlying stock. Our expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding 
and is determined based on historical experience of similar awards, giving consideration to the contractual terms of 
the stock-based awards, vesting schedules and expectations of future employee behavior as influenced by changes to 
the  terms  of  our  stock-based  awards.  The  expected  stock  price  volatility  is  based  on  the  historical  prices  of  our 
common stock.
Mineral Properties
Mineral  property  acquisition  costs  are  initially  capitalized  as  tangible  assets  when  purchased.    When  facts  and 
circumstances warrant, or at least once per fiscal year, we evaluate the carrying costs of these assets for impairment, 
as  described  previously.    Once  proven  and  probable  reserves  are  established  for  a  property  and  it  has  been 
determined  that  a  mineral  property  can  be  economically  developed,  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-
production method of the estimated life of the probably reserve.  Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as 
incurred.    Estimated  future  removal  and  site  restoration  costs,  when  determinable,  are  provided  over  the  life  of 
proven  reserves  on  a  units-of-production  basis.    Costs,  which  include  production  equipment  removal  and 
environmental remediation, are estimated each period by management based on current regulations, actual expenses 
incurred and technology and industry standards.  Any charge is included in exploration expense or the provision for 
depletion and depreciation during the period and the actual restoration expenditures are charged to the accumulated 
provision amounts as incurred.  As of May 31, 2009, we had not established any proven or probably reserves on our 
mineral properties and have incurred only acquisition and exploration costs.
ITEM 7A.  QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK.  
 
Not required by Form 10-K for Smaller Reporting Companies.
Page 56 of 110
ITEM 8.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA. 
 
The  information  required  by  this  item  is  set  forth  in  the  Consolidated  Financial  Statements  and  is  hereby 
incorporated by reference.  
 
ITEM  9.  CHANGES  IN  AND  DISAGREEMENTS  WITH  ACCOUNTANTS  ON  ACCOUNTING  AND 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.  
 
KPMG, LLP 
 
On May 24, 2006 (the “KPMG Notification Date”), our certifying accountant, KPMG LLP (“KPMG”), notified the 
Company that it would not be standing for reappointment as our independent registered public accounting firm for 
the fiscal year ending May 31, 2006 (FY 2006).  
 
The report of KPMG for the year ended May 31, 2004 (FY 2004) did not contain an adverse opinion or disclaimer 
of opinion and was not modified as to uncertainty, audit scope or accounting principles, except that KPMG LLP had 
a separate report on the financial statements as of and for the years ended May 31, 2004 and 2003 titled “Comments 
by Auditor For U.S. Readers on Canada-U.S. Reporting Difference” which stated:
”In the United States, reporting standards require the addition of an explanatory paragraph (following the 
opinion  paragraph)  when  the  financial  statements  are  affected  by  conditions  and  events  that  cast 
substantial doubt on the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, such as those described in Note 
1  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements.    Our  report  to  the  directors  dated  September 9,  2004  is 
expressed  in  accordance  with  Canadian  reporting  standards  which  does  not  permit  a  reference  to  such 
events  and  conditions  in  the  auditor’s  report  when  these  are  adequately  disclosed  in  the  financial 
statements.”
During our two fiscal years preceding the KPMG Notification Date and the period through the KPMG Notification 
Date,  there  were  no  disagreements  (as  defined  in  Item  304  of  Regulation  S-K)  with  KPMG  on  any  matter  of 
accounting  principles  or  practices,  financial  statement  disclosure,  or  auditing  scope  or  procedure  which,  if  not 
resolved to the satisfaction of KPMG, would have caused KPMG to make reference to the subject matter of the 
disagreement in connection with their reports on the Corporation’s financial statements. In addition, for the same 
periods, there were no reportable events (as defined in Regulation S-B Item 304 (a)(1)(v)).  
 
At the time of the KPMG Notification Date, the decision to change accountants was not recommended or approved 
by the board of directors. 
 
Hein & Associates, LLP 
 
On May 21, 2007, our board of directors recommended and approved the engagement of Hein & Associates LLP 
(“Hein”), as our independent registered public accounting firm commencing with our fiscal year ending May 31, 
2005.  We engaged Hein on May 25, 2007.  Hein commenced work on the audit shortly thereafter but, during 2008, 
work  was  ceased  because  we  did  not  have  adequate  financial  resources  available  to  us  to  prepare  for  audit 
procedures.  Accordingly, no audit of our financial statements was ever completed by Hein.  On October 18, 2010 
(the “Hein Dismissal Date”), our Board of Directors determined to dismiss Hein & Associates, LLP. 
 
During our two fiscal years preceding the Hein Dismissal Date, the subsequent interim periods thereto, and through 
the Hein Dismissal Date, there were no disagreements (as defined in Item 304 of Regulation S-K) with Hein on any 
matter of accounting principles or practices, financial statement disclosure, or auditing scope or procedure, which 
disagreements, if not resolved to the satisfaction of Hein, would have caused it to make reference in connection with 
its opinion to the subject matter of the disagreement. In addition, for the same periods, there were no reportable 
events (as defined in Regulation S-B Item 304 (a)(1)(v)).
Page 57 of 110
Eide Bailly 
 
On October 18, 2010 (the “Eide Bailly Engagement Date”), our Board of Directors approved the appointment of 
Eide Bailly, LLP (“Eide Bailly”) as our independent registered public accounting firm.  During our two most recent 
fiscal years, the subsequent interim periods thereto, and through the Eide Bailly Engagement Date, neither us nor 
anyone on our behalf consulted with Eide Bailly regarding either: (i) the application of accounting principles to a 
specified or contemplated transaction or the type of audit opinion that might be rendered on our financial statements; 
or  (ii) any  matter  that  was  either  the  subject  of  a  “disagreement”    or  “event”  as  defined  in  Item  304(a)(1)  of 
Regulation S-K.  
 
On  February  28,  2011  (the  “Eide  Bailly  Dismissal  Date”),  the  registrant  dismissed  Eide  Bailly  LLP  as  its 
independent  registered  public  accounting  firm.    Eide  Bailly  was  engaged  on  October  18,  2010  to  audit  the 
registrant’s financial statements commencing with the fiscal year ended May 31, 2005.  Eide Bailly has notified the 
registrant of a violation of a Public Company Accounting Oversight Board independence rule.  While Eide Bailly 
had completed audits of the registrant’s financial statements for the years ended May 31, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 
2009 and 2010, none of the audited financial statements were filed with the SEC.  The registrant’s board of directors 
determined  that  it  could  not  proceed  to  file  its  delinquent  reports  with  the  SEC  unless  it  dismissed  Eide  Bailly 
because of the independence issue.  
 
During the registrant’s two fiscal years preceding the Eide Bailly Dismissal Date and the subsequent interim period 
preceding the Eide Bailly Dismissal Date, there were no disagreements with Eide Bailly on any matter of accounting 
principles or practices, financial statement disclosure, or auditing scope or procedure, which disagreements, if not 
resolved  to  the  satisfaction  of  Eide  Bailly,  would  have  caused  it  to  make  reference  to  the  subject  matter  of  the 
disagreements  in  connection  with  its  report.  Further,  during  the  registrant’s  two  fiscal  years  preceding  the  Eide 
Bailly Dismissal Date and the subsequent interim period preceding the Eide Bailly Dismissal Date, there were no 
reportable events (as defined in Item 304 (a)(1)(v) of Regulation S-K. 
 
On March 10, 2011 (the “StarkSchenkein, Engagement Date”), the registrant engaged StarkSchenkein, LLP as its 
independent registered public accounting firm.  
 
During the registrant’s two fiscal years preceding the StarkSchenkein Engagement Date and the subsequent interim 
period preceding  the StarkSchenkein  Engagement  Date,  neither  the  registrant  nor  anyone on  its  behalf  consulted 
StarkSchenkein regarding either (1) the application of accounting principles to a specified transaction regarding the 
registrant,  either  completed  or  proposed,  or  the  type  of  audit  opinion  that  might  be  rendered  on  the  registrant’s 
financial  statements;  or  (2)  any  matter  regarding  the  registrant  that  was  either  the  subject  of  a  disagreement  (as 
defined in Item 304(a)(1)(iv) of Regulation S-K and the related instructions to Item 304 of Regulation S-K) or a 
reportable event (as defined Item 304(a)(1)(v) of Regulation S-K). 
 
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES.  
 
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures  
 
Disclosure controls and procedures, as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the 
“Exchange Act”), are our controls and other procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be 
disclosed by us in the reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and 
reported, within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Disclosure controls and procedures include, 
without limitation, controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in the 
reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to our officers, or persons 
performing similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.   
 
Rule 13a-15 under the Exchange Act, requires us to carry out an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and 
operation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  as  of  May  31,  2009,  being  the  date  of  our  most  recently 
completed fiscal year end.  This evaluation was conducted under the supervision and with the participation of David 
K. Young (our functioning principal executive officer and principal financial officer).  Based on this evaluation, Mr. 
Young concluded that the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective because 
of the identification of the material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting described below.  In light
Page 58 of 110
of the material weaknesses described above, we performed additional analysis and other post-closing procedures to 
ensure  our  financial  statements  were  prepared  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles 
(“GAAP”).  Accordingly,  we  believe  that  the  financial  statements  included  in  this  report  fairly  present,  in  all 
material respects, our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented. 
 
Management's annual report on internal control over financial reporting 
 
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. 
Internal control over financial reporting is a set of processes designed by, or under the supervision of, a company’s 
principal  executive  and  principal  financial  officers,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of 
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP and 
includes those policies and procedures that:
•  Pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions
and dispositions of our assets;
•  Provide  reasonable  assurance  our  transactions  are  recorded  as  necessary  to  permit  preparation  of  our 
financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in 
accordance with authorizations of our management and directors; and
•  Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or
disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. 
It  should  be  noted  that  any  system  of  internal  control,  however  well  designed  and  operated,  can  provide  only 
reasonable,  and  not  absolute,  assurance  that  the  objectives  of  the  system  will  be  met.    Also,  projections  of  any 
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of 
changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including David K. Young (our functioning 
principal executive officer and principal financial officer), we conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of our 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting based on  criteria established  in “Internal  Control-Integrated Framework” 
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), as of May 31, 2009. 
 
As a result of our material weaknesses described below, management has concluded that, as of May 31, 2009, our 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting  was  not  effective  based  on  the  criteria  in  “Internal  Control-Integrated 
Framework” issued by COSO. 
 
Material Weakness in Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
 
A  material  weakness  is  a  control  deficiency,  or  combination  of  control  deficiencies,  that  results  in  more  than  a 
remote likelihood that a material misstatement of annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or 
detected. In connection with the assessment, management identified the following control deficiencies that represent 
material weaknesses at May 31, 2009:
•  We have not consistently recorded transactions in our accounting records. 
•  The non-cash components of certain debt and equity transactions were not properly accounted for.  
•  We rely on external consultants for the preparation of our financial statements and reports.  As a result, our
management may not be able to identify errors and irregularities in the financial statements and reports.
•  We relied on one of our officers for oversight of the financial reporting process and, therefore, there was an 
inherent lack of segregation of duties with certain aspects of the financial reporting process, and a limited 
independent governing board.
•  We relied on an external consultant for the administration functions, some of which did not have standard
procedures in place for formal review by the one officer who was providing financial oversight for us.
Page 59 of 110
The internal control weaknesses identified above with regard to the failure to consistently record transactions and 
inadequate  segregation  of  duties  with  certain  aspects  of  the  financial  reporting  process  will  only  be  completely 
corrected if the Company expands and has the capacity to perform necessary accounting functions and adequately 
segregate the duties to mitigate the risk in financial reporting.  This expansion will depend mostly on the ability of 
management to fully execute its business operating strategy as outlined in this report and generate enough income to 
warrant growth in personnel.  With regard to the internal control deficiency identified above related to preventative 
measures to properly and accurately account for the recording of the non-cash aspects of certain debt and equity 
issuances, management has already taken steps to mitigate such risk going forward by utilizing external financial 
consulting services prior to the review by our principal independent accounting firm to ensure that all information 
required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, 
summarized and reported accurately and within the time periods specified in the Commission’s rule and forms. 
 
Attestation Report of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company’s independent registered public accounting 
firm  regarding  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.    Management’s  report  was  not  subject  to  attestation 
requirements by the Company’s registered public accounting firm pursuant to rules of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission that permit the company to provide only management’s report in this annual report. 
  
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting  
 
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fiscal quarter ended 
May  31,  2009  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  our  internal  control  over 
financial reporting. 
 
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION. 
 
None.
PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE. 
 
The following table lists the names and ages of our directors, executive officers and key employees as of the date of 
this report. Except for R. David Russell, who was appointed as a director, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman 
effective January 15, 2011, all of officers and directors listed below were officers and/or directors of the Company 
on May 31, 2009.
Age
54
57
62
78
Name
R. David Russell
David K. Young
Thomas Hendricks
Art Daher
Position 
Director  –  January  2011  to  present  and  July    2005  to  August 
2008 
Chairman – January 2011 to present 
Chief Executive Officer – January 2011 to present 
Director – July 2005 to present 
President – February 2006 to present 
Chief Operating Officer – January 2011 to present 
Chief Executive Officer – February 2006 to January 2011 
Director – 1998 to present 
Vice  President  of  Exploration  and  Corporate  Development
February 2006 to present
President – 2000 to February 2006 
Director – 1995 to present
Page 60 of 110
The  following  table  lists  the  names  and  ages  of  former  directors,  executive  officers  and  key  employees  of  the 
Company who served during the period from May 31, 2005, through May 31, 2009.
Name
Melvin Martin
Matthew Witt
Robert Akright
Position
Director – 1992 to July 2005
Chief Financial Officer – 2003 to February 2005
Vice President – 1998 to  February 2007
None of the current directors and officers is related to any other director or officer of the Company. 
 
While some of our directors and executive officers are involved in other business ventures and do not spend full 
time  on  our  business  and  affairs,  we  believe  that  each  devotes  as  much  time  to  our  business  and  affairs  as  are 
required to satisfactorily carry out their duties.  
 
Set forth below are brief accounts of the business experience of each director, executive officer of the Company. 
 
R. David Russell. Mr. Russell has over 27 years experience in the mining industry including a variety of operating, 
executive and board of director positions. He served as President, CEO and a director of Apollo Gold Corp. from 
June  2002  until  June  2010  when  it  merged  with  Linear  Gold  and  changed  its  name  to  Brigus  Gold  Corp.    Mr. 
Russell  was  a  founder  of  Nevoro  Gold  Corporation  in  January  2002,  the  predecessor  of  Apollo  Gold  Corp.  and 
served as its President from February 2002 through June 2002.  Mr. Russell is the Chairman of Pure Nickel Inc., 
Lead Director for Fire River Gold Corp. and a director of General Moly, Inc.  He has also previously served as a 
director of the Company from July 2005 until August 2008.  Mr. Russell received a Bachelor of Science degree in 
Mining Engineering from the Montana School of Mineral, Science and Technology. 
 
David K. Young. Mr. Young has been a director of the Company since 2005 and an officer of the Company since 
February  2006.    Mr. Young  is  a  mining  engineer  with  over  twenty-five  years  of  experience  in  mine  operations, 
engineering, permitting, development, and corporate management. A graduate of the Colorado School of Mines, he 
is  a  registered  professional  engineer  in  the  State  of  Idaho  with  substantial  experience  in  designing,  permitting, 
developing and operating underground mines. Mr. Young is not an officer or a director of any other company whose 
shares are registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. 
 
 
Thomas S. Hendricks. Mr. Hendricks has been a director of the Company since 1988 and an officer since 2006.  
Mr. Hendricks was the original owner of Hendricks Mining, Inc. (“HMI”) which owned the Cross / Caribou gold 
and silver mines near Nederland, Colorado.  Mr. Hendricks formed HMI in 1974 for the purpose of acquiring and 
operating  the  Cross  Mine  and  neighboring  mineral  interests.  Mr. Hendricks  has  been  engaged  in  exploring  and 
limited  mining  operations  at  the  Cross  Mine  and  neighboring  mineral  interests  (now  referred  to  as  the  “Caribou 
prospect”) on a full time basis since 1971. Mr. Hendricks is not an officer or a director of any other company whose 
shares are registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 
 
Art  Daher.    Mr. Daher  has  been  secretary  and  a  director  of  Calais  Resources  since  1995.  Mr. Daher  is  retired. 
Mr. Daher sold his Real Estate Company in September of 1996, a company he had owned and operated since May 
of  1983.  Mr.  Daher  is  not  an  officer  or  a  director  of  any  other  company  whose  shares  are  registered  under  the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  
 
Significant Employees  
 
We have no significant employees other than our officers described above.
Page 61 of 110
Arrangements & Family Relationships 
 
There are no family relationships between any of our directors and/or executive officers.  There are no arrangements 
or understandings between any person and any of our current directors and/or executive officers pursuant to which 
any director or executive officer was selected as a director or executive officer.  
 
Legal Proceedings 
 
We are not aware of any material proceedings to which any of our executive officers, directors or any associate of 
any  such  officer  or  director,  is  a  party  adverse  to  us  or  has  a  material  interest  adverse  to  us  or  to  any  of  our 
subsidiaries.  During the last five years, none of the officers or directors of the Company has (i) had any bankruptcy 
petition filed by or against any business of which such person was an officer; (ii) had any conviction in a criminal 
proceeding or been subject to a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and other minor offenses); 
(iii) been subject to any order, judgment, or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any court, 
permanently  or  temporarily  enjoining,  barring,  suspending  or  otherwise  limiting  his  involvement  in  any  type  of 
business, securities, insurance or banking activities; (iv) been found by a court of competent jurisdiction (in a civil 
action), the SEC or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated a federal or state securities or 
commodities law; (v) been subject to any order, judgment, decree, or finding, not subsequently reversed, suspended 
or  vacated,  relating  to  an  alleged  violation  of  securities  or  commodities  laws  or  regulations,  laws  or  regulations 
relating to financial institutions or insurance companies, or any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud; or 
(vi) been subject to any sanction or order, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any self-regulatory 
organization or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has disciplinary authority over its 
members or persons associated with a member. 
 
Audit Committee Financial Expert  
 
We do not have an audit committee financial expert at this time. 
 
Audit Committee  
 
Calais does not have a formal audit committee and, therefore, its Board of Directors serves as its audit committee. 
 
Procedures by which security holders may recommend nominees to the board of directors  
 
The board of directors has not adopted procedures by which security holders may recommend nominees to the board 
of directors.  
 
Code of Ethics 
 
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to our principal executive officer and principal 
financial officer, and persons performing similar functions.  The text of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics is 
posted on our Internet website at http://www.calaisresources.com/en/financials.htm.  In the event that an amendment 
to, or a waiver from, a provision of this code is necessary, we intend to post such information on our website. 
 
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance 
 
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires our officers, directors, and persons who beneficially 
own more than 10% of our common stock to file reports of securities ownership and changes in such ownership with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).  Officers, directors and greater than 10% beneficial owners are 
also required by rules promulgated by the SEC to furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) forms they file. 
 
The  table  below  sets  forth  the  last  known  Section  16  filings  made  by  current  and  former  officers,  directors  and 
persons  beneficially  owning  10%  or  more  of  our  common  stock.    Based  upon  this  information,  we  believe  that 
certain of our current and former shareholders, officers and directors have been delinquent or failed to file reports 
required by Section 16.
Page 62 of 110
Form
Name
R. David Russell 
David K. Young 
Thomas Hendricks 
Art Daher 
Matthew Witt 
Melvin Martin 
Robert Akright 
RCA III GP LLC 
Steve Benaske 
 
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION.
Form 4 
Form 3 
Form 4 Amendment 
Form 4 Amendment 
Form 3 
Form 4 
Form 4 Amendment 
Form 4 
Form 3
Date of Filing
June 13, 2008 
June 12, 2008 
September 14, 2004 
September 10, 2004 
September 26, 2003 
June 6, 2005 
September 10, 2005 
June 14, 2005 
September 29, 2003
Executive Compensation 
 
The following table sets forth information about the remuneration of our executive officers during the fiscal years 
ended May 31, 2005 through May 31, 2009.
Summary Compensation Table
Option Awards
All Other
($)(6)
Compensation ($)
Total ($)
Name and Principal
Position
David K. Young(1)
Thomas Hendricks(2)
Matthew Witt(3)
Robert Akright(4)
Art Daher(5)
Year 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009
2005
2005 
2006 
2007
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009
Salary ($)
-
42,290 
175,000 
175,000 
175,000
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
150,000
130,000
25,471 
49,221 
28,181
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
Stock Awards
($) 
- 
- 
- 
-
45,000
- 
- 
- 
-
45,000
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
-
45,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
-
42,290 
175,000 
175,000 
220,000
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
195,000
130,000
25,471 
49,221 
28,181
- 
- 
- 
-
45,000
_________________________
(1)  Mr. Young has served as a director since July 2005.  He was subsequently appointed as President and Chief Executive Officer in 
February  2006.    Mr.  Young  was  appointed  Chief  Operating  Officer  when  Mr.  Russell  was  appointed  Chief  Executive  Officer  in 
January 2011.
(2)  Mr. Hendricks has served as a director since 1998 and was President of the Company from 2000 to February 2006.  Mr. Hendricks has
served as Vice President of Exploration and Corporate Development since February 2006.
(3)  Mr. Witt served as Chief Financial Officer from 2003 to February 2005. Mr. Witt received 1,000,000 options upon his employment
with the Company.
(4)  Mr. Akright is a self-employed consulting geologist and acted as Vice President of the Company from 1998 to 2007.   
(5)  Mr. Daher has served as a director and as Secretary of the Company since1995.
(6)  Stock options granted during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2004 and for all periods prior were accounted for under APB 25, and 
therefore no fair value has been recorded. For the fiscal periods subsequent to May 31, 2005, our board of directors had contemplated 
the grant of options and or the re-pricing of existing options, but none of the actions contemplated were ever completed.
Page 63 of 110
Employment and Compensation Arrangements 
 
In July 2006, the Company entered into an employment agreement with David K. Young, as its President and Chief 
Executive  Officer.    The  agreement  had  no expiration  and  provided  for  compensation to  Mr.  Young  of $175,000 
annually,  and  a  monthly  automobile  allowance.    In  the  event  that  Mr.  Young  is  terminated  without  cause,  the 
agreement provides for severance equal to 36 months of salary, plus 50% of entitled bonuses.  In addition, upon 
termination described above, health coverage for Mr. Young will continue for a period of 36 months. The agreement 
also includes a provision pursuant to an Effective Change in Control, whereby Mr. Young will have been deemed 
terminated without cause, and the provisions discussed above will become effective. 
 
In July 2006, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Thomas Hendricks, as its Vice President for 
Exploration and Corporate Development.  The agreement had no expiration and provided for compensation to Mr. 
Hendricks  of  $150,000  annually,  and  a  monthly  automobile  allowance.    In  the  event  that  Mr.  Hendricks  is 
terminated without cause, the agreement provides for severance equal to 36 months of salary, plus 50% of entitled 
bonuses.    In  addition,  upon  termination  described  above,  health  coverage  for  Mr.  Hendricks  will  continue  for  a 
period of 36 months.  The agreement also includes a provision pursuant to an Effective Change in Control, whereby 
Mr. Hendricks will have been deemed terminated without cause, and the provisions discussed above will become 
effective, as well as other provisions regarding vesting of certain stock options due to Mr. Hendricks. 
 
The  Company  had  an  employment  agreement  with  Matt  Witt,  the  Company’s  former  our  chief  financial  officer, 
during 2004 through August 2005. The employment agreement was a two-year agreement expiring in October 2005, 
and provided for compensation to Mr. Witt of $130,000 annually.  
 
Due to the financial difficulties we faced during the 2005 to 2010 fiscal years, we were unable to pay the wages of 
certain  of  our  executive  officers.    We  have  entered  into  agreements  and  settlements  with  various  officers  and 
directors relating to compensation payable to them.  See “Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, 
and Director Independence – Wages and Other Payables.” 
 
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End 
 
All  of  the  stock  awards  shown  above  in  the  Summary  Compensation  table  were  fully  vested  upon  grant.  
Accordingly, at May 31, 2009, there were no stock awards that had not vested.  
 
Director Compensation 
 
We have no formal plan for compensating our directors for their service in their capacity as directors. Directors are 
entitled  to  reimbursement  for  reasonable  travel  and  other  out-of-pocket  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with 
attendance at meetings of the Board. The Board may award special remuneration to any director undertaking any 
special services on our behalf other than services ordinarily required of a director. Other than indicated below no 
director received any compensation for his services as a director, including committee participation and/or special 
assignments.  
 
The following table sets forth the compensation paid to members of our Board of Directors, who were not executive 
officers, during each fiscal year from May 31, 2005 through May 31, 2009.
Director Compensation
Year 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009
2005
Fees Earned or 
Paid in Cash ($)
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
R. David Russell
Name
(1)
Melvin Martin (2)
Stock Awards
($)
30,000 
30,000 
30,000
-
-
Option Awards
($) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
Page 64 of 110
Non-Equity 
Incentive Plan 
Compensation
($) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
Non-qualified
Deferred
Compensation 
Earnings ($)
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
All Other
Compensation
($) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
Total ($) 
30,000 
30,000 
30,000
-
-
(1)  Mr. Russell served as a director from July 2005 to August 2008.  He was subsequently appointed as a director, Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer on in January 2011.
(2)  Mr. Martin served as a director from 1992 until June 28, 2005.
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND 
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
Equity Compensation Plan Information 
 
At May 31, 2009, there were outstanding options to purchase 1,100,000 common shares.  These options expired 
during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010. 
 
Beneficial Ownership 
 
Set forth below is information regarding the beneficial ownership of our common stock, as of June 10, 2011 by (i) 
each person whom we know owned, beneficially, more than 5% of the outstanding shares of our common stock, (ii) 
each of our directors, (iii) each of our named executive officers, and (iv) all of the current directors and executive 
officers as a group.  We believe that, except as otherwise noted below, each named beneficial owner has sole voting 
and investment power with respect to the shares listed.  Unless otherwise indicated herein, beneficial ownership is 
determined  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  includes  voting  or 
investment  power  with  respect  to  shares  beneficially  owned.    Shares  of  common  stock  subject  to  convertible 
instruments or warrants currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days of June 10, 2011 are deemed outstanding 
for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of the person holding such instruments or warrants, but are not 
deemed outstanding for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of any other person.
Beneficial Ownership Information
Number of Shares Beneficially
Owned as of May 1, 2011(1)
Beneficial Owner & Address 
R. David Russell(3) 
David K. Young 
Thomas Hendricks(4) 
Art Daher(5) 
Officers  and  Directors  as  a  group 
(4 persons)(6) 
Marlowe and Judy Harvey(7) 
Glenn Duffy(8)
11,715,650 
6,270,420 
4,785,667 
2,340,450
25,112,187 
9,550,368 
8,316,725
Percent of 
Class(2) 
7.7% 
4.2% 
3.2% 
1.6%
16.6% 
6.4% 
5.5%
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4) 
(5)
(6) 
(7)
(8)
To the best of the Company’s knowledge, none of the shares listed for these officers and directors has been pledged as 
security.  Except for Glenn Duffy, the address of those listed is c/o Calais Resources Inc., P.O. Box 653, 4415 Caribou 
Road, Nederland, Colorado 80466.   
If  a  stockholder  holds  options  or  other  securities  that  are  exercisable  or  otherwise  convertible  into  our  common  stock 
within 60 days following June 10, 2011, we treat the shares of common stock underlying those securities as owned by that 
stockholder and as outstanding shares when we calculate that stockholder’s percentage ownership of our common stock. 
We do not consider those shares to be outstanding when we calculate the percentage ownership of any other stockholder. 
Includes 650,000 shares held of record by Mr. Russell’s wife and 1,562,500 shares issuable upon exercise of warrants held 
by Mr. Russell.  
Includes 619,000 shares held of record by Hendricks Mining Co. 
Includes 2,500 shares held of record by Mr. Daher’s wife and 55,000 shares held of record by 575061BC Ltd., a company 
controlled by Mr. Daher. 
Includes 2,312,500 shares issuable upon exercise of warrants held by Mr. Russell. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Marlowe’s  address  is  47015  Extrom  Road,  Chiliwack,  British  Columbia,  Canada  V2R  4V1.    Includes 
659,730  shares  held  of  record  by  Argus  Resources,  a  company  of  which  Mr.  Harvey  is  an  officer  and  significant 
shareholder. 
Mr.  Duffy’s  address  is  5679  Old  Ranch  Road,  Sarasota,  Florida  34241.    Includes  6,420,903  shares  held  of  record  by 
Pensco Trust Company Cust FBO Glenn E Duffy Roth IRA and 1,895,822 shares issuable upon exercise of warrants.  Mr. 
Duffy  has  been  identified  with  other  shareholders  referred  to  in  this  report  as  the  “Duffy  Group”.    The  Duffy  Group 
beneficially owns 14,889,174, or 9.6%, which includes 6,420,903 shares held of record by Pensco Trust Company Cust 
FBO Glenn E Duffy Roth IRA, 4,161,325 shares held of record by Equity Trust Co Cust FBO Duane A Duffy Roth IRA, 
and 4,306,946 shares issuable upon exercise of warrants.
Page 65 of 110
Changes in Control 
 
There are no agreements known to management that may result in a change of control of our company.
ITEM  13.  CERTAIN  RELATIONSHIPS  AND  RELATED  TRANSACTIONS,  AND  DIRECTOR 
INDEPENDENCE.
Conflicts of Interest and Related Party Transactions 
 
Several  of  the  Company’s  officers  and  directors  are  also  directors,  officers  or  shareholders  of  other  companies.  
Some of the directors and officers are engaged and will continue to be engaged in the search for additional business 
opportunities on behalf of other corporations, and situations may arise where these directors and officers will be in 
direct competition with the Company. Such associations may give rise to conflicts of interest from time to time.  
Such  a  conflict  poses  the  risk  that  the  Company  may  enter  into  a  transaction  on  terms  which  could  place  the 
Company in a worse position than if no conflict existed.  Conflicts, if any, will be dealt with in accordance with the 
relevant  provisions  of  the  Business  Corporations  Act  (British  Columbia)  (the  “BCBCA”).    The  directors  of  the 
Company are required by law to act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interest of the Company and 
to disclose any interest which they many have in any project or opportunity of the Company. However, each director 
has a similar obligation to other companies for which such director serves as an officer or director.   
 
Except as set forth above, we have not adopted any other conflict of interest policy with respect to such transactions.  
 
Consulting Fees 
 
We paid consulting fees and expense reimbursements of $58,300 (unaudited), $12,500 (unaudited), $13,750 in fiscal 
years 2007, 2006, and 2005, respectively, to Herbert Hendricks, the brother of Thomas Hendricks, an officer and 
director of the Company, as compensation for overseeing certain exploration activities in Panama and other various 
consulting activities.  
 
Wages and Other Payables 
 
Due to the financial difficulties we faced during the 2005 – 2010 fiscal years, we were unable to pay the wages of 
certain of our executive officers.  As such, we had significant amounts payable to executive officers as of May 31, as 
follows:
David K. Young (1) 
Thomas Hendricks (2) 
Matthew Witt (3)
$
$
2010
417,833   $  
366,820  
 
 
127,750  
 
$
912,403
2009
279,333 
216,820 
127,750
623,903
$ 
 
 
 
$
2008
160,416 
91,821 
127,750
379,987
$ 
 
 
 
$
2007
(unaudited) 
106,667 
89,321 
127,750
323,738
$ 
 
 
 
$
2006
(unaudited)
18,154   $  
134,321  
 
 
127,750  
 
$
280,225
2005
(unaudited) 
-   
132,321 
127,750
260,071
(1) David K. Young has served on our Board since July 30, 2005 and as our President and Chief Executive Officer 
since February 10, 2006.  In January 2011, Mr. Young relinquished his CEO title and was appointed as our Chief 
Operating Officer.  He remains our President.  On October 27, 2010, we and Mr. Young entered into a Settlement 
Agreement wherein Mr. Young agreed to relinquish and waive $227,042 in wages owed to him, which constituted 
50% of the total wages he was owed as of August 31, 2010.  Mr. Young agreed to accept as full payment for the 
remaining 50% 2,270,420 restricted shares of our common stock.  See also “Item 11. Executive Compensation – 
Employment and Compensation Arrangements.” 
 
(2)  Subsequent  to  May  31,  2010,  we  have  paid  Mr.  Hendricks  $319,220  against  both  current  and  aged  wages 
payable  balances  as  well  as  convertible  debenture  balances  due.    See  also  “Item  11.  Executive  Compensation  – 
Employment and Compensation Arrangements.”
Page 66 of 110
(3)  Matthew Witt served as our Chief Financial Officer from August 2003 until February 7, 2005.  On March 31, 
2005, we, Thomas Hendricks (an officer and director of the Company) and Mr. Witt entered into a Settlement and 
Release Agreement wherein, among other things, we agreed to pay Mr. Witt (a) $127,750 for all wages, including 
vacation, paid personal leave, bonus or otherwise, which were due, owing and accrued through February 7, 2005 and 
(b) all amounts owed to Mr. Witt for any of our business expenses incurred by Witt as an employee of ours (at the 
time, an additional $49,718), in exchange for release of certain claims and liabilities of ours.  This Settlement and 
Release agreement was later superseded by a Settlement Agreement entered into on October 28, 2010 (the “October 
Settlement”) by and between us and Mr. Witt.  Under the October Settlement, Mr.  Witt agreed to accept as full 
payment  for  all  amounts  owed  to  him  under  the  earlier  Settlement  and  Release  Agreement  2,000,000  restricted 
shares of our common stock and $25,000 in cash. These shares were issued and cash released in November 2010. 
 
Debentures 
 
As of May 31, 2005 through 2010, the Company had outstanding convertible debentures payable to shareholders, 
current officers, and former officers and directors of the Company as set forth below:
Debentures (a)
Debentures (b) 
 
Total debentures 
payable
Less: Current portion
Long-term portion
$
$
$
2010
4,809,649   $
45,500
4,855,149   $
(4,855,149) 
 
   
-    $
2009
4,644,900 
 
  
105,500 
 
  
4,750,400 
  
(105,500) 
 
  
4,644,900
$
2008
5,110,759
225,000
$
$
5,335,759
$
(175,000)
$
5,160,759
$
2007
(unaudited)
4,723,979 
 
  
225,000 
 
  
4,948,979 
  
(125,000) 
 
  
4,823,979
$
$
$
2006
(unaudited)
4,600,798   $
250,000
4,850,798   $
(100,000)
4,750,798   $
2005
(unaudited)
4,036,090 
 
  
250,000 
 
  
4,286,090 
  
(50,000) 
 
  
4,236,090
(a)These debentures are unsecured, non-interest bearing, and initially matured in May 2011.  These debentures are 
owned by Marlowe Harvey who was the President and a director of the Company until he resigned as President in 
2000 and as a director in November 2003; Argus Resources, Inc., the president of which is Mr. Harvey; Judy Harvey 
who is Mr. Harvey’s spouse; and Lynne Martin. Ms. Martin is the spouse of Melvin Martin, who was a director of 
ours until he resigned on July 28, 2005.  The debentures are convertible into common stock at $1.23 in Canadian 
Dollars at the holders’ discretion and contain no restrictive covenants.  
 
In December 2010, $4,306,347 of  the  debentures were  converted  into 9,550,368  shares  of  common  stock  and  in 
exchange for $259,149 in cash as described more fully below. The remaining debenture, totaling Cdn$747,728, will 
mature in May 2011.  
 
Lynne Martin Settlement 
 
We entered into a Settlement Agreement with Lynne Martin regarding a debenture payable to her in the principal 
amount of $1,097,367.  Ms. Martin is the spouse of Melvin Martin, who was a director of the Company until he 
resigned  on  July  28,  2005.    We  and  Ms.  Martin  agreed  that  Ms.  Martin  would  accept  as  full  payment  for  the 
debenture the amount of $109,781 in cash which is to be paid by us in four quarterly payments of $27,445, with the 
first payment due on December 15, 2010 and the three remaining payments due on March 15, 2011, June 15, 2011, 
and September 15, 2011.  We made the first payment on December 15, 2010 and the second payment of $27,470.59 
on March 18, 2011. 
 
The Harvey Settlement 
 
We entered into a Settlement Agreement with Marlowe and Judy Harvey and Argus Resources, Inc. regarding the 
following three debentures:
Page 67 of 110
$2,038,840 
$949,417 
$220,723
1.   Judy Harvey 
     2.   Judy Harvey 
     3.   Argus Resources, Inc. 
 
Marlowe Harvey was the President and a director of the Company until he resigned as President in 2000 and as a 
director in November 2003.  Mr. Harvey is the President of Argus Resources, Inc.  Judy Harvey is Mr. Harvey’s 
spouse. After the closing of this transaction, Mr. Harvey beneficially holds more than 5% percent of our outstanding 
shares.   
 
We and Judy Harvey agreed that Ms. Harvey would accept as full payment for her two debentures the total amount 
of  $149,368  in  cash  and  a  total  of  8,890,638  restricted  shares  of  our  common  stock.    The  cash  was  paid  on 
December 15, 2010 and the shares were issued on December 20, 2010 to an escrow agent to hold the shares until the 
Cease Trade Order in British Columbia has been revoked. 
 
We  and  Argus  Resources  agreed  that  Argus  Resources  would  accept  as  full  payment  for  its  debenture  659,730 
restricted shares of our common stock.  The shares were issued on December 20, 2010. 
 
(b)  This  debenture  is  owed  to  Thomas  S.  Hendricks,  an  officer,  director  and  shareholder  of  the  Company.    The 
debenture is non interest-bearing, convertible into common stock at $0.85 per share in $50,000 annual increments, 
contains  no  restrictive  covenants  and  matured  on  July  8,  2008.    We  repaid  $25,000  of  this  debenture  in  2007, 
$119,500 in 2009, and $60,000 in 2010.  At May 31, 2009, the balance of the unpaid debenture was $105,500.  This 
debenture has subsequently been paid in full.  
 
Debt 
 
The Duffy Notes 
 
On August 1, 2005, we issued a note payable (the “Duffy Note”) to a group of shareholders (the “Duffy Group”) for 
$807,650, in exchange for $681,000 originally accounted for as Share Capital, and interest accrued from the date of 
each cash infusion totaling $126,650.  The Duffy Group (Duane Duffy, Glenn Duffy, Luke Garvey and James Ober) 
are independent qualified investors and shareholders of Calais. The Duffy Note was secured by a trust deed on the 
Caribou Townsite and Mine.  The Duffy Note bore interest at 15.9% and was payable in two installments: the first 
due on October 31, 2005 for $166,000 and the remaining principal and interest due October 31, 2006.  In addition, in 
consideration for the financing of the note, the Duffy Group received warrants to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our 
common stock for $0.40 per share in August 2005.
Initially, in the event that any scheduled payments were not made, a penalty representing 5% of the payment amount 
was to be added to the principal amount of the note.  In the event that the note holders provided written notification 
of default and the default was not cured within 10 days, the default interest rate would increase to 24% per annum 
on the entire principal amount and accrued interest.
On October 31, 2005, we defaulted on our obligation to pay $166,000. Under the terms of the note, a late fee penalty 
of 5%, or $8,300, was added to the principal amount of the note.  On December 15, 2005, we made a payment on the 
note of $169,070.
On October 31, 2006, we defaulted on the payment due at the note’s maturity and, under the terms of the note, a late 
fee penalty of 5%, or $39,129, was added to the principal amount of the note.  In addition, the default rate under the 
terms of the note was increased to 24% per annum. 
 
The note was restructured on March 26, 2007.  The principal balance was set at $910,677, consisting of the original 
balance of the note, plus late fees and interest.  The payment terms specified an initial payment of $200,000 and 
payments of $75,000 per month until the note was repaid in full.  The interest rate was reset from the default rate of 
24% to 15.9%.  We issued 500,000 shares of stock to the Duffy Group and extended the exercise date on warrants 
owned by the Duffy Group to purchase 875,000 shares of common stock from April 2008 to March 2012.
Page 68 of 110
We defaulted on the $75,000 payment due April 15, 2007.  The note was restructured again on December 31, 2007.  
The principal balance of the note was set at $900,537, consisting of the principal balance established at March 26, 
2007, plus additional late fees and interest.  The maturity date was extended to April 1, 2008.    Warrants to purchase 
1,000,000 shares of stock at $0.40 per share, expiring April 14, 2011, and warrants to purchase 875,000 shares of 
stock at $0.25, expiring March 15, 2012, owned by the Duffy Group, were modified, with the exercise price set at 
$0.25 and the expiration date extended to January 1, 2020.
The  note  was  restructured  again  on  March  31,  2008.    The  principal  balance  of  the  note  was  set  at  $948,397 
consisting of the principal balance established at December 31, 2007 plus interest.  The payment terms specified an 
initial payment of $100,000 and five monthly payments of $50,000 each beginning May 1, 2008.  The remaining 
principal and interest were due October 1, 2008.  We issued to the Duffy Group 1,185,496 shares of common stock 
at $0.13 per share and warrants to purchase 1,185,496 shares of common stock at $0.12 per share, expiring April 1, 
2013. 
 
In May 2008, as a result of the failure to pay scheduled interest payment in accordance with the March 31, 2008 loan 
modification, the note holders were issued 1,021,000 shares of common stock at $0.15 per share and warrants to 
purchase 1,021,000 shares of common stock at $0.12 per share expiring in August 2013.  
 
In May 2009, the note holders were issued 1,249,900 shares of common stock at $0.14 per share and warrants to 
purchase  1,249,900  shares  of  common  stock  at  $0.12  per  share  expiring  in  May  2020  in  connection  with  the 
execution of a trust deed modification.  
 
As a result of these transactions, the Duffy Group became holders of a significant percentage of the Company’s 
outstanding common stock.  See “Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and 
Related Stockholder Matters.”  
 
Debt Restructure  
 
On February 1, 2010, we, Elkhorn and Brigus entered into a purchase agreement which provided for the assignment 
to Brigus of principal, accrued interest and penalties owed to MFPI Partners, LLC (“MFPI”) in connection with the 
mortgage note of $7,755,622, principal and accrued interest in the amount of $386,653 owed in connection with the 
Congo Chief Note, and $1,458,582 owed to MFPI Capital Partners, LLC. On February 19, 2010, the Duffy Group 
entered  into  an  agreement  with  Brigus  and  us  whereby  the  Duffy  Group  received  10,306,790  shares  of  Calais 
common stock in exchange for the forgiveness of $453,347 in our debt to Duffy, the assignment to Brigus of the 
remaining balance of $653,021 owed by us, and the assignment by the Duffy Group of its right to title and interest to 
the  “Caribou”  loan  property  to  Brigus.  The  terms  of  the  agreement  allowed  for  additional  consideration  to  be 
conveyed to the Duffy group from Brigus, in consideration for the consummation of the transaction. 
 
Immediately following the debt restructure, we owed $10,253,878 in principal accruing interest at 8% per annum to 
Brigus. The debt initially matured on February 1, 2011. On January 15, 2011, we received a forbearance under the 
terms of this agreement effectively extending the maturity date of the debt through June 30, 2011. As of May 31, 
2010, interest of $269,691 had been accrued on this note. 
 
At the time of the Brigus transaction, our current R. David Russell, our current Chairman, CEO and a director of the 
Company,  was  President  and  CEO  of  Apollo  Gold  Corporation,  a  predecessor  of  Brigus.    Mr.  Russell  also 
beneficially  owns  approximately  3.9%  of  our  outstanding  common  stock.  See  “Item  12.  Security  Ownership  of 
Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.” 
 
Shareholder Note 
 
In connection with an Exploration Agreement dated December 31, 2008 (the “Exploration Agreement”) between the 
Company and DRDMJ, LLC, a company owned and controlled by R. David Russell, on December 20, 2008, the 
Company issued a one-year note payable to R. David Russell, who at the time was a shareholder of the Company 
and is currently the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, in the amount of $405,410 in 
consideration for cash of approximately $300,000. The cash was to be used for development at the Cross Gold mine 
with  ore  processing  at  the  Gold  Hill  mine.    In  August  2009  the  Company  defaulted  on  its  agreement  with  Mr.
Page 69 of 110
Russell and issued 5,067,650 shares of our common stock valued at $861,501 as consideration for our default on the 
Exploration Agreement and recorded losses of $456,905 in connection with this. 
 
Stock 
 
On  numerous  occasions,  we  sold  common  stock  to  then-related  parties,  including  our  current  Chief  Executive 
Officer, R. David Russell.   
 
On July 1, 2005 we sold 750,000 common share units to R. David Russell for proceeds of $150,000.  Each unit 
consisted of one share of our common stock and one warrant to purchase shares of our common stock at $0.25 per 
share. The warrants expired in June 2010. 
 
On November 30, 2007 we sold 6,450,000 common share units to R. David Russell and parties related to him to him 
for proceeds of $516,000.  Each unit consisted of one share of our common stock and one warrant to purchase shares 
of our common stock at $0.12 per share.  The warrants expire in November 2012. 
 
On February 8, 2008 and again on March 24, 2008 we sold a total of 1,375,000 common share units to R. David 
Russell and parties related to him for proceeds of $110,000.  Each unit consisted of one share of our common stock 
and one warrant to purchase shares of our common stock at $0.12 per share. The warrants expire in February and 
March 2013. 
 
On April 26, 2010 we sold 100,000 shares of our common stock to R. David Russell for proceeds of $5,000. 
 
On August 24, 2010, we sold 650,000 shares of our common stock to the wife of R. David Russell for proceeds of 
$52,000.
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES.
Principal Accountants Fees 
 
As disclosed in “Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure,” 
the Board has appointed StarkSchenkein, LLP (“StarkSchenkein”) as our independent registered public accounting 
firm to examine our financial statements for the fiscal years ending May 31, 2004, through May 31, 2011 and to 
perform  other  appropriate  accounting  services.    StarkSchenkein  has  served  as  our  independent  registered  public 
accounting firm since March 10, 2011, and has no relationship with us other than that arising from their employment 
as our independent registered public accounting firm. 
 
Fees paid to our auditors during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2005 through May 31, 2009 are as follows:  
 
 Fiscal Year
Audit-Related Fees
All Other Fees
Tax Fees
Page 70 of 110
Audit Firm 
KPMG LLP 
KPMG LLP
2005 
2006 
2007  Hein & Associates LLP 
2008  Hein & Associates LLP 
2009  Hein & Associates LLP
Audit Fees 
$52,362 
$50,690 
$5,000 
$190,000
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
To the best of our knowledge, during the fiscal years listed above, fifty percent or less of the hours expended on the 
audit  of  our  financial  statements  by  our  auditors  were  attributed  to  work  performed  by  persons  other  than  the 
auditor’s full-time permanent employees.  
 
Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures 
 
Our board of directors does not currently have an audit committee and has not adopted a formal pre-approval policy. 
Therefore, our full board of directors is functioning as the Company’s audit committee.  The Board has considered 
whether  the  provision  of  the  non-audit  services  described  above  by  an  external  auditor  is  compatible  with 
maintaining  the  auditor’s  independence,  and  determined  that  these  non-audit  services  are  compatible  with  the
required  independence.  The  Board  pre-approves  all  services  to  be  provided  to  our  company  by  the  independent 
auditors.  This includes the pre-approval of (i) all audit services, and (ii) any significant (i.e., not de minimis) non-
audit services.  Before granting any approval, the Board gives due consideration to whether approval of the proposed 
service will have a detrimental impact on the auditor’s independence.  All services provided by and fees paid to our 
independent auditors during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2005 through May 31, 2009 were pre-approved by the 
Board.  
 
Report of Board of Directors 
 
The  Board  reviewed  and  discussed  the  audited  financial  statements  with  management  and  discussed  with  the 
independent  auditors  the  matters  required  to  be  discussed  by  the  statement  on  Auditing  Standards  No.  61,  as 
amended.  The Board received the written disclosures and the letter from the independent accountant required by 
applicable  requirements  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  regarding  the  independent 
accountant’s  communications  with  the  Board  concerning  independence,  and  has  discussed  with  the  independent 
accountant the independent accountant’s independence.  Based on the review and discussions referred to above, the 
Board approved the inclusion of the audited financial statements in our annual report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES.
PART IV
(1)  Financial Statements 
 
The financial statements filed as part of this report are listed on the index to financial statements on page F-1 
 
(2)  Financial Statement Schedules 
 
All financial statement schedules have been omitted because they are not required, are not applicable or the 
information is included in the Financial Statements or Notes thereto. 
 
(3) Exhibit List
Exhibit 
Number
3.01
3.02
3.03
10.01
10.02
10.03
Memorandum forming Millennium Resources, Inc. dated December 22, 1986 (Incorporated herein by 
reference from exhibits filed with the original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as 
amended).
Title
Articles of Incorporation (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the original filing
on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as amended).
Special Resolution filed March 19, 1992 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the
original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as amended).
Loan  agreement  dated  August  1,  2003  by  and  between  Calais  Resources  Inc.,  Calais  Resources 
Colorado, Inc., Aardvark Agencies, Inc., and Broadway Mortgage Corporation (Incorporated herein by 
reference from exhibits filed with the original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as 
amended).
Option Agreement,  dated November 29,  2005, by  and  between  the  Broadway  Group,  Calim  Private 
Equity,  LLC  and  Mendel  Blumenfeld,  LLP  related  to  the  purchase  and  sale  of  the  Broadway  Loan 
Agreement  dated  August  1,  2003  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010).
Allonge  to  Promissory  Note  dated  December  15,  2005,  related  to  the  increase  in  principal  amount 
payable  under  Loan  Agreement  with  MFPI  Partners,  LLC.  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from 
exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010).
Page 71 of 110
Exhibit 
Number 
10.04
10.05
10.06
10.07
10.08
10.09
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
Second  Allonge  to  Promissory  Note  dated  December  15,  2006,  related  to  the  increase  in  principal 
amount payable under Loan Agreement with MFPI Partners, LLC. (Incorporated herein by reference 
from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010).
Title
Letter Agreement with Calim Private Equity, LLC dated September 22, 2005 (Incorporated herein by
reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010).
Letter Agreement with MFPI Partners, LLC dated July 27, 2006 (Incorporated herein by reference from
exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010).
Mutual  Release  effective  July  18,  2000,  between  Marlowe  Harvey,  Aardvark  Agencies,  Inc.,  Calais 
Resources  Colorado,  Inc.,  Calais  Resources  Inc.,  on  the  one  part  and  Thomas  S.  Hendricks 
(Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the original filing on Form 20-F for the year 
ended May 31, 2003, as amended).
Form of convertible debentures (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the original
filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as amended).
Purchase  Option  Agreement  dated  February  28,  2003  by  and  between  Calais  Resources  Inc.  and 
Golden  Cycle  of  Panama,  Inc.  and  Manama  Mining  of  Golden  Cycle,  Inc.  (Incorporated  herein  by 
reference from exhibits filed with the original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as 
amended).
Grant  of  Royalty  Interest  for  Fixed  Term,  Modification  of  Prior  Royalty  Grants  and  Assignment  of 
Royalty Buyout Rights Under Prior Grants dated March 1998 by Calais Resources Colorado Inc. in 
favor of Thomas S. Hendricks, Marjorie J. Hendricks, and John R. Henderson (Incorporated herein by 
reference from exhibits filed with the original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as 
amended).
Right to Redeem and Re-Acquire Agreement dated March 26, 1999 between Aardvark Agencies, Inc. 
and  Calais  Resources  Colorado,  Inc.  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the 
original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as amended). 
Right to Redeem and Re-Acquire Agreement dated July 20, 2000 between Aardvark Agencies, Inc. and 
Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the original 
filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as amended). 
Grant of Royalty Interest for Fixed Term by Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. and Aardvark Agencies, 
Inc. dated July 2000 by Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. in favor of Thomas S. Hendricks, Marjorie J. 
Hendricks  and  John  R.  Henderson  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the 
original filing on Form 20-F for the year ended May 31, 2003, as amended). 
Settlement Agreement and General Mutual Release between Calais Resources Inc., Marlowe Harvey, 
and others, dated March 8, 2004. (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with quarterly 
report on Form 10-QSB for the quarter ended February 29, 2004). 
Purchase  Option  Agreement  between  Calais  Resources  Inc.  and  Golden  Cycle  of  Panama,  Inc.  and 
Panama  Mining  of  Golden  Cycle,  Inc.,  dated  February  28,  2003.  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference 
from exhibits filed with quarterly report on Form 10-QSB for the quarter ended February 29, 2004). 
Extension  of  Purchase  Option  Agreement  and  Partial  Acknowledgement  of  Performance  by  and 
between Calais Resources Inc., Golden Cycle of Panama, Inc. and Panama Mining of Golden Cycle, 
Inc. dated January 31, 2004  (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with quarterly report 
on Form 10-QSB for the quarter ended February 29, 2004). 
Further  Extension  and  Restatement  of  Purchase  Option  Agreement  between  Calais  Resources  Inc., 
Panama  Mining  of  Golden  Cycle  and  Golden  Cycle  of  Panama  Mining  dated  September  15,  2005 
(Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2010).
Page 72 of 110
Title
Note payable between Calais Resources Inc., Calais Resources, Colorado, Inc., Duane A. Duffy, Glenn 
E. Duffy, James Ober, and Luke Garvey dated August 1, 2005 (Incorporated herein by reference from 
exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Grace Period Letter between Calais Resources Inc., Calais Resources, Colorado, Inc., Duane A. Duffy, 
Glenn E. Duffy, James Ober, and Luke Garvey dated March 13, 2007 (Incorporated herein by reference 
from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Note  and  Trust  Deed  Modification  Agreement  between  Calais  Resources  Inc.,  Calais  Resources, 
Colorado, Inc., Duane A. Duffy, Glenn E. Duffy, James Ober, and Luke Garvey dated December 21, 
2007 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year 
ended May 31, 2010). 
Note  and  Trust  Deed  Modification  Agreement  between  Calais  Resources  Inc.,  Calais  Resources, 
Colorado, Inc., Duane A. Duffy, Glenn E. Duffy, James Ober, and Luke Garvey dated June 12, 2008 
(Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2010). 
Note and Trust Deed Modification Agreement of August 2008 between Calais Resources Inc., Calais 
Resources,  Colorado,  Inc.,  Duane  A.  Duffy,  Glenn  E.  Duffy,  James  Ober,  and  Luke  Garvey  dated 
August 22, 2008. 
Note and Trust Deed Modification Agreement of January 2009 between Calais Resources Inc., Calais 
Resources,  Colorado,  Inc.,  Duane  A.  Duffy,  Glenn  E.  Duffy,  James  Ober,  and  Luke  Garvey  dated 
January 22, 2009. 
Note  and  Trust  Deed  Modification  Agreement  of  May  2009  between  Calais  Resources  Inc.,  Calais 
Resources, Colorado, Inc., Duane A. Duffy, Glenn E. Duffy, James Ober, and Luke Garvey dated May 
26, 2009. 
Promissory Note between MFPI Partners, LLC and Calais Resources Inc. for purchase of Congo Chief, 
dated December 16, 2005 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s 
Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Vacant Land Contract to Buy and Sell Real Estate dated September 21, 2005 related to Congo Chief 
(Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2010). 
Amendment and Extension Agreement by and between Calais Resources Inc. and the Estate of John W. 
Snyder,  dated  November  10,  2005  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010).
Deed of Trust from Calais Resources Inc. to MFPI Partners, LLC dated December 16, 2005.
Endorsement to Promissory Note transferring rights to Apollo Gold, Inc. from Duane A. Duffy, Glenn 
E. Duffy, James Ober, and Luke Garvey (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Assignment of Loan Property by Duane A. Duffy, Glenn E. Duffy, Luke Garvey and James Ober, and 
Calais Resources Inc., Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. f/b/o Apollo gold, Inc. dated March 12, 2010 
(Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2010). 
Purchase Agreement by and among Apollo Gold Corporation, Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. Calais 
Resources Inc. and Duane A. Duffy, Glenn, E. Duffy, Luke Garvey and James Ober dated March 12, 
2010 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year 
ended May 31, 2010).
Exhibit 
Number 
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.22+
10.23+
10.24+
10.25
10.26
10.27
10.28* 
10.29
10.30
10.31
Page 73 of 110
Title
Promissory Note between Calais Resources Inc. and Walsh Environmental Scientists and Engineers, 
LLC dated March 23, 2009 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s 
Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Stock  Pledge  Agreement  by  and  between  Walsh  Environmental  Scientists  and  Engineers,  LLC  and 
Calais Resources Inc. dated March 23, 2009 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with 
the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Agreement by Calais Resources Colorado Inc. to Purchase Perpetual Independent Royalty Interest from 
Tusco, Incorporated dated June 1, 1988 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Purchase  Documents  related  to  acquisition  of  land  by  Calais  Resources  Colorado,  Inc.  from  John 
Spencer Folawn (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K 
for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Bill of Sale related to Stringtown Mill (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Purchase Agreement by and among Elkhorn Goldfields, LLC, Calais Resources Inc., Calais Resources 
Colorado, Inc. and Apollo Gold, Inc. made as of February 1, 2010 (Incorporated herein by reference 
from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Forbearance Agreement dated as of January 15, 2011 by and among Brigus Gold Corp., Brigus Gold, 
Inc., Calais Resources Inc. and Calais Resources Colorado, Inc.  
Exploration Agreement dated as of December 31, 2008 between Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. and 
DRDMJ, LLC. (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K 
for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Letter re: Payment of Promissory Note dated August 20, 2009 between Calais Resources Colorado, Inc. 
and R. David Russell (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 
10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Settlement  Agreement  for  Certain  Debentures  dated  December  10,  2010  by  and  among  Calais 
Resources Inc., Marlowe and Judy Harvey and Argus Resources Inc (Incorporated herein by reference 
from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Employment  Agreement  with  Thomas  S.  Hendricks,  dated  July  12,  2006  (Incorporated  herein  by 
reference from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Employment Agreement with David K. Young, dated July 5, 2006 (Incorporated herein by reference 
from exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Settlement and Release Agreement by and among Calais Resources Inc., Thomas S. Hendricks, and 
Matthew C. Witt dated March 31, 2005 (Incorporated herein by reference from exhibits filed with the 
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Settlement Agreement by and between Calais Resources Inc. and Matt Witt dated October 28, 2010 
(Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2010). 
Settlement Agreement by and between Calais Resources Inc. and David Young dated October 27, 2010 
(Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2010). 
Promissory Note dated February 1, 2010 between Calais Resources Inc., Calais Resources Colorado, 
Inc. and Apollo Gold Corporation.
Page 74 of 110
Exhibit 
Number 
10.32
10.33
10.34
10.35
10.36
10.37
10.38+
10.39
10.40
10.41
10.50#
10.51#
10.52#
10.53#
10.54#
10.55+
Title
Extension Agreement dated as of June 8, 2011 by and among Brigus Gold Corp., Brigus Gold, Inc., 
Calais  Resources  Inc.  and  Calais  Resources  Colorado,  Inc.  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from 
exhibits filed with the Company’s Form 8-K dated
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
List  of  subsidiaries  (Incorporated  herein  by  reference  from  exhibits  filed  with  the  Company’s  Form 
10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010). 
Certification of Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) 
or Rule 15d-14(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to Section 302 of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
Certification of the Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 
Section 1350, as adopted, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Exhibit 
Number 
10.56
14+ 
21
31+
32+
99.1+ 
99.2+
Caribou Property Claims List  
   Manhattan Property Claims List  
   + - Filed herewith. 
   # - Compensatory arrangement. 
   * - To be filed by amendment.
Page 75 of 110
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Date:  June 10, 2011
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
By:        /s/ R. David Russell
R. David Russell 
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  this  report  has  been  signed  below  by  the 
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Date
June 10, 2011
June 10, 2011
June 10, 2011
June 10, 2011
Name and Title
R. David Russell 
Chief Executive Officer and 
Chairman of the Board
David K. Young  
President, Chief Operating Officer 
and Director (Principal Executive 
Officer and Principal Financial 
Officer)
Thomas S. Hendricks 
Vice President of Exploration and 
Corporate Development, and 
Director 
 
Art Daher 
Director
Signature
/s/ R. David Russell
/s/ David K. Young
/s/ Thomas S. Hendricks                   
 
 
     /s/ Art Daher
Page 76 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
INDEX TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page 77 of 110
Description 
 
Report of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2009 and 2008 
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the fiscal years 
ended  May  31,  2009  and  2008,  and  for  the  period  from  December  30,  1986  (inception) 
through May 31, 2009. 
 
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity (Deficit) for  the period  from 
December 30, 1986 (inception) to May 31, 2009   
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2009 and 2008, 
and for the period from December 30, 1986 (inception) through May 31, 2009. 
 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Page Number
78
79
80
81
86
88
StarkSchenkem, LLP
BUSINESS ADVISORS 84 CPAS
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
Shareholders and Board of Directors
Calais Resources Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Calais Resources Inc. (an
exploration stage Company) as of May 31, 2009 and 2008> and the related consolidated statements of
operations, shareholders' (deficit) and comprehensive income (loss), and cash flows for the years then
ended. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. The
Company’s financial statements for the period from inception (December 30, 1986) to May 31> 2004,
were audited by other auditors whose report expressed an unqualified opinion and included a going
concern paragraph on those financial statements.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects> the
consolidated financial position of Calais Resources Inc. as of May 31, 2009 and 2008, the results of
its consolidated operations and its consolidated cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will
continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, the Company has
suffered a loss from operations and anticipates further losses in the development of its business.
These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this
uncertainty.
/s/ StarkSchenkein, LLP
Denver, Colorado
June 10, 2011
wharwamm.1 rmnmtum much > 1331711 1 Jim I, l umzrsm ~. .«smrgymm
1mm.wwstn 'Wl’m 
Page 78 of 110


CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Prepaid expenses and other assets
Total current assets
Restricted cash
Note receivable
Mineral interests
Total assets
LIABILITIES
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Convertible debentures - employee
Notes payable and accrued interest
Notes payable - shareholders
Total current liabilities
Royalty interest
Convertible debentures
Convertible debentures - related party
Environmental remediation liabilities
Total liabilities
Shareholders' Deficit
Common stock, no par value, unlimited shares 
authorized, 50,992,802, and 46,866,802 shares issued and 
outstanding as of May 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
Total Shareholders' Deficit
Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Deficit
As of May 31,
2009
2008
$                       
-
12,437
12,437
$
15,555
49,505
65,060
15,400
60,000
-
$
87,837
$
2,490,622
105,500
8,814,925
1,160,356
12,571,403
150,000
4,644,900
-
50,000
17,416,303
$
15,400
60,000
495,573
636,033
$
1,652,998
175,000
8,160,717
780,240
10,768,955
150,000
5,110,759
50,000
50,000
16,129,714
$
26,541,417
(42,656,319)
(1,213,564)
(17,328,466)
87,837
$
25,926,355
(39,740,613)
(1,679,423)
(15,493,681)
636,033
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 79 of 110
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
FOR THE FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008, AND FOR THE PERIOD FROM
DECEMBER 20, 1986 (inception) THROUGH MAY 31, 2009
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
Expenses
General and administrative expense
Exploration and business development expenses
Depreciation and amortization expense
Total operating expenses
Other (income) and expenses
Loss on impairment
(Gain) on settlement of debts
Interest and financing fees
Other (income) expense
Total other income and expenses
Loss before income taxes
Income tax expense (benefit)
Net loss
For the years ended May 31,
2009
2008
1,013,858
61,979
$               
                      
-
1,075,837
1,374,817
107,164
$          
               
-
1,481,981
December 30, 1986
(inception) through
May 31, 2009
$
9,103,717
12,153,326
202,403
21,459,446
495,573
(5,184)
1,351,038
(1,558)
1,839,869
-
30,000
1,399,232
(5,128)
1,424,104
9,808,572
(147,408)
11,645,797
(110,088)
21,196,873
(2,915,706)
-
                            
$
(2,915,706)
(2,906,085)
-
                       
$
(2,906,085)
(42,656,319)
-
                            
$
(42,656,319)
Other comprehensive loss (income) - foreign currency 
translation adjustments
Comprehensive loss
$
(465,859)
(2,449,847)
$
386,779
(3,292,864)
$
1,213,564
(43,869,883)
Basic and diluted weighted-average number of common 
shares outstanding
50,469,135
45,833,846
Basic and diluted net loss per common share
$
(0.06)
$
(0.06)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 80 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT) AND
FOR THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 30, 1986 (Inception) TO MAY 31, 2009
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Common Stock
Balance at Inception: December 30, 1986
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1987
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1988
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1989
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1990
Shares issued for acquisition of Cineonix LTD 
Shares issued for finder's fee 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1991
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1992
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued under debt settlement 
Shares issued for finder's fee
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1993
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued for cash 
Net loss
Shares
-
Amount
-
$
1
                      
80,000
150,000
1
                      
73,346
5,501
230,001
78,848
11,600
100,000
10,635
110,019
341,601
199,502
31,000
20,000
5,000
39,790
29,338
7,335
397,601
275,965
40,000
20,000
99,751
55,010
457,601
430,726
1,000,000
30,000
550,095
66,011
1,487,601
1,046,832
50,000
14,669
1,537,601
1,061,501
1,000,000
600,000
115,468
30,000
110,019
96,817
16,939
19,143
3,283,069
1,304,419
50,000
1,000,000
145,000
170,000
22,371
110,019
23,397
74,813
Balance at May 31, 1994
4,648,069
$
1,535,019
Accumulated
Deficit During the
Development Stage 
-
$
Comprehensive 
(Loss) Income
 
$                         
-
(79,688)
(79,688)
-
(31,108)
(110,796)
-
(136,400)
(247,196)
-
(39,985)
(287,181)
-
(865,413)
(1,152,594)
-
(52,591)
(1,205,185)
-
(86,648)
(1,291,833)
-
$
(241,437)
(1,533,270)
$                         
-
Total
Stockholders
Deficit
$                         
-
1
                      
73,346
                        
5,501
                     
(79,688)
(840)
10,635
110,019
(31,108)
88,706
39,790
29,338
7,335
(136,400)
28,769
99,751
55,010
(39,985)
143,545
550,095
66,011
(865,413)
(105,762)
14,669
(52,591)
(143,684)
110,019
96,817
16,939
19,143
(86,648)
12,586
$
22,371
110,019
23,397
74,813
(241,437)
1,749
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 81 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT) AND
FOR THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 30, 1986 (Inception) TO MAY 31, 2009 (continued)
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Balance at May 31, 1994
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Cancellation of shares
Net loss
Common Stock
Shares
4,648,069
Amount
$
1,535,019
200,000
205,000
40,000
215,000
3,000
(905,209)
110,019
                      
40,340
                        
7,628
                      
41,000
1,650
                        
                              
(1)
Balance at May 31, 1995
4,405,860
1,735,655
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued for finder's fee 
Net loss
700,000
209,200
285,750
359,300
100,000
81,500
141,500
8,000
73,500
300,000
43,500
36,500
4,364
-
513,422
583,939
800,620
1,006,694
220,038
44,833
71,611
4,988
48,566
220,038
27,120
22,756
Balance at May 31, 1996
6,748,974
5,300,280
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for finder's fee 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1997
Shares issued for cash
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued upon exercise of options 
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests 
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests 
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
199,820
5,962
10,000
3,000
1,000
1,000
7,000
500
75,900
81,000
27,500
285,750
222,700
1,494,912
-
9,535
2,860
953
953
12,117
477
72,371
77,233
17,145
1,047,932
816,708
7,670,106
8,853,476
537,200
1,400
1,000
7,000
39,562
207,000
11,250
619,000
1,970,075
1,335
953
6,674
45,345
44,030
71,540
3,123,238
Balance at May 31, 1998
9,093,518
$
14,116,666
Accumulated
Deficit During the   Comprehensive 
(Loss) Income
Development Stage   
$           
$                         
-
(1,533,270)
Total
Stockholders
Deficit
$
1,749
110,019
                      
40,340
                        
7,628
                      
41,000
                        
1,650
                              
(1)
                   
(485,428)
(283,043)
(485,428)
(2,018,698)
-
513,422
583,939
800,620
1,006,694
220,038
44,833
71,611
4,988
48,566
220,038
27,120
22,756
-
(1,576,237)
1,705,345
1,494,912
-
9,535
2,860
953
953
12,117
477
72,371
77,233
17,145
1,047,932
816,708
(2,147,983)
3,110,558
$
1,970,075
1,335
953
6,674
45,345
44,030
71,540
3,123,238
(9,379)
(8,375,209)
(10,840)
(1,576,237)
(3,594,935)
-
(2,147,983)
(5,742,918)
-
$
(8,375,209)
(14,118,127)
(9,379)
$
(9,379)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 82 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT) AND
FOR THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 30, 1986 (Inception) TO MAY 31, 2009 (continued)
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Balance at May 31, 1998
Shares returned to Treasury
Shares issued for debt settlement @ $1.10 per share
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests @ $4.36 per 
share
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests @ $6.36 per 
share
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests @ $4.36 per 
share
Shares issed upon exercise of options @ $0.98 per share
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 1999
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 2000
Shares issued under settlement for services @ $0.33 per 
share
Shares issed upon exercise of options @ $0.15 per share
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Common Stock
Shares
9,093,518
Amount
$
14,116,666
(22,039)
180,125
80,364
-
198,172
350,716
288,750
1,836,190
10,000
43,641
25,000
24,571
9,655,718
16,569,956
9,655,718
16,569,956
100,000
33,006
100,000
11,002
Balance at May 31, 2001
9,855,718
16,613,964
Shares issued for debt settlement @ $0.22 per share
Shares issued under settlement for services @ $.22 per share
250,000
471,000
55,010
103,638
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests @ $0.22 per 
share
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 2002
Shares issued for cash @ $1.14 per share
Shares issued for debt settlement @ $0.42 per share
Shares issued under settlement for services @ $0.40 per 
share
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests @ $0.60 per 
share
Shares issed upon exercise of options @ $0.33 per share
Warrants issued for services
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
100,000
22,004
10,676,718
16,794,616
62,500
67,500
261,667
57,775
28,458
105,056
100,000
60,144
25,000
8,251
150,832
Balance at May 31, 2003
11,193,385
$
17,205,132
Accumulated
Deficit During the   Comprehensive 
Development Stage   
(Loss) Income
$
(14,118,127)
$
(9,379)
Total
Stockholders
Deficit
$
(10,840)
-
198,172
350,716
1,836,190
43,641
24,571
-
(4,986,037)
(2,543,587)
(1,546,541)
(4,090,128)
33,006
11,002
172,512
(585,235)
(4,458,843)
55,010
103,638
22,004
(33,641)
(732,152)
(5,043,984)
57,775
28,458
105,056
60,144
$
8,251
150,832
(411,846)
(761,138)
(5,806,452)
(4,986,037)
(19,104,164)
(1,546,541)
(20,650,705)
-
(9,379)
(9,379)
(585,235)
(21,235,940)
172,512
163,133
(732,152)
(21,968,092)
(33,641)
129,492
$
(761,138)
(22,729,230)
(411,846)
$
(282,354)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 83 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT) AND
FOR THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 30, 1986 (Inception) TO MAY 31, 2009 (continued)
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Common Stock
Shares 
11,193,385
80,000
125,000
8,181,818
245,750
2,000
62,500
340,000
-
(87,000)
Amount
$
17,205,132
91,493
120,618
4,606,309
409,649
3,594
51,185
112,219
428,963
(28,077)
(150,831)
20,143,453
22,850,254
-
(440,000)
(228,751)
100,000
1,100,000
-
25,000
220,000
21,114,702
22,655,254
750,000
1,500,000
875,000
93,649
150,000
300,000
175,000
44,951
105,890
24,333,351
23,431,095
250,000
3,782,955
23,750
50,000
556,590
6,413
500,000
90,000
55,000
9,900
Balance at May 31, 2003
Shares issued for cash @ $1.14 per share
Shares issued for cash @ $0.96 per share
Shares issued for financing @ $0.56 per share
Shares issued for services @ $1.67 per share
Shares issued for acquisition of mineral interests @ $1.80 per 
share
Shares issued upon exercise of warrants @ $0.82 per share
Shares issued upon exercise of options @ $0.33 per share
Shares issuable for subscriptions received
Shares cancelled previously issued for services @ $0.32 per 
share
Warrants cancelled previously issued for services
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net Loss
Balance at May 31, 2004
Conversion of subscriptions received in prior periods to note 
payable
Cancellation of shares
Shares issued for cash @ $0.25 per share
Shares issued for cash @ $0.20 per share
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 2005
Shares issued for cash @ $0.20 per share.
Shares issued for cash @ $0.20 per share
Shares issued for cash @ $0.20 per share
Shares issued for services  @ $0.48 per share
Warrants issued in connection with debt issuance
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 2006
Shares issued for cash @$ 0.20 per share
Shares issued in conjunction with purchase of mortgage 
Shares issued in connection with investor relations @ $0.27 
per share
Shares issued in connection with trust deed modification @ 
$0.18 per share
Shares issued in connection with settlement agreement @ 
$0.18 per share
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Balance at May 31, 2007
28,945,056
$
24,143,998
Accumulated
Deficit During the   Comprehensive 
Development Stage   
(Loss) Income
$
(22,729,230)
$
(282,354)
Total
Stockholders
Deficit
(5,806,452)
$
91,493
120,618
4,606,309
409,649
3,594
51,185
112,219
428,963
(28,077)
(150,831)
(8,111)
(4,723,421)
(4,892,862)
(440,000)
-
25,000
220,000
(314,290)
(4,365,149)
(9,767,301)
150,000
300,000
175,000
44,951
105,890
(564,707)
(2,761,205)
(12,317,372)
50,000
556,590
6,413
90,000
9,900
$
(123,182)
(2,255,523)
(13,983,174)
(4,723,421)
(27,452,651)
(8,111)
(290,465)
(4,365,149)
(31,817,800)
(314,290)
(604,755)
(2,761,205)
(34,579,005)
(564,707)
(1,169,462)
$
(2,255,523)
(36,834,528)
(123,182)
$
(1,292,644)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 84 of 110
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT) AND
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
FOR THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 30, 1986 (Inception) TO MAY 31, 2009 (continued)
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Total
Stockholders
Deficit
(13,983,174)
$
622,000
156,000
90,000
176,900
204,000
100,000
154,114
32,500
93,089
153,754
(386,779)
(2,906,085)
(15,493,681)
$
85,000
125,000
153,233
38,400
150,939
62,490
465,858
(2,915,706)
(17,328,467)
Common Stock
Accumulated
Balance at May 31, 2007
Shares issued for cash @ $.08 per share
Shares issued for cash @ $.08 per share
Shares issued for services @ $0.12 per share
Shares issued for cash @$.08 per share
Shares issued for cash @$.08 per share
Shares issued for cash @$.08 per share
Shares issued for note payable restructure @ $ 0.13 per share
Shares issued for mineral interest and royalties
Warrants issued 
Warrants issued 
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
Shares 
28,945,056
Amount
$
24,143,998
7,775,000
1,950,000
750,000
2,211,250
2,550,000
1,250,000
1,185,496
250,000
622,000
156,000
90,000
176,900
204,000
100,000
154,114
32,500
93,089
153,754
Balance at May 31, 2008
46,866,802
25,926,355
Shares issued for cash @ $.08 per share
Shares issued for cash @ $.08 per share
Shares issued for note payable restructure @ $ 0.15 per share
Shares issued for cash @ $ 0.08 per share
Warrants issued
Warrants issued 
Other comprehensive income (loss) 
Net loss
1,062,500
1,562,500
1,021,000
480,000
85,000
125,000
153,233
38,400
150,939
62,490
Balance at May 31, 2009
50,992,802
$
26,541,417
Deficit During the   Comprehensive 
Development Stage   
(Loss) Income
$
(36,834,528)
$
(1,292,644)
(2,906,085)
(39,740,613)
(386,779)
(1,679,423)
$
(2,915,706)
(42,656,319)
465,858
$
(1,213,565)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Page 85 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in 
operating activities:
Accretion expense
Amortization of deferred financing costs
Depreciation and depletion
Non-cash interest expense
Loss on impairment of mineral properties
Loss on impairment of investment
Common shares issued in connection with trust deed 
modification 
Common shares issued in connection with debt settlement 
Common shares issued for services
Warrants cancelled for services
Warrants issued in connection with debt restructure 
Losses (gains) recognized in connection with debt 
settlement
Gain on sale of property, plant and equipment
Loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment
Loss on abandonment of mineral properties
Loss on foreign exchange
Environmental remediation liability
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
(Increase) decrease in prepaid expenses
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and other current 
liabilities
(Increase) decrease in other operating assets and liabilities
Net cash (used in) operating activities
Cash flows from investing activities:
Purchase of mineral properties & equipment 
Dispositions of equipment
Net additions to equipment
Deferred exploration expenditures
Deposit on equipment
Acquisition of shares of subsidiary
Advance to subsidiary
Payable under option agreement
Refundable deposit on purchase of shares of subsidiary
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
For the Years Ended May 31,
2009
2008
December 30, 1986 
(Inception) through
May 31, 2009
$
(2,915,706)
$
(2,906,085)
(42,656,319)
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                        
                           
-
1,149,673
495,573
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                        
                                   
-
-
1,039,026
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
-
-
                                   
-
                             
                                   
-
153,754
90,000
(5,184)
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
-
                                   
                                   
-
30,000
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
-
                                   
                                   
-
105,655
3,369,936
200,736
10,164,713
8,824,989
983,583
90,000
(54,544)
601,349
(18,173)
308,761
142,488
4,873
8,040,143
300,600
318,770
50,000
37,068
(24,331)
(55,725)
667,506
147,762
(423,308)
267,780
(82,934)
(1,432,790)
1,997,379
(33,967)
(7,314,753)
-
                                   
-
-
                                   
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
-
                                   
                                   
-
-
                                   
-
-
                                   
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
-
                                   
                                   
-
(17,450,192)
161,352
(167,929)
(143,071)
(17,880)
(715,932)
(177,875)
716,481
(73,847)
(17,868,893)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements
Page 86 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash flows from financing activities:
Proceeds from sale of common shares
Proceeds from sale of private equity 
Proceeds from borrowings on long term-debt
Proceeds from borrowings on shareholder note
Repayments of long term debt 
Repayments of debt - convertible debentures 
Advances to affiliated companies, shareholders and directors
Restricted cash
Share subscriptions received in advance
Net cash provided by financing activities
Effect of foreign exchange
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash at beginning of period
Cash at end of period
Supplemental Cash Flow Information
Interest expense paid in cash
Interest received
Debt restructuring - warrants issued
Common shares issued in connection with debt restructuring and 
settlement of accrued liabilities
Common shares issued for acquisition of property 
Shares issued for mineral  property development
Shares issued for repayment of shareholder advances
For the Years Ended May 31,
2008
2009
248,400
$                         
                                   
-
                                   
-
                           
                              
                          
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
282,000
(3,147)
(119,500)
407,753
1,258,900
334,084
(144,639)
$                      
                                   
-
                           
-
                                   
                          
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
                                   
-
1,448,345
-
                            
                             
-
$
(15,555)
15,555
201,365
$                         
$                                 
-
$
213,788
-
                             
                                   
-
$
15,555
15,555
206,452
$                         
$                                 
-
$
246,843
153,233
$                         
$                                 
-
$                                 
-
-
$
154,114
32,500
$                         
$                           
$                                 
-
-
$
December 30, 1986 
(Inception) through
May 31, 2009
$
18,535,079
345,000
6,776,082
282,000
(1,910,748)
(160,926)
(106,730)
(31,789)
518,415
24,246,383
936,263
-
                                   
-
-
$
$                      
$                             
$
1,188,233
3,999
412,767
$                         
$                           
$                           
$
957,515
32,500
96,315
9,240,146
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements
Page 87 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
NOTE 1 - ORGANIZATION AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
Calais  Resources  Inc.  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the  Province  of  British  Columbia,  Canada,  on 
December 30, 1986.  Calais Resources Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively with its subsidiaries, referred to herein 
as “Calais”, “we”, “us” or “our”) is currently in the process of exploring various mineral interests, primarily gold 
and silver.  We are headquartered in Colorado, and have mining interests principally in Colorado and Nevada.
Our  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  accounting  principles  generally 
accepted in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP"). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements 
requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related 
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported 
amounts  of  revenues  and  expenses  during  the  reporting  period.  The  more  significant  areas  requiring  the  use  of 
management estimates and assumptions relate to mineral reserves, impairment of fixed assets, valuation allowances 
for deferred tax assets and the fair value of financial instruments. We base our estimates on historical experience and 
on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Accordingly, actual results 
may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Through May 9, 2011 we had not filed financial statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) 
since  our  Form  10-QSB  for  the  quarter  ended  August  31,  2004.    Subsequent  to  our  filing  on  May  9,  2011  we 
continue to complete and file with the SEC our financial statements for all periods, so as to bring the Company 
current with respect to its reporting requirements..
Our activities to date have primarily consisted of raising capital and acquiring and exploring our mining interests.  
We have had no significant revenue in our history.  Accordingly, we are considered to be in the exploration stage.
Our fiscal year end is May 31st.  Through May 31, 2004, we reported our financial information using Canadian 
Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles  (“Canadian  GAAP”)  using  the  Canadian  dollar  as  our  functional  and 
reporting currency.  During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2005, we changed our reporting basis to “U.S. GAAP” 
and our functional and reporting currency to the United States dollar (“U.S. dollar”).  This change was made for 
several reasons, including the following: (1) substantially all of our assets and employees are now located in the 
United States; (2) substantially all of our labor, materials and other costs are now denominated in the U.S. dollar; 
and (3) our recent financing transactions, including both lending activities and cash infusions in exchange for equity, 
have  been  denominated  in  the  U.S.  dollar  and  have  involved  parties  and  investors  located  in  the  United  States.  
Accordingly, historical financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been restated using 
U.S.  GAAP  with  a  functional  and  reporting  currency  of  the  U.S.  dollar,  unless  otherwise  noted.    All  references 
herein  to  “$” and  “US$” refer  to U.S. dollars, unless  otherwise  indicated.   Unless otherwise  specified,  all  dollar 
amounts  are  expressed  in  U.S.  dollars.    All  references  to  Common  Shares  refer  to  shares  of  our  common  stock 
(without par value) unless otherwise indicated.
NOTE 2 - LIQUIDITY
These  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  on  a  going  concern  basis.    To  date,  we  have  not  generated  any 
revenues  from  operations  and  have  incurred  losses  since  inception,  resulting  in  a  deficit  accumulated  during  the 
development stage of $42,656,319, as of May 31, 2009.  Further losses are anticipated as we continue to be in the 
exploration stage.  Our ability to continue operations depends upon our ability to generate profitable operations in 
the future and/or to raise additional funds through equity or debt financing.   Since inception through May 31, 2009, 
we  have  raised  $19,398,494  through  the  sale  of  equity  securities  and  $7,058,082  through  the  issuance  of  debt 
instruments  which  has  been  used  primarily  to  provide  operating  funds,  repay  long  term  debt    acquire  mineral 
interests and property and equipment.  Subsequent to May 31, 2009, we have acquired an additional $3,472,400 in 
financing (Note 13).  There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional funding when needed, or that 
such funding, if available, can be obtained on terms acceptable to us or at all.  If we cannot obtain needed funds for 
implementing  our  mine  plan  after  completion  of  the  feasibility  study,  we  may  be  forced  to  curtail  or  cease  our 
activities.    Equity  financing,  if  available,  may  result  in  substantial  dilution  to  existing  stockholders.  All  of  these
Page 88 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
factors cause substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.  These financial statements do not 
include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts of and 
classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event we cannot continue as a going concern.
NOTE 3 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Reclassifications
Certain  prior  period  amounts  have  been  reclassified  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements  to  conform  to  the 
current period presentation.
Foreign Currency
For  all  periods  prior  to  May  31,  2004,  our  functional  and  reporting  currency  was  the  Canadian  dollar.    We  
determined during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2005 that our functional currency was the U.S. dollar (Note 1).  We 
translated financial statements prior to May 31, 2005 into U.S. dollars by translating all assets and liabilities at the 
exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date.  Transactions involving equity were translated at the exchange rate 
in effect on or about the date of each transaction.  Income and expenses were translated using an average exchange 
rate for the period. Adjustments resulting from translation of foreign currency financial statements were reported as 
Other Comprehensive Income.
Cash Equivalents
We consider all highly liquid debt securities purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash 
equivalents.
Mineral Interests
We expense general prospecting costs and the costs of acquiring and exploring unevaluated mineral interests.  We 
capitalize land.  When a mineral interest is determined to have proven and probable reserves, subsequent exploration 
costs  are  capitalized  to  mineral  interests.    For  acquired  mineral  interests  with  proven  and  probable  reserves,  we 
capitalize acquisition costs and subsequent development costs. When mineral interests are developed and operations 
commence, capitalized costs will be charged to operations using the units-of-production method over proven and 
probable  reserves.  Upon  abandonment  or  sale  of  a  mineral  interest,  all  capitalized  costs  relating  to  the  specific 
property will be written off in the period abandoned or sold and a gain or loss is recognized. To date, we have not 
yet commenced our primary operations.
Notes Receivable 
  
We  have  recorded  notes  receivable  as  of  May  31,  2009  and  2008.    It  is  our  policy  to  review  the  notes  for 
collectability on a periodic basis or when there has been a significant change in circumstances that might impact the 
collectability of the notes. As of May 31, 2009 and 2008 we have not recorded any allowance for notes receivable 
and we believe these amounts to be fully collectible.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We  review  and  evaluate  long-lived  assets  for  impairment  at  least  once  per  year,  or  more  often  when  events  or 
changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable.
During  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2009,  we  experienced  financial  difficulties  due  to  the  global  economic 
downturn.  During  this  downturn,  the  price  of  gold  declined  and  the  U.S.  credit  markets  tightened,  significantly 
lessening  the availability  of  business  financing. We  continued  to produce  net  operating  losses  and negative  cash
Page 89 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
flow during this time, ending the 2009 fiscal year with a net negative cash balance. Accordingly, we performed an 
impairment  analysis  and,  as  a  result  of  that  analysis,  recognized  an  impairment  of  approximately  $0.5  million, 
constituting all of our mineral interests at the time, in recognition of the fact that future cash flows were not likely 
given then-current facts and circumstances.
Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations
We  are  subject  to  certain  environmental  and  regulatory  obligations  which  will  require  us  to  restore  our  mine 
properties after mining has been completed or, in the case of environmental remediation obligations, at the request 
of local, state, or federal environmental authorities.  The fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation is 
recognized as a liability in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made, with 
an offsetting increase in the carrying value of the asset.  The asset retirement obligation is recorded at fair value, and 
accretion expense is recognized over time as the discounted liability is accreted to its expected settlement value.  
The  fair  value  of  the  asset  retirement  obligation  is  measured  using  expected  future  cash  flow  discounted  at  our 
credit-adjusted, risk-free interest rate.  During the fiscal years ended May 31, 2009 and 2008, we did not recognize 
an asset retirement obligation related to our properties as we have not engaged in any activities which would have 
disturbed the initial state of the property.
We  have  recorded  an  environmental  remediation  obligation  which  provides  for  the  recognition,  disclosure  and 
subsequent measurement of liabilities related to pollution arising from some past act, corrective-action provisions of 
the  Resource Conservation and  Recovery Act,  or  analogous  state  and non-U.S.  laws  and regulations. During  the 
fiscal year ended May 31, 2005 we recorded an environmental remediation obligation of $50,000 (Note 5).
Royalty Interest
We  have  recorded  liabilities  related  to  our  purchase  of  perpetual  independent  royalty  interests  in  our  Caribou 
property as royalty interests (Note 4).  These amounts are payable at any time no later than twenty years from the 
initial purchase date April 12, 2008.
Fair Value
The carrying amounts reported for cash, prepaid assets, accounts payable and all accrued liabilities approximate fair 
value  because  of  the  immediate  of  short-term  maturity  of  these  financial  instruments.    Fair  values  of  assets  and 
liabilities measured on a recurring basis as of May 31, 2009 included notes receivable, convertible debentures, notes 
payable,  common  stock  issuable  and  long-term  debt.    The  reported  amounts  approximated  fair  value  as  of  the 
balance sheet date.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Our  comprehensive  loss  consists  of  net  gains  and  losses  on  foreign  currency  translation  adjustments,  primarily 
related  to  our  Canadian-dollar-based  convertible  debentures.    Comprehensive  income  (loss)  is  presented  in  the 
accompanying consolidated statements of changes in shareholders’ equity (deficit).
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial  instruments  which  potentially  subject  us  to  concentrations  of  credit  risk  consist  of  cash  deposits  with 
financial  institutions.    We  periodically  evaluate  the  creditworthiness  of  financial  institutions  and  maintain  cash 
accounts  only  with  major  financial  institutions,  thereby  minimizing  exposure  for  deposits  in  excess  of  federally 
insured amounts.  On occasion, we may have cash in banks in excess of federally insured amounts.  Management 
believes that credit risk associated with cash is remote.
Page 90 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
Incomes Taxes
Deferred  income  taxes  are  recognized  using  the  liability  method  whereby  deferred  tax  assets  are  recognized  for 
deductible  temporary  differences  and  operating  loss  and  tax  credit  carry-forwards  and  deferred  tax  liabilities  are 
recognized  for  taxable  temporary  differences.  Temporary  differences  are  the  differences  between  the  reported 
amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, 
in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be 
realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of the changes in tax laws and rates of the date 
of enactment.  We have not fully evaluated the existence of uncertain tax positions relating to unfiled federal income 
tax returns.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Basic loss per share is computed by dividing income available to common stockholders by the weighted-average 
number of shares outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share reflect the potential of securities that 
could share in our earnings. All of the common shares underlying stock options and warrants outstanding as of May 
31, 2009 and 2008 were excluded from diluted weighted average shares outstanding for each of the respective years 
because their effects were considered anti-dilutive.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash consists of certificates of deposit and underlying letters of credit for state and local bonds related to 
our mineral properties.
Share-Based Compensation
For all reporting periods prior to the fiscal year ended May 31, 2004, we accounted for stock-based compensation 
pursuant to Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees (“APB 25”) 
and related interpretations.  As such, compensation expense under fixed plans was recorded only if the market value 
of the underlying stock at the date of granting exceeded the exercise price.  If the exercise price of a fixed option 
award was changed, the award was accounted for as a variable award from the date of modification to the final 
measurement date upon which the award was exercised, forfeited, or expired unexercised. Compensation cost was 
adjusted in subsequent periods up to the measurement date for changes in the quoted market price.
In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board “FASB”) issued Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards No. 123R (“FAS 123R”), which was a revision of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, 
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation (“FAS 123”).  These standards were subsequently codified under ASC 
Topic 718, Share Based Compensation.  The standards required all share-based payments to employees, including 
grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on the grant date fair value of 
the  award.    The  provisions  of  these  accounting  rules  were  effective  for  all  registrants  as  of  the  first  fiscal  year 
beginning after June 15, 2005; however, we adopted these standards effective for all reporting periods subsequent to 
June 1, 2004.
New Accounting Standards
Accounting standards-setting organizations frequently issue new or revised accounting rules. We have reviewed all 
new pronouncements that have been issued since the filing of our Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2004 to 
determine their impact, if any, on our financial statements. 
  
Effective  July  1,  2009,  the  FASB  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (“ASC”)  Topic  105,  Generally  Accepted 
Accounting  Principles,  became  the  single  source  for  authoritative  non-governmental  U.S.  GAAP.  Rules  and 
interpretive  releases  of  the  SEC  under  authority  of  federal  securities  laws  are  also  sources  of  authoritative  U.S.
Page 91 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
GAAP for SEC registrants. The ASC does not change U.S. GAAP but is intended to simplify user access to all 
authoritative U.S. GAAP by providing all the authoritative literature related to a particular topic in one place.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-06, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (Topic 820), which 
requires  reporting  entities  to  make  new  disclosures  about  recurring  or  nonrecurring  fair  value  measurements 
including  significant  transfers  into  and  out  of  Level  1  and  Level  2  fair  value  measurements  and  information  on 
purchases, sales, issuances, and settlements on a gross basis in the reconciliation of Level 3 fair value measurements. 
ASU  2010-6  is  effective  for  annual  reporting  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2009,  except  for  Level  3 
reconciliation  disclosures  which  are  effective  for  annual  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2010.  We  do  not 
have  any  assets  or  liabilities  classified  as  Level  3.  We  have  adopted  the  Level  1  and  Level  2  amendments 
accordingly.  As  the  update  only  pertained  to  disclosures,  it  had  no  impact  on  our  financial  position,  results  of 
operations, or cash flows upon adoption.
In  February  2010,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  2010-09,  Subsequent  Events,  Amendment  to  Certain  Recognition  and 
Disclosure Requirements, to remove the requirement for SEC filers to disclose the date through which an entity has 
evaluated subsequent events. This change removes potential conflicts with current SEC guidance and clarifies the 
intended scope of the reissuance disclosure provisions. The update was effective upon its date of issuance, February 
24, 2010, and we adopted the amendment accordingly. As the update only pertained to disclosures, it had no impact 
on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows upon adoption.
On August 2, 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-21, Accounting for Technical Amendments to Various SEC Rules 
and  Schedules—Amendments  to  SEC  Paragraphs  Pursuant  to  Release  No.  33-9026:  Technical  Amendments  to 
Rules, Forms, Schedules and Codification of “Financial Reporting Policies” (“ASU 2010-21”). The ASU reflects 
changes made by the SEC in Final Rulemaking Release No. 33-9026, which was issued in April 2009 and amended 
SEC requirements in Regulation S-X (17 CFR 210.1-01 et seq.) and Regulation S-K ( 17 CFR 229.10 et seq.) and 
made changes to financial reporting requirements in response to the FASB's issuance of SFAS No. 141(R), Business 
Combinations (“ASC 805”), and SFAS No. 160, Non-controlling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements—
an amendment of ARB No. 51 ( “ASC 810”). The provisions of ASU 2010-21 did not have a material impact on the 
financial statements.
NOTE 4 – MINERAL INTERESTS
As of May 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, our mineral properties are carried at $nil and $495,573. We review and 
evaluate long-lived assets for impairment at least on an annual basis or when there has been a significant change in 
circumstance.    The  analyses  performed  during  the  periods  presented  resulted  in  the  recognition  of  impairment 
expense  of  $495,573  and  $nil  during  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2009  and  2008,  respectively.  Since  our 
inception we have recorded impairment expense of $9,808,572.
Title to mining interests involves certain inherent risks due to the difficulties of determining the validity of certain 
claims  as  well  as  the  potential  for  problems  arising  from  the  frequently  ambiguous  conveyance  history 
characteristics of many mining interests.  We have investigated title to all of its mineral interests and, to the best of 
our knowledge, title to all of our interests are in good standing as described below.
(a) Colorado 
 
Calais owns or controls 129 patented claims (consolidating separate interests in the same claim as a single claim) 
and 105 unpatented mineral claims in a 3.5 square mile area, which comprise the Consolidated Caribou District. In 
general, these claims can be classified as:
•  The Calais Patented Claims, which comprise the Caribou and Cross Projects. These claims include most of the 
currently  disturbed  and  proposed  development  property  at  the  Cross  Mine  (which  is  an  underground  mine). 
Calais owns the mineral rights to all these claims; and
Page 92 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
•  The Caribou Property (Upper) Claims represent the majority of the Consolidated Caribou District land holdings. 
Aardvark  Agencies,  Inc.  (“AAI”)  is  the  “nominee  owner”  of  a  portion  of  the  claims,  which  comprise  the 
Caribou Property. As “nominee owner”, AAI holds record title to the parcel, however Calais retains the right to 
occupy, explore, mine, develop, build, and/or re-acquire the property.  AAI is controlled by Marlowe Harvey, a 
former officer, director and significant shareholder of the Company. Following a series of transactions between 
AAI, Mr. Harvey, Calais, and Mr. Hendricks, which resulted in litigation brought by Mr. Hendricks against Mr. 
Harvey,    AAI,  Mr. Hendricks  and  Calais  entered  into  a  mutual  release  and  settlement  agreement  effective 
July 18, 2000.  This agreement, which was modified in 2004, provides that we have the right to reacquire the 
claims held by AAI for a debenture (which we have already paid to AAI) and for a payment from Calais to AAI 
of  “a  cash  amount  equal  to  pay  the  capital  gains  triggered  by  the  transfer”  to  Calais  (which  his  ultimately 
deducted from the debenture).  In March 2004, Mr. Harvey and his affiliates entered into a settlement agreement 
with  Calais  which,  among  other  things,  included  a  more  precise  definition  of  Calais’  right  (which  expires 
August 31,  2011,  but  can  be  extended  for  an  additional  ten  years  if  AAI’s  right  to  convert  the  debenture  is 
extended  as  well)  to  repurchase  the  interest  of  AAI  in  the  Caribou  prospect,  including  the  payment  of 
approximately $750,000 for the reacquisition, and AAI’s right to convert that debenture before it is paid.  That 
agreement, also defined Calais’ right to borrow against, enter in and upon the mineral interests in the Caribou 
prospect owned by AAI, construct buildings and mines on those prospects, and remove and sell minerals from 
Caribou for Calais’ own account.
The majority of the mineral interests acquired in 1998 from Hendricks Mining Co. (“HMC”), or acquired prior 
to April 2003, are subject to net smelter return royalties of 2.0% in favor of the former shareholders of HMC.  
The royalty grants now outstanding and of record are currently effective for a period of 20 years after the date 
of the grants, with expiration of the royalties beginning in January 2018 and ending in April 2018.  Certain of 
the royalty grants to the former HMC shareholders on non-patented claims are subject to a partial buyout option 
exercisable by us at any time during the term of the grants.  The buyout option gives us the right to buy out and 
retire 1% out of the 2% royalty grants (i.e., 50% of the outstanding grants) for an exercise price of $750,000. 
The royalty grants to the former HMC shareholders on the patented claims are subject to a repurchase of the 2% 
NSR at any time during the term for $1.5 million.
Several  of  the  mineral  interests  acquired  after  April  2003  are  subject  to  royalty  reservations  in  favor  of  the 
sellers in amounts varying from 1.325% to 3.5% of net smelter returns.  The terms of these royalties vary from 
perpetual to a lifetime interest only.
In April 2008, we entered into an agreement to purchase a perpetual independent royalty interest from Tusco, 
Incorporated (“Tusco”), a third party.  Prior to this agreement, Tusco held a royalty interest in production from 
certain  properties  formerly  held  by  HMC.    Under  the  April  2008  agreement,  Calais  purchased  this  royalty 
interest from Tusco in exchange for $150,000, payable at any time during the following 20 years, and 250,000 
shares of Calais common stock.  In addition, Calais must pay Tusco $1,500 per month beginning May 15, 2008 
and continuing through the life of Tusco’s President during the term of the agreement and the final payment 
period.  Pursuant to this agreement, we recognized a $182,500 mineral interest, and a corresponding $150,000 
liability,  as  well  as  $32,500  in  common  stock  related  to  the  250,000  shares  issued.  We  continue  to  make 
payments pursuant to this agreement.
As  a  result  of  agreements  entered  into  in  the  2000  calendar  year  to  provide  financing  to  us,  AAI,  an  entity 
controlled by a former officer and director of ours, owns a portion of the Caribou property. The parties clarified 
the earlier agreements in March 2004 and, as a result, we may repurchase (through August 31, 2011, with a 
possible  ten-year  extension)  by  repaying  the  $743,765  debenture  (Note  7)  that  AAI  holds  (subject  to  the 
holder’s right to convert the debenture into our common stock in accordance with the terms of the debenture). 
During the period of time that AAI owns the property, we may enter upon the property, explore for minerals, 
use the Aardvark properties as collateral, and produce any minerals found for our own account. If we fail to 
exercise the option to reacquire the property interest held by AAI by August 31, 2011, the parties have agreed to 
extend the purchase option an additional ten years if we also extend the debenture held by Aardvark for the 
same period.
Page 93 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
(b) Nevada
In December 1994, we acquired from a then-director a 51% interest in various properties in Nevada known as 
the Manhattan project. We also agreed to acknowledge any applicable 5% net smelter return royalties on certain 
claims in that project to that director. It appears that the director owned no interest in these properties at that 
time,  although  he  believes  that  he  had  and  still  has  rights  to  acquire  interests  in  those  properties.  In 
October 2003,  we  received  partial  title  information  relating  to  these  properties  which  consist  of  28  patented 
mining claims and 147 unpatented mining claims. In July 2004, the former director and his affiliated companies 
conveyed their respective interests in these properties to us. Certain of these claims overlie other claims.
It appears that the record ownership of the various prospects is as follows:
•
•
•
28 patented mining claims appear to be owned by us (which received assignment of these claims in 
July 2004) as to a 60% undivided interest, and by Nevada Manhattan Mining, Inc., an entity controlled 
by the former director (“NMMI”), as to a 40% undivided interest; 
42 unpatented mining claims appear to be owned by us (which received assignment of these claims in 
July 2004); 
56 unpatented  mining claims appear to be owned by an individual named Anthony Selig or entities 
associated with Mr. Selig; and
•  The remaining claims appear to be owned by us or by us and NMMI in the 60-40 ratio described above
for the patented claims.  Our ownership of these claims was received by the July 2004 assignment.
Mr. Selig  has  denied  any  obligation  to  convey  any  portion  of  the  claims  directly  to  us,  but  has  admitted  an 
obligation to convey his interest in claims listed in a 1997 agreement between Selig and NMMI to NMMI. Selig 
is aware of the outcome of the Calais/NMMI litigation and he and his counsel have indicated a willingness to 
tender the NMMI deed to the District Court in and for Nye County if properly directed to do so.  We believe 
that  the  settlement  of  the  NMMI  litigation  reached  in  September  2000  results  in  NMMI  being  obligated  to 
convey  its  interests  in  the  prospects  to  Calais,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  settlement,  including  payment  of 
royalties to NMMI from production.  We are currently unable to locate any person with authority to act for 
NMMI; management is evaluating the possible invocation of the jurisdiction of the District Court to accept the 
Selig deed on behalf of the joint venture, and subject to the terms of the recorded settlement.  We also plan to 
deposit the remaining funds due to NMMI with the registry fund of the Nye County, Nevada District Court, as 
NMMI itself cannot be located or contacted.
(c)  Panama
On  February  28,  2003,  we  entered  into  a  “Purchase  Option  Agreement,”  wherein  we  received  an  option  to 
purchase  a  40,000  acre  mineral  concession  in  an  historic  gold  producing  district  of  Panama  with  Panama 
Mining of Golden Cycle of Panama Incorporated (“PMGC”) in exchange for a combination of cash and our 
shares.    Under  the  Purchase  Option  Agreement  and  subsequent  extensions,  we  were  committed  to  perform 
certain work on the properties, including an obligation to complete a $250,000 exploration program for lode 
deposits by September 25, 2004, and an additional $250,000 program to explore for placer gold deposits and 
install a pilot placer operation. We also hired a shareholder of the sellers, Herbert Hendricks, to oversee the 
project. Herbert Hendricks is the brother of our then-President, Thomas Hendricks, but they do not share the 
same  home,  they  make  independent  business  decisions,  and  are  not  otherwise  affiliated.  These  performance 
obligations were modified by a full restatement of the agreement dated September 2005.
It was later determined that the concession applications and the concession originally issued for the original 
exploitation concession were not of a status with the Panamanian government that exploration could be pursued 
without  further  processing  of  the  concession  applications  in  Panama  and  the  official  re-issuance  of  the 
exploitation concession.  The issuance of these documents was the responsibility of the Panama companies, and 
the Panama companies were unable to produce written evidence of such issuance, in violation of our agreement 
with  them.  After  extensive  correspondence  with  the  Panama  companies  over  said  concessions,  management 
determined that it was unable to conduct exploration activities in Panama absent the formal issuance of these
Page 94 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
concessions  by  the  Panamanian  government.  Accordingly,  we  did not meet  the  aforementioned performance 
obligations and can offer no assurance that we will do so.
In 2007, the Panama companies declared us to be in default; we protested and declared the Panama companies 
to be in default.  We have since initiated arbitration with the International Center of Dispute Resolution, the 
international division of the American Arbitration Association, seeking damages of $995,000.  There can be no 
assurance of a positive outcome for this arbitration and, in the event the outcome is positive, there can be no 
assurance as to the collectability of assets pursuant to a judgment.
We do not intend to pursue any further exploration activities in Panama.
NOTE 5 -   ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION LIABILITY
We  have  been  approached  by  the  State  of  Nevada,  Division  of  Minerals  (“Nevada  Division  of  Minerals”),  with 
regard  to  the  need  for  safeguarding  and  public  notification  of  several  dozen  mine  openings  in  the  area  of  our 
properties  in  Nevada  and  are  working  with  the  Nevada  Division  of  Minerals  to  set  forth  a  plan  of  remediation.  
Management’s current cost estimates for this remediation are in the range of $25,000 - $35,000.
In addition, we have been contacted by the United States Forest Service (“USFS”) with regard to the potential need 
for environmental remediation related to exploration activities that took place on federal lands within our mining 
claims.  Management’s preliminary estimates indicate that costs are not expected to exceed $15,000 with respect to 
this remediation.
Pursuant  to  the  above,  we  have  recorded  an  environmental  remediation  liability  of  $50,000,  which  management 
believes is the most likely cost outcome for these activities.  This environmental remediation liability is an estimate 
and it is reasonably possible that this estimate could change in the near term or that costs to remediate these claims 
could exceed management’s estimates.
NOTE 6 – DEBT
2008
2009
$
5,222,095 
2,121,002 
1,170,500 
259,892 
823,636 
336,720 
41,436 
9,975,281
A summary of notes payable outstanding at May 31, is as follows: 
 
 
Current Portion 
  Note payable (“mortgage”) 
  Accrued interest (“mortgage”) 
  Note payable (“Calim”) 
  Note payable (“Congo Chief”) 
  Note payable – shareholders (“Duffy”)  
  Note payable – shareholders (“Russell”) 
Other 
Total Current Portion 
 
 
Mortgage Loan  
 
On August 1, 2003, we issued a note payable to Broadway Mortgage Corporation (“Broadway”) for $4,500,000, 
which bore interest at 12.9% annually and was due in full on July 31, 2005.  The note payable was secured by a first 
trust  deed  on  the  Caribou  Town-site  and  Mine,  owned  jointly  between  us  and  Aardvark  Agencies,  Inc.    Cash 
proceeds  from  the  note  were  $3,339,000  and  non-cash  proceeds  representing  prepaid  interest  on  the  note  were 
$1,161,000.  In the event of default, a late fee penalty of 10% of the face value of the note was to be added to the 
principal amount of the note, and the note carried a default interest rate of 15%.  In consideration for financing of the 
note, we  issued  8,181,818  shares of  common  stock  to Broadway valued  at $4,500,000  and  incurred  $286,104  in 
transaction closing costs.
5,222,095 
1,506,828 
1,170,500 
261,294 
780,240 
- 
- 
8,940,957
$ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
$
Page 95 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
On July 31, 2005, we defaulted on our obligation to pay the note.  Under the terms of the amended note agreement, 
the  principal  amount  increased  $450,000  to  $4,950,000  and  we  began  to  accrue  interest  at  the  15%  per  annum 
default interest rate.
On  December  15,  2005,  MFPI  Partners,  LLC  (“MFPI”)  purchased  the  face  value  of  the  note  of  $4,950,000  and 
accrued interest and late fees of $272,095, as well as all assigned interests in the note from Broadway.  In addition, 
the  note’s  maturity  was  extended  to  December  15,  2006  and  the  default  interest  rate  was  reduced  from  15%  to 
12.9% per annum.
On December 15, 2006, we and MFPI agreed to extend the maturity of the note to March 15, 2007.  As of March 16, 
2007, we defaulted on the note agreement and remained in default until February 2010.   
 
Subsequent to May 31, 2009,  in February 2010, all amounts outstanding including principal, accrued interest and 
accrued late fees totaling $7,755,622 payable to MFPI were paid in full as a component of the February 2010 debt 
restructure. (Note 13)  
 
Calim Payable 
 
In July 2006, the Company entered into an agreement with MFPI Capital Partners (“Calim”), which, among other 
provisions  related  to  MFPI  mortgage  loan,  provides  for  non-interest  bearing  cash  advances.    During  2007,  the 
Company  received  cash  totaling  $1,020,500  under  this  agreement.    During  2008,  the  Company  received  cash 
totaling $150,000 under this agreement. 
 
Congo Chief Payable 
 
On December 16, 2005, we issued a note payable to MFPI Partners, LLC for $258,956 and the proceeds used for the 
purchase of the Congo Chief Lode Mining Claim.  The Congo Chief note bore interest at 12.0% per annum and the 
principal amount of the note plus all accrued and unpaid interest was originally due and payable on February 21, 
2006. On February 21, 2006, we defaulted on the payment commitment on the note and began to accrue interest at a 
default rate of 18% on the total of the principal amount and accrued and unpaid interest of $264,567. 
 
On February 1, 2010, we repaid all past due amounts on the note of total principal and interest in the amount of 
$386,653 as a component of a debt restructuring. (Note 13) 
 
The Duffy Notes 
 
On August 1, 2005, we issued a note payable to a group of shareholders for $807,650, in exchange for $681,000 
originally infused into us as Share Capital, and interest accrued from the date of each infusion totaling $126,650.  
The note payable was secured by a trust deed on the Caribou Townsite and Mine.  The Duffy Note bore interest at 
15.9%  and  was  payable  in  two  installments:  the  first  due  on  October  31,  2005  for  $166,000  and  the  remaining 
principal and interest due October 31, 2006.  In addition, in consideration of financing of the note, the Duffy Group 
received warrants on August 11, 2005 for the purchase of 1,000,000 shares of Common stock.  The warrants were 
valued at $105,890 and recorded as a discount to the note payable to be amortized over the initial term of the note 
(Note 9).
Initially, in the event that any scheduled payments were not made, a penalty representing 5% of the payment amount 
was to be added to the principal amount of the note.  In the event that the note holders provided written notification 
of default and the default was not cured within 10 days, the default interest rate would increase to 24% per annum 
on the entire principal amount and accrued interest.
On  October  31,  2005,  we  defaulted  on  our  obligation  to  pay  $166,000.    Under  the  terms  of  the  note,  a  late  fee 
penalty of 5%, or $8,300, was added to the principal amount of the note.
Page 96 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
On December 15, 2005, we made a payment on the note of $169,070.   
 
On October 31, 2006, we defaulted on the payment due at the note’s maturity and, under the terms of the note, a late 
fee penalty of 5%, or $39,129, was added to the principal amount of the note.  In addition, the default rate under the 
terms of the note was increased to 24% per annum. 
 
The note was restructured on March 26, 2007.  The principal balance was set at $910,677, consisting of the original 
balance of the note, plus late fees and interest.  The payment terms specified an initial payment of $200,000 and 
payments of $75,000 per month until the note was repaid in full.  The interest rate was reset from the default rate of 
24% to 15.9%.  We issued 500,000 shares of stock to the Duffy Group and extended the exercise date on warrants 
owned by the Duffy Group to purchase 875,000 shares of common stock from April 2008 to March 2012. 
 
We defaulted on the $75,000 payment due April 15, 2007.  The note was restructured again on December 31, 2007.  
The principal balance of the note was set at $900,537, consisting of the principal balance established at March 26, 
2007, plus additional late fees and interest.  The maturity date was extended to April 1, 2008.  Warrants to purchase 
1,000,000 shares of stock at $0.40 per share, expiring April 14, 2011 and 875,000 shares of stock at $0.25, expiring 
March 15, 2012, owned by the Duffy Group, were modified, with the exercise price set at $0.25 and the expiration 
date extended to January 1, 2020.  The modification of the warrants was valued at $93,089, and was recorded as 
interest expense in December 2007 (Note 9). 
 
The  note  was  restructured  again  on  March  31,  2008.    The  principal  balance  of  the  note  was  set  at  $948,397 
consisting of the principal balance established at December 31, 2007 and interest.  The payment terms specified an 
initial payment of $100,000 and five monthly payments of $50,000 each beginning May 1, 2008.  The remaining 
principal and interest are due October 1, 2008.  We issued to the Duffy Group 1,185,496 shares of Common stock at 
$0.13 per share and warrants to purchase 1,185,496 shares of Common stock at $0.12 per share, expiring April 1, 
2013.  The warrants were valued at $153,754, were deemed to be a modification to the terms of the original note 
payable, and as such were recorded as interest expense in April 2008 (Note 9). 
 
In May 2008, as a result of the failure to pay scheduled interest payment in accordance with the March 31, 2008 loan 
modification, the note holders were issued 1,021,000 shares of Common stock at $0.15 per share and warrants to 
purchase 1,021,000 shares of common stock at $0.12 per share expiring in August 2013.  The warrants were valued 
at $150,939, were deemed to be a modification to the terms of the original note payable, and as such were recorded 
as interest expense in August 2008 (Note 9). 
 
In May 2009, the note holders were issued 1,249,900 shares of Common stock at $0.14 per share and warrants to 
purchase  1,249,900  shares  of  common  stock  at  $0.12  per  share  expiring  in  May  2020  in  connection  with  the 
execution of a trust deed modification.  The warrants were valued at $62,489, were deemed to be a modification to 
the terms of the original note payable, and as such were recorded as interest expense in May 2009 (Note 9). 
 
In February 2010, in connection with the repayment of $435,347 in principal of the outstanding loan balance, the 
assignment of the right to title and interest to the loan property “Caribou,” as described above, to Brigus Gold Corp. 
(“Brigus”), and the assumption of $653,021 in outstanding principal and accrued interest by Brigus, the note holders 
received 10,306,790 shares of Common stock. (Note 13)  
 
Shareholder Note
On December 20, 2008,  the Company  issued  a one-year note payable  to  a  shareholder,  R. David  Russell,  in  the 
amount of $405,410 in consideration for cash of approximately $282,000. The cash was granted to the Company 
pursuant to an exploration and development agreement wherein the proceeds were to be used for development at the 
Gold Hill mine. We recorded a debt discount in the amount of $123,410, which has been recorded as debt discount 
and accreted to interest expense over the term of the note. In August 2009 the Company defaulted on its agreement 
with  Mr.  Russell  and  issued  5,067,650  shares  of  our  common  stock  valued  at  $861,501  as  consideration  for  the 
default.    We  have  recorded  an  additional  expense  of  $456,905  in  connection  with  our  default  on  this  agreement 
(Note 9).
Page 97 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
Future Maturities 
 
As of May 31, 2009, all of our notes and debt payable were due before May 31, 2010. 
 
 
NOTE 7 - DEBENTURES 
 
A summary of convertible debentures outstanding at May 31 is as follows:
Debentures (a) 
Debentures (b) 
Total debentures payable 
Less:  Current portion 
Long-term portion
2009
4,644,900 
105,500 
4,750,400 
(105,500) 
4,644,900
$ 
   
  $ 
   
  $
2008
5,110,759 
225,000 
5,335,759 
(175,000) 
5,160,759
$ 
   
  $ 
   
  $
(a) These debentures are unsecured, non-interest bearing, and initially matured in May 2011.  These debentures are 
owned by Marlowe Harvey who was the President and a director of ours until he resigned as President in 2000 and 
as a director in November 2003; Argus Resources, Inc., the president of which is Mr. Harvey; Judy Harvey who is 
Mr. Harvey’s spouse; and Lynne Martin. Ms. Martin is the spouse of Melvin Martin, who was a director of ours 
until he resigned on July 28, 2005.  The debentures are convertible into common stock at $1.23 in Canadian Dollars 
at the holders’ discretion and contain no restrictive covenants.  The debentures are denominated in Canadian dollars, 
as the debentures presented herein are in US dollars fluctuations in the debenture balances between periods relate to 
changes currency translation adjustments. 
 
In December, 2010, $4,306,347 of the debentures were converted into 9,550,368 shares of common stock and in 
exchange for $259,149 in cash (Note 13). The remaining debenture, totaling $743,765, matured on May 31 2011. 
We are currently in default related to the repayment of the principal. We are in discussion with the note holders with 
respect to reaching a settlement agreement. We anticipate that amounts owing related to this note will be settled in 
shares of our common stock.
(b)  This  debenture  is  owed  to  Thomas  S.  Hendricks,  an  officer,  director  and  shareholder  of  the  Company.    The 
debenture is non interest-bearing, convertible into common stock at $0.85 per share in $50,000 annual increments, 
contains no restrictive covenants and matured on July 8, 2008.  We repaid $25,000 of this debenture in 2007 and 
$119,500 in 2009. As of May 31, 2009 the unpaid balance on this debenture was $105,500. We repaid $60,000 of 
this balance in 2010 and the remaining $45,500 in 2011.     
 
NOTE 8 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES 
 
We lease certain mineral rights, have both patented and unpatented mine claims that require annual maintenance 
payments and have entered into certain royalty agreements with third parties wherein we have monthly obligations.  
Failure  to  make  payments  on  our  patented or  unpatented claims  or  royalty  interests  will  result  in  the  loss of  the 
interests  and  underlying  claims.  The  table  below  sets  forth  anticipated  expenditures  under  the  patented  and 
unpatented claims as well as our royalty interests.
May 31, 2010 
May 31, 2011 
May 31, 2012 
May 31, 2013 
May 31, 2014 
Total
$ 
   
   
   
   
  $
75,345 
75,793 
76,248 
76,711 
88,966 
393,063
Page 98 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
In July 2006, the Company entered into an employment agreement with David K. Young, as its then President and 
Chief  Executive  Officer.    The  agreement  had  no  expiration  and  provided  for  compensation  to  Mr.  Young  of 
$175,000 annually, and monthly automobile allowance.  In the event that Mr. Young is terminated without cause, 
the agreement provides for severance equal to 36 months of salary, plus 50% of entitled bonuses.  In addition, upon 
termination described above, health coverage for Mr. Young will continue for a period of 36 months. The agreement 
also includes a provision pursuant to an Effective Change in Control, whereby Mr. Young will have been deemed 
terminated without cause, and the provisions discussed above will become effective.
In July 2006, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Thomas Hendricks, as its Vice President for 
Exploration and Corporate Development.  The agreement had no expiration and provided for compensation to Mr. 
Hendricks of $150,000 annually, and monthly automobile allowance.  In the event that Mr. Hendricks is terminated 
without cause, the agreement provides for severance equal to 36 months of salary, plus 50% of entitled bonuses.  In 
addition,  upon  termination  described  above,  health  coverage  for  Mr.  Hendricks  will  continue  for  a  period  of  36 
months.    The  agreement  also  includes  a  provision  pursuant  to  an  Effective  Change  in  Control,  whereby  Mr. 
Hendricks  will  have  been  deemed  terminated  without  cause,  and  the  provisions  discussed  above  will  become 
effective.
From  time  to  time  we  are  involved  in  litigation  in  the  ordinary  course of trade  or  business.  Included  in  accrued 
liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets is $75,000 related to a litigation claim payable. We believe that that 
this amount is adequate. We are not aware of any additional potential claims and or contingencies other than as 
discussed herein.
NOTE 9 - SHAREHOLDERS’ DEFICIT
Common stock   -   We have an authorized unlimited number of common shares of our no par value common stock.  
Common shares outstanding as of May 31 were as follows:
2009
50,992,802
2008
46,866,802
Fiscal 2009 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2009 we issued 4,126,000 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
•
In June, July and October 2008, we raised $248,400 in cash from accredited investors for the sale of units, 
totaling  3,105,000  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  and  warrants  to  purchase  an  equal  number  of 
common shares.   The common stock price was $0.08 per share and the warrants had an exercise price of 
$0.12 per share with an expiration dates of June, July and October 2013. 
In August 2008, we issued units to the Duffy Group in connection with extension of notes payable.  These 
units consisted of 1,021,000 shares of restricted common stock and warrants to purchase an equal number 
of common shares.  The warrants were valued at $150,939 were recorded as a charge to interest expense.  
The  common  stock  price  was  $0.15  per  share  and  the  warrants  had  an  exercise  price  of  $0.12  with  an 
expiration date of August 2013 (Note 9).
Fiscal 2008 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2008 we issued 17,921,746 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
•
In November and December 2007 and in January, February and March 2008, we raised $1,258,900 in cash 
from accredited investors for the sale of units comprising 15,736,250 shares of restricted common stock 
and warrants to purchase an equal number of common shares.   The common stock price was $0.08 per 
share  and  the  warrants  had  an  exercise  price  of  $0.12  per  share  with  expiration  dates  ranging  from 
November 2012 to March 2013. 
In December 2007, we entered into a transaction wherein we intended to purchase assets from one of our 
shareholders in exchange for common stock. The transfer of title to the assets was not completed; however,
Page 99 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
we issued 750,000 shares restricted common stock at to the purchaser in exchange for a note receivable in 
the  amount  of  $60,000.  In  connection  with  this  transaction,  we  have  recorded  a  loss  of  $30,000,  which 
represents the value as set for in the initial agreement and the value of the 750,000 shares of common stock 
as issued. 
In  April  2008,  we  issued  units  to  the  Duffy  Group  in  connection  with  extension  of  notes.  The  units 
consisted  of  1,185,496  shares  of restricted common  stock  and warrants  to  purchase  an  equal number  of 
common shares.  The common stock price was $0.13 per share and the warrants had an exercise price of 
$0.12 with an expiration date of April 2013.  The warrants were valued at $153,754 and have been charged 
to interest expense. 
In  April  2008,  we  issued  250,000  shares  of  restricted  common  stock  as  partial  consideration  for  the 
purchase  of  a  royalty  interest.    The  common  stock  price  was  $0.13  per  share,  we  have  valued  this 
transaction at $32,500 and have been recorded as a component of our properties.
•
•
Fiscal 2007 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2007 we issued 4,611,705 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
In June 2006, we raised $50,000 in cash from accredited investors for the sale of units, totaling 250,000 
shares  of  restricted  common  stock  and  warrants  to purchase  an  equal number  of  common  shares.     The 
common stock price was $0.20 per share and the warrants had an exercise price of $0.25 per share with an 
expiration date of June 2010. 
In  July  2006,  we  issued  3,782,955  shares  of  restricted  common  stock  and  issued  4,782,955  warrants  to 
MFPI.  The common stock price was $0.15 per share and the warrants had an exercise price of $0.25 per 
share with an expiration dates ranging from December 2007 to December 2010. The shares of common 
stock  were  issued  in  connection  with  the  execution  of  a  letter  agreement  between  Calim/MFPI  and  us 
wherein MFPI acquired the Broadway Mortgage (Note 8).  
In November 2006, we issued 23,750 shares of restricted common stock to SQ Funding in connection with 
investor relations services received in November and December 2006.  The common stock price was $0.27 
per share.  
In  May  2007, we  issued 55,000 shares of restricted  common  stock  in connection with  the  settlement of 
accrued  interest  and  other  charges  owed  to  an  officer  of  ours.    The  common  stock  price  was  $0.18  per 
share.   
In March 2007, we issued 500,000 shares of restricted common stock to the Duffy Group in connection 
with the modification of a trust deed.  The common stock price was $0.18 per share. We have recorded a 
charge to interest expense in connection with the issuance of these shares.
Fiscal 2006 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2006 we issued 3,218,649 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
•
In July 2005 and February and April 2006, we raised $625,000 in cash during from accredited investors 
through the sale of units. These units totaled 3,125,000 shares of restricted common stock and warrants to 
purchase  an  equal  number  of  common  shares.    The  common  stock  price  was  $0.20  per  share  and  the 
warrants had an exercise price of $0.25 per share with expiration dates ranging from April 2008 to June 
2010.  Included in the private placements were 875,000 units sold to the Duffy Group for cash proceeds of 
$175,000.  Each unit sold to the Duffy group contained one share of common stock and one warrant to 
purchase an equal number of common shares at $0.25 with an original expiration date of April 2008. These 
warrants were subsequently extended with an expiration date of January 2020.  
In April 2006, we issued 93,649 shares of restricted common stock to the Duffy Group as reimbursement 
for legal fees totaling $44,951 associated with the initial Duffy notes payable described above.
Page 100 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
Fiscal 2005 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2005 we issued 1,200,000 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
In January and March 2005, we raised $245,000 in cash from accredited investors through the sale of units.  
The units totaled 1,200,000 shares of restricted common stock and warrants to purchase an equal number of 
common shares.   The common stock prices ranged from $0.20 to $0.25 per share, and the warrants had 
exercise prices of $0.25 to $0.30 per share and expired on various dates in February and March 2010.
Warrants - The following stock purchase warrants were outstanding at May 31:
Outstanding as of May 31, 2004 
Issued 
Expirations 
Exercised 
Outstanding as of May 31, 2005 
Issued 
Expirations 
Exercised 
Outstanding as of May 31, 2006 
Issued 
Expirations 
Exercised 
Outstanding as of May 31, 20074 
Issued 
Expirations 
Exercised 
Outstanding as of May 31, 2008 
Issued 
Expirations 
Exercised 
Outstanding as of May 31, 2009
Number of Warrants
Outstanding 
255,000 
1,200,000 
(50,000) 
                 - 
  1,405,000 
4,125,000 
(205,000) 
                 - 
  5,325,000 
5,032,955 
(125,000) 
                 - 
10,232,955 
16,921,746 
(1,000,000) 
                 - 
26,154,701 
5,376,450 
(1,782,955) 
                 - 
29,748,196
Weighted Average
Exercise Price
$0.50 
$0.25 
$0.50
$0.33 
$0.25 
$0.50
$0.27 
$0.25 
$0.25
$0.26 
$0.12 
$0.25
$0.17 
$0.12 
$0.25
$0.16
Number of Warrants
Exercisable
1,405,000 
 
 
 
5,325,000 
 
 
 
10,232,955 
 
 
 
26,154,701 
 
 
 
29,748,196
•  Fiscal  2009  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2009,  we  issued  5,376,450  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.12 per share. Of the warrant issuances during the period, 3,105,000 were 
issued  in  connection  with  unit  sales,  each  unit  consisting  of  one  common  share  and  one  warrant.  The 
warrants  issued  in  connection  with  the  unit  sales  expire  in  2013.  2,271,450  warrants  were  issued  in 
connection with the modification of terms of notes payable due to a related party, the warrants expire in 
2013 and 2021. We have recorded a charge of $213,490 in interest expenses related to the issuance of these 
warrants.
•  Fiscal  2008  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2008,  we  issued  16,921,746  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.12 per share. Of the issuances during the period, 15,736,250 warrants 
were issued in connection with unit sales, each unit consisting of one common share and one warrant. The 
warrants issued in connection with unit sales expire in 2012 and 2013. 1,185,496 warrants were issued in 
connection with the modification of notes payable due a related party and expire in 2013. We recorded a 
charge of $153,754 in interest expense relating to the issuance of these warrants.  In addition, we recorded 
$93,089  as  a  discount  on  notes  payable  related  to  the  re-pricing  and  extension  of  the  original  Duffy 
warrants issued in August 2005.
Page 101 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
•  Fiscal  2007  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2007,  we  issued  5,032,955  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.25 per share.  250,000 warrants were issued in connection with unit 
sales expiring in 2010.  4,782,955 warrants to purchase our common stock at $0.25 expiring in 2007, 2008 
and were issued in connection with our private equity offering as well as the modification of our Broadway 
mortgage.
•  Fiscal  2006  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2006,  we  issued  4,125,000  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.25.  2,250,000 of the warrants were sold in connection with unit sales 
and expired in 2010, and 875,000 warrants were issued in connection with unit sales to a related party and 
expire in 2020.   In August 2005, we issued 1,000,000 warrants to the Duffy Group in connection with the 
restructuring of the initial Duffy notes payable (Note 8).  The warrants had an exercise price of $.25 per 
share with expiration dates ranging from 2010 to 2020.  We have recorded $105,890 to discount on notes 
payable related to the warrants issued in connection with the notes payable to be amortized over the initial 
term of the note.
•  Fiscal  2005  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2005,  we  issued  1,200,000  warrants  to 
purchase  our  common  shares  between  $0.25  and  $0.30,  expiring  in  2010.  The  warrants  were  issued  in 
connection with unit sales.
The  value  of  the  warrants  as  discussed  above  was  determined  using  the  Black-Scholes  model  for  pricing.    The 
following table represents the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes pricing model:
Expected Term 
Risk free Interest Rate  
Expected Dividend Yield  
Volatility
2009
2008
2007
3 – 12 years 
1.39% - 2.79%
None
230.52% - 
274.43%
5 - 12 years 
1.94% - 3.23%
None
269.77% - 
284.73%
- 
- 
- 
-
2006 
5 years 
4.09% 
None
162.66%
2005
- 
- 
- 
-
NOTE 10 - STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
We have no formal stock option or stock-based compensation plan.  However, historically, we have granted stock 
options to our directors, officers and employees.  Options issued to employees and directors had historically been 
issued  with  exercise  prices  in  both  Canadian  and  U.S.  dollars.  Effective  June  1,  2004,  our  functional  currency 
became the U.S. dollar (Note 1) and therefore all amounts below have been presented in U.S. dollars.
Page 102 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
A summary of the activity as of and for the years ended May 31, are as follows:
Options Outstanding May 31, 2004
Options Exercisable May 31, 2004
Grants  
Forfeits  
Expirations  
Options Outstanding May 31, 2005
Options Exercisable May 31, 2005
Grants  
Forfeits  
Expirations  
Options Outstanding May 31, 2006 
Options Exercisable May 31, 2006  
Grants  
Forfeits  
Expirations  
Options Outstanding May 31, 2007 
Options Exercisable May 31, 2007  
Grants  
Forfeits  
Expirations  
Options Outstanding May 31, 2008 
Options Exercisable May 31, 2008  
Grants  
Forfeits  
Expirations  
Options Outstanding May 31, 2009 
Options Exercisable May 31, 2009
Number of
Shares
1,232,500
1,232,500
$
$
-  $ 
 
- 
 
(82,500) 
1,150,000 
$
1,150,000
$
- 
-
- 
- 
-
(50,000)  $ 
1,100,000  $ 
1,100,000  $ 
 
 
 
1,100,000  $ 
1,100,000  $ 
 
 
 
1,100,000  $ 
1,100,000  $ 
 
 
 
1,100,000  $ 
(a) 
1,100,000
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
Weighted 
Average
Exercise Price 
3.34
3.34
0.80 
3.52
3.52
0.33 
3.67 
3.67 
 
 
 
3.67 
3.67 
 
 
 
3.67 
3.67 
 
 
 
3.67 
3.67
(a)  These options expired during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010
We considered legacy pronouncement SFAS 123(R), which became effective as of the beginning of the first interim 
or  annual  reporting  period  that  began  subsequent  to  June  15,  2005  when  assessing  the  impact  of  stock  options 
granted  prior  to  May  31,  2004.  As  all  options  were  vested  as  of  May  31,  2004,  and  there  were  no  grants, 
modifications, repurchases, or other activity during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2009, 2008, 2007, 2006, or 2005, 
we have not adopted any of the three transition approaches as prescribed by SFAS 123(R).
We  deemed  that  the  “Modified  Perspective,”  “Modified  Retrospective,”  and  “Limited  Retrospective”  approaches 
were  not  applicable.  Therefore,  we  did  not  recognize  stock-based  compensation  expense  during  the  reporting 
periods presented above, nor have we recorded any deferred financing cost at the end of the respective reporting 
periods.
Page 103 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
NOTE 11 -   INCOME TAXES
We  account  for  income  taxes  using  the  asset  and  liability  approach  in  accounting  for  income  taxes.  Under  this 
approach,  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  based  on  anticipated  future  tax  consequences,  using 
currently  enacted  tax  laws,  attributable  to  temporary  differences  between  the  carrying  amounts  of  assets  and 
liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts calculated for income tax purposes. 
 
Income tax expense (benefit) consists of the following for the fiscal years ended May 31:
Current taxes 
Deferred taxes 
Less:  valuation allowance 
Net income tax provision (benefit)
2009
- 
(975,635) 
975,635 
-
2008
$ 
- 
    (1,018,156) 
    1,018,156 
  $ 
-
$ 
   
   
  $
Our  effective  tax  rate  differs  from  the  statutory  rate  for  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31  due  to  the  following 
(expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income):
Federal taxes at statutory rate 
State taxes, net of federal benefit 
Permanent items 
Alternative minimum tax 
Valuation allowance 
Expiring NOLs, change in tax rate and other adjustments 
Effective income tax rate for continuing operations
2009 
35.00% 
3.01% 
-0.02% 
0.00% 
-36.50% 
-1.49% 
0.00%
2008 
35.00% 
3.01% 
-0.02% 
0.00% 
-36.50% 
-1.49% 
0.00%
As of May 31 the components of these temporary differences and the deferred tax asset were as follows:
Stock grants
Deferred tax assets: 
  Net operating loss carryforwards 
 
  Debentures issued for compensation 
  Exploration costs 
  Accrued compensation 
  Other 
  Gross deferred tax assets 
 
Deferred tax liabilities: 
 
  Other 
  Gross deferred tax liabilities 
Net deferred tax assets before valuation allowance 
Valuation allowance 
Deferred tax assets (liabilities), net
Financing fees
2009
$  11,183,678 
260,640 
  
  
40,101 
  
- 
256,868 
  
  
135,255 
   11,876,542 
 
 
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
   11,876,542 
   (11,876,542) 
 $ 
-
2008
$  10,374,192 
126,310 
  
  
85,523 
- 
  
146,764 
  
  
80,517 
   10,813,306 
 
 
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
   10,813,306 
   (10,813,306) 
 $ 
-
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that 
some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. Based upon the level of historical losses and the level
Page 104 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
of uncertainty with respect to future taxable income over the periods in which the deferred tax assets are deductible, 
a full valuation allowance has been provided. 
 
As  of  May  31,  2009,  and  2008  we  had  $31,953,000,  and  $29,707,000,  respectively,  in  net  operating  loss  carry-
forwards  available  to  reduce  future  taxable  income.  The  benefits  of  the  losses  have  not  been  recognized  in  the 
financial statements. The losses will expire through 2029.
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029
$ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
Canada 
114,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
114,000
US 
 
- 
$ 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
4,239,523 
$ 
4,121,101 
$ 
660,237 
$ 
1,065,740 
$ 
964,039 
$ 
989,426 
$ 
7,927,626 
$ 
2,233,167 
$ 
2,410,718 
$ 
2,213,983 
$ 
2,881,440 
$ 
$ 
2,246,000 
$  31,953,000
Total 
 
114,000 
$ 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
4,239,523 
$ 
4,121,101 
$ 
660,237 
$ 
1,065,740 
$ 
964,039 
$ 
989,426 
$ 
7,927,626 
$ 
2,233,167 
$ 
2,410,718 
$ 
2,213,983 
$ 
2,881,440 
$ 
$ 
2,246,000 
$  32,067,000
We have not filed our federal income tax returns for 2005 through 2009.  Upon filing of the returns adjustments may 
be required to the components of the deferred tax assets and liabilities.  However, no tax expense will be recorded as 
a result of a full valuation allowance.
On June 1, 2007, we adopted the provisions of ASC Topic 740, regarding uncertainty in income taxes. Management 
has  not  fully  evaluated  the  existence  of  uncertain  tax  positions  relating  to  unfiled  federal  income  tax  returns,  as 
noted above.
NOTE 12 – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Wages and other Payables  
 
Due to the financial difficulties we faced during the 2005 – 2009 fiscal years, we were unable to pay the wages of 
certain of our executive officers.  As such, we had significant amounts payable to executive officers as of May 31, as 
follows:
David K. Young (1) 
Thomas Hendricks (2) 
Matthew Witt (3)
2009 
279,333 
216,820 
127,750 
623,903
$ 
   
   
  $
2008 
160,416 
91,820 
127,750 
379,986
$ 
   
   
  $
(1) David K. Young has served on our Board since July 30, 2005 and as our President and Chief Executive Officer 
since February 10, 2006.  Subsequent to May 31, 2009, in January 2011, Mr. Young relinquished his CEO title and
Page 105 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
was appointed as our Chief Operating Officer.  He remains our President.  On October 27, 2010, we and Mr. Young 
entered into a Settlement Agreement wherein Mr. Young agreed to relinquish and waive $227,042 in wages owed to 
him, which constituted 50% of the total wages he was owed as of August 31, 2010.  Mr. Young agreed to accept as 
full payment for the remaining 50% 2,270,420 restricted shares of our common stock (Note 13). 
 
(2)  Subsequent  to  May  31,  2009,  we  have  paid  Mr.  Hendricks  $319,220  against  both  current  and  aged  wages 
payable balances as well as convertible debenture balances due. (Note 13). 
 
(3)  Matthew Witt served as our Chief Financial Officer from August 2003 until February 7, 2005.  On March 31, 
2005,  we,  then-President  and  CEO  Thomas  Hendricks  and  Mr.  Witt  entered  into  a  Settlement  and  Release 
Agreement wherein, among other things, we agreed to pay Mr. Witt (a) $127,750 for all wages, including vacation, 
paid personal leave, bonus or otherwise, which were due, owing and accrued through February 7, 2005 and (b) all 
amounts owed to Mr. Witt for any of our business expenses incurred by Witt as an employee of ours (at the time, an 
additional $49,718), in exchange for release of certain claims and liabilities of ours.  This Settlement and Release 
agreement was later superseded by a Settlement Agreement entered into subsequent to May 31, 2009 on October 28, 
2010 by and between us and Mr. Witt.  Under this 2010 settlement, Mr. Witt agreed to accept as full payment for all 
amounts  owed  to  him  under  the  earlier  Settlement  and  Release  Agreement  2,000,000  restricted  shares  of  our 
common stock and $25,000 in cash. These shares were issued and cash released in November 2010 (Note 13). 
 
Debentures 
 
The Canadian-dollar-denominated convertible debentures (Note 7) are owned by companies or persons related to a 
shareholder and former director.  These convertible debentures were subject to a settlement in December 2010 (Note 
13). 
 
The U.S. Debentures are owned by an officer/shareholder and are recognized as Convertible debentures – related 
party on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
 
Debt 
 
During the five fiscal years ended through May 31, 2009, we renegotiated on numerous occasions the terms of a 
note payable to Duffy (Note 6).  During several of these renegotiations, Duffy was issued shares and/or warrants as 
part of the settlement.   
 
On February 1, 2011, certain of our debt was assumed by Brigus.  At the time, our current Executive Chairman and 
of the Board and CEO, R. David Russell, was President and CEO of Apollo Gold Group, a predecessor of Brigus.
NOTE 13   -   SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
We  have  evaluated  all  our  activity  and  concluded  that  no  subsequent  events  have  occurred  that  would  require 
recognition  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements  or  disclosure  in  the  notes  to  the  consolidated  financial 
statements, except as disclosed below. 
 
Debt Restructure  
 
On  February  1,  2010,  we,  Elkhorn  Goldfields,  LLC  (“Elkhorn”),  and  Brigus  entered  into  a  purchase  agreement 
which  provided  for  the  assignment  to  Brigus  of  principal,  accrued  interest  and  penalties  owed  to  MFPI,  in 
connection with the mortgage note of $7,755,622, principal and accrued interest in the amount of $386,653 owed in 
connection with the Congo Chief note, and $1,458,582 owed to MFPI Capital Partners. On February 19, 2010, the 
Duffy Group entered into an agreement with Brigus and us whereby the Duffy group received 10,306,790 shares of 
Calais common stock in exchange for the forgiveness of $453,347 of our debt to Duffy, the assignment to Brigus of 
the  remaining  balance  of  $653,021  owed  by  us,  and  the  assignment  by  the  Duffy  Group  of  its  right  to  title  and 
interest to the “Caribou” loan property to Brigus. The terms of the agreement allowed for additional consideration to 
be  conveyed  to  the  Duffy  group  from  a  third  party,  Elkhorn,  in  consideration  for  the  consummation  of  the 
transaction.
Page 106 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
Immediately following the debt restructure, we owed $10,253,878 in principal accruing interest at 8% per annum to 
Brigus. The debt initially matured on February 1, 2011.  
 
On January 15, 2011, we received forbearance under the terms of this agreement effectively extending the maturity 
date of the debt through June 30, 2011.  On June 8, 2011, Brigus agreed to extend the June 30, 2011 date to October 
in exchange for the payment of $1,000,000 cash. The funds will be applied to accrued but unpaid interest on the 
debt.  
 
In connection with the acquisition of our outstanding debt obligations, Brigus has a lien on our Caribou property.  
 
Settlements 
 
Since May 31, 2009, we have executed against a plan to settle our trade payables with certain of our vendors as well 
as wages and other payables owed to current and former employees of ours, either by paying outstanding balances in 
full or by entering into agreements for mutually agreed-upon settlement amounts.  These efforts are ongoing.  Since 
May 31, 2009, we recognized net gains of $312,931 related to settlements and releases on our trade payables and 
wages payable in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.  In addition, we issued 4,370,420 shares of restricted 
stock related to these settlements.  
 
Debenture Settlements 
 
On December 15, 2010, we entered into two agreements which relate to the settlement of a total of four convertible 
debentures  in the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  $4,306,347  in  exchange  for  a  total  of  $258,680  in  cash  and  the 
issuance of a total of 9,550,368 restricted shares of our common stock.  The two settlements, each of which involved 
parties who are considered to be “related parties,” are described below. 
 
Lynne Martin Settlement 
We entered into a Settlement Agreement with Lynne Martin (the “Lynne Martin Settlement”) regarding a debenture 
payable  to  her  in  the  principal  amount  of  $1,097,367.    Ms.  Martin  is  the  spouse  of  Melvin  Martin,  who  was  a 
director of ours until he resigned on July 28, 2005.  We and Ms. Martin agreed that Ms. Martin would accept as full 
payment for the debenture the amount of $109,781 in cash which is to be paid by us in four quarterly payments of 
$27,445, with the first payment due on December 15, 2010 and the three remaining payments due on March 15, 
2011, June 15, 2011, and September 15, 2011.  We made the first payment on December 15, 2010 and we made the 
second payment of $27,445 on March 18, 2011. 
 
The Harvey Settlement 
We entered into a Settlement Agreement with Marlowe and Judy Harvey and Argus Resources, Inc. regarding the 
following three debentures: 
 
     1.   Judy Harvey               
     2.   Judy Harvey              
     3.   Argus Resources, Inc.     
 
Marlowe Harvey was the President and a director of ours until he resigned as President in 2000 and as a director in 
November 2003.  Mr. Harvey is the President of Argus Resources, Inc.  Judy Harvey is Mr. Harvey’s spouse. After 
the closing of this transaction, Mr. Harvey beneficially holds more than 5% percent of our outstanding shares.   
 
We and Judy Harvey agreed that Ms. Harvey would accept as full payment for her two debentures the total amount 
of  $149,368  in  cash  and  a  total  of  8,890,638  restricted  shares  of  our  common  stock.    The  cash  was  paid  on 
December 15, 2010 and the shares were issued on December 20, 2010 to an escrow agent to hold the shares until the 
Cease Trade Order in British Columbia has been revoked. 
 
We  and  Argus  Resources  agreed  that  Argus  Resources  would  accept  as  full  payment  for  its  debenture  659,730 
restricted shares of our common stock.  The shares were issued on December 20, 2010.
$   2,038,840 
$      949,417 
$      220,723
Page 107 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
Settlements  
 
Subsequent to May 31, 2009 we continued to settle accrued liabilities and amounts outstanding with trade creditors 
current and former directors and officers of the Company. On October 27, 2010, we and Mr. David Young entered 
into a Settlement Agreement wherein Mr. Young agreed to relinquish and waive $227,042 in wages owed to him, 
which constituted 50% of the total wages he was owed as of August 31, 2010.  Mr. Young agreed to accept as full 
payment for the remaining 50% 2,270,420 restricted shares of our common stock. 
 
In October and November 2010, we have paid Mr. Hendricks $319,220 against both current and aged wages payable 
balances as well as convertible debenture balances due.  
 
Matthew Witt served as our Chief Financial Officer from August 2003 until February 7, 2005.  On March 31, 2005, 
we,  then-President  and  CEO  Thomas  Hendricks  and  Mr.  Witt  entered  into  a  Settlement  and  Release  Agreement 
wherein,  among  other  things,  we  agreed  to  pay  Mr.  Witt  (a)  $127,750  for  all  wages,  including  vacation,  paid 
personal  leave,  bonus  or  otherwise,  which  were  due,  owing  and  accrued  through  February  7,  2005  and  (b)  all 
amounts owed to Mr. Witt for any of our business expenses incurred by Witt as an employee of ours (at the time, an 
additional $49,718), in exchange for release of certain claims and liabilities of ours.  This Settlement and Release 
agreement  was  later  superseded  by  a  Settlement  Agreement  entered  into  On  October  28,  2010  we  reached  a 
settlement agreement with Matt Witt.   Mr. Witt agreed to accept as full payment for all amounts owed to him under 
the earlier Settlement and Release Agreement 2,000,000 restricted shares of our common stock and $25,000 in cash. 
These shares were issued and cash released in November 2010 (Note 12). 
 
Debt Restructure  
 
On January 15, 2011, we announced an extension until June 30, 2011, of the forbearance period of our note payable 
in the amount of $10,253,878.  The original forbearance period for this note was scheduled to expire in February 
2011.    On  June  8,  2011,  Brigus  agreed  to  extend  the  June  30,  2011  date  to  October  31,  2011  upon  payment  of 
$1,000,000 by June 30, 2011. The funds will be applied to accrued but unpaid interest on the debt. 
 
Shareholders’ Deficit 
 
Common Stock Sales – Since May 31, 2009, we have issued a total of 99,232,184 shares of common stock.  Since 
May  31,  2009,  we  have  issued  46,846,370  shares  of  common  stock  for  total  cash  proceeds  of  $3,472,400  and 
52,385,814  shares  of  our  common  stock  in  connection  with  the  settlement  of  debt  and  accrued  liabilities,  for 
services, and as payment for trade accounts payable as further below. 
 
Subsequent to May 31, 2011 - Subsequent to May 31, 2011, we have issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock 
at $0.20 per share to an accredited investor for net cash proceeds of $200,000. 
  
Fiscal 2011 Transactions – During the fiscal year ending May 31, 2011, we have issued 72,946,844 shares of our 
common stock as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
In June 2010, we issued 9,500,000 shares of our common stock valued at $0.08 per share or $760,000 to 
our  Directors  as  compensation  for  their  services.  These  amounts  had  been  previously  accrued  in  our 
balance sheet as accrued salaries and wages. 
In August 2010, we sold 650,000 shares of our common stock at $0.08 per share to the wife of our current 
Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) for $52,000 as part of a private placement. 
In June 2010, we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per share for accounting services 
provided in May 2010 totaling $50,000. 
In June and August 2010 we issued a total of 1,500,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per share in 
connection with the payment of $76,539 in accounts payable. 
In  September  2010,  we  issued  4,500,000  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.06  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $270,000.
Page 108 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In October 2010 we issued 5,753,334 shares of our common stock at $0.06 per share to accredited investors 
for net cash proceeds of $345,200.  
In  October  2010,  we  issued  2,270,420  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.10  per  share  to  our  Company 
President in connection with settlement of accrued liabilities owed to him. We have recorded a gain in the 
amount  of  $227,042  in  connection  with  this  issuance.  In  addition  we  issued  2,000,000  shares  of  our 
common stock at $0.0762  to our former CFO in connection with the settlement of accrued liabilities owed 
to  him  in  the  amount  of  $152,468.  We  have  not  recorded  any  gain  or  loss  in  connection  with  this 
settlement. 
In  November  2010,  we  issued  1,066,666  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.075  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $80,000. In addition we issued 17,651,667 shares of our common stock at 
$0.06 per share for net cash proceeds of $1,059,100. 
In December 2010, we issued 9,550,368 shares of our common stock at $0.15 per share to accredited in 
connection with the settlement of four convertible debentures totaling $1,432,555. 
In  December  2010,  we  issued  536,666  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.06  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $32,200. In addition we issued 2,666,666 shares of our common stock at 
$0.08 per share to accredited investors for net cash proceeds of $200,000. 
In December 2010, we issued 2,102,500 shares of our common stock at $0.17 per share in connection with 
fundraising and consulting services valued at $357,425. 
In December 2010, we issued 100,000 shares of our common stock at $0.17 per share in connection with 
the settlement of previously accrued liabilities. 
In January 2011 we issued 2,033,333 shares of our common stock valued at $0.17 per share in connection 
with fundraising and consulting services valued at $345,667 
In January 2011, we issued 66,666 shares of our common stock at $0.06 per share to an accredited investor 
in for net cash proceeds of $4,000. 
In  February  2011,  we  issued  2,464,706  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  $0.17  per  share  to  accredited 
investors for net cash proceeds of $300,000. 
In March 2011, we issued 40,000 shares of our common stock at $0.06 per share to an accredited investor 
for net cash proceeds of $2,400. 
In April 2011, we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per share to an accredited investor 
for net cash proceeds of $50,000. 
In May 2011 we issued 7,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.10 per share to an accredited investor 
for net cash proceeds of $700,000.
Fiscal 2010 Transactions - During the year ended May 31, 2010 we issued 25,285,340 shares of our common stock 
as follows:
•
•
•
•
In August 2009 and February, April and May 2010, we raised $177,500 in cash from accredited investors 
for  the  sale  of  units  comprising  3,150,000  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  and  warrants  to  purchase 
1,450,000 of common shares.   The Common stock prices ranged from $0.05 to $0.0625 per share and the 
warrants  had  an  exercise  price  of  $0.20  per  share  with  expiration  dates  ranging  from  August  2012  to 
February 2013. 
In August 2009, we issued units to the Duffy Group in connection with extension of Duffy notes.  The units 
consisted of 1,249,900 shares of restricted Common stock and warrants to purchase an equal number of 
common shares.  The Common stock price was $0.14 per share and the warrants had an exercise price of 
$0.12 with an expiration date of August 2021.  
In August 2009, we issued 511,000 shares of restricted Common stock in connection with a settlement of a 
$42,436 note payable to Walsh Environmental Sciences. 
In  September  2009,  we  issued  5,067,650  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  in  connection  with  the 
settlement of a note payable due a shareholder related to our default on an exploration and development 
agreement.  The Common stock price was $0.17 per share. In connection with the issuance of these shares 
we have recorded a loss on default of the exploration agreement in the amount of $456,901; this amount 
has been included in other (income) loss on our consolidated income statement.
Page 109 of 110
CALAIS RESOURCES INC.
(A Mining Company in the Exploration Stage)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FISCAL YEARS ENDED MAY 31, 2009 AND 2008
•
•
•
In  September  2009,  we  issued  1,000,000  shares  of  restricted  Common  stock  in  connection  with  a 
consulting agreement.  The Common stock price was $0.17 per share. We have recognized the expense of 
$170,000 ratably over the term of the agreement.  
In  February  2010,  we  issued  10,306,790  shares  of  restricted  common  stock  to  the  Duffy  Group  in 
connection  with  the  restructuring  of  $1,088,367  of  notes  payable  to  Duffy  Group.    The  Duffy  Group 
entered into an agreement with Brigus and Calais whereby the Duffy group received these shares for the 
forgiveness of $435,347 in debt, with the remaining balance of $653,021 owed, assigned to Brigus.  The 
Company recorded a gain on the settlement of the Duffy note of $359,992. The common stock price was 
$0.09 per share.  
In May 2010, we issued 4,000,000 shares of restricted common stock to members of our board of directors 
as compensation, for the period of June 2006 through August 2009.  The common stock price was $0.09 
per share.
Warrants  –  Since  May  31,  2009,  we  have  issued  9,450,000  warrants  to  purchase  our  common  shares  as 
discussed below.
•  Fiscal  2010  Transactions  -  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2010,  we  issued  1,450,000  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.20 expiring in 2012 and 2013. The warrants were issued in connection 
with unit sales, each unit consisting of one common share and one warrant.
•  Fiscal  2011  Transactions  –  During  the  year  ended  May,  31,  2011  we  issued  7,000,000  warrants  to 
purchase our common shares at $0.12 expiring in May 2012. The warrants were issued in connection with 
unit sales, each unit consisting of one common share and one warrant.
•  Subsequent to May 31, 2011 – In June 2011 we issued 500,000 shares to purchase our common stock at 
$0.30 per share. These warrants were issued in connection with the sale of 1,000,000 common stock units 
in June 2011 and expire in June 2012.
Page 110 of 110