
.
BRAZILIAN DIAMONDS LIMITED
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
123  SAMPLES  STREET
SAMPLETOWN  SS  X9X 9X9
9th Floor, 100 University Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1
www.computershare.com
Security Class
COMMON
Holder Account Number
C1234567890
X X X
Form of Proxy - Annual and Special Meeting to be held on July 29, 2010
This Form of Proxy is solicited by and on behalf of Management.
Notes to proxy
1. Every holder has the right to appoint some other person or company of their choice, who need not be a holder, to attend and act on their behalf at the meeting or any
adjournment or postponement thereof. If you wish to appoint a person or company other than the persons whose names are printed herein, please insert the name of
your chosen proxyholder in the space provided (see reverse).
2. If the securities are registered in the name of more than one owner (for example, joint ownership, trustees, executors, etc.), then all those registered should sign this proxy. If you are
voting on behalf of a corporation or another individual you must sign this proxy with signing capacity stated, and you may be required to provide documentation evidencing your
power to sign this proxy.
3. This proxy should be signed in the exact manner as the name(s) appear(s) on the proxy.
4. If this proxy is not dated, it will be deemed to bear the date on which it is mailed by Management to the holder.
5. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted as directed by the holder, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, this proxy will be
voted as recommended by Management.
6. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted in favour or withheld from voting or voted against each of the matters described herein, as applicable, in accordance with the
instructions of the holder, on any ballot that may be called for and, if the holder has specified a choice with respect to any matter to be acted on, the securities will be voted
accordingly.
7. This proxy confers discretionary authority in respect of amendments or variations to matters identified in the Notice of Meeting or other matters that may properly come before the
meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
8. This proxy should be read in conjunction with the accompanying documentation provided by Management.
Proxies submitted must be received by 10:00 am, Pacific Time, on July 27, 2010.
Fold
Fold
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
.
.
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
• Call the number listed BELOW from a touch tone
telephone.
1-866-732-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
• Go to the following web site:
www.investorvote.com
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this proxy.
Voting by mail may be the only method for securities held in the name of a corporation or securities being voted on behalf of another individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet are the only methods by which a holder may appoint a person as proxyholder other than the Management nominees named on the reverse of this proxy.
Instead of mailing this proxy, you may choose one of the two voting methods outlined above to vote this proxy.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER 123456789012345
00R3JA
CPUQC01.E.INT/000001/i1234
.
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
Appointment of Proxyholder
I/We, being holder(s) of Brazilian Diamonds Limited hereby
appoint: Kenneth Judge, or failing this person, Kerry Beamish, or
failing this person, David Cowan,
C1234567890
XXX
123
OR
Print the name of the person you are
appointing if this person is someone
other than the Chairman of the
Meeting.
as my/our proxyholder with full power of substitution and to attend, act and to vote for and on behalf of the shareholder in accordance with the following direction (or if no directions have
been given, as the proxyholder sees fit) and all other matters that may properly come before the Annual and Special Meeting of shareholders of Brazilian Diamonds Limited to be held at
Suite 910, 475 Howe Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, on July 29, 2010 at 10:00 AM Pacific Time, and at any adjournment or postponement thereof.
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
For
Against
1. Number of Directors 
To set the number of Directors at five.
2. Election of Directors
01. Kenneth Judge
04. David Cowan
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
Fold
02. Stephen Fabian
05. Mike Byron
03. Francis Johnstone
3. Appointment of Auditors 
Appointment of Davidson & Company as Auditors of the Company for the ensuing year and authorizing the Directors to fix their remuneration.
4. 10% Rolling Stock Option Plan 
To re-approve the Company's 10% rolling stock option plan.
5. Disposition of All Shares of Mineraco do Sul Ltda. 
To approve, by special resolution, the disposition of all shares of Mineraco Do Sul Ltda., which include assets of the Canstra Project.
6. Share Consolidation  
To approve, by special resolution, consolidation of the Company's common shares on and up to 5 for 1 basis.
7. Name Change  
To approve, by special resolution, a change of name of the Company to such name as may be chosen by the board of directors and shall be acceptable to
the Registrar of Companies and other applicable regulatory authorities.
8. Transact Other Business
To consider any permitted amendment to or variation of any matter identified in this Notice and to transact such other business as may be properly come
before the Meeting or any adjournment thereof.
For
Withhold
For
Against
For
Against
Fold
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be completed for your
instructions to be executed.
I/We authorize you to act in accordance with my/our instructions set out above. I/We
hereby revoke any proxy previously given with respect to the Meeting. If no voting
instructions are indicated above, this Proxy will be voted as recommended by
Management.
Signature(s)
Date
DD / MM / YY
.
Interim Financial Statements – Mark this box if you would like
to receive Interim Financial Statements and accompanying
Management’s Discussion and Analysis by mail.
Annual Financial Statements – Mark this box if you would like
to receive the Annual Financial Statements and accompanying
Management’s Discussion and Analysis by mail.
If you are not mailing back your proxy, you may register online to receive the above financial report(s) by mail at www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
0 3 3 7 4 3
X X X X
A R 1
B S W Q
00R3KD