
EX-99.42 43 a12-11867_1ex99d42.htm EX-99.42
[Sandstorm Gold Logo]
Exhibit 99.42
News Release
Sandstorm Gold Announces New US$50 Million Revolving Credit Facility
Vancouver, British Columbia, January 12, 2012 — Sandstorm Gold Ltd. (“Sandstorm” or the “Company”) (TSX-V:
SSL) announced that it has entered into a revolving credit agreement with The Bank of Nova Scotia which allows the
Company to borrow up to US$50 million (the “Revolving Loan”). The Revolving Loan has a term of three years, which
is extentable by mutual consent of The Bank of Nova Scotia and Sandstorm. Sandstorm intends to use the Revolving
Loan for the acquisition of gold streams.
The amounts drawn on the Revolving Loan are subject to interest at LIBOR plus 3.00%-4.25% per annum, and the
undrawn portion of the Revolving Loan is subject to a standby fee of 0.75%-1.05% per annum, dependent on the
Company’s leverage ratio.
Sandstorm President and CEO Nolan Watson commented, “The credit facility coupled with our increasing operating
cash flow, allows Sandstorm to continue to grow the Company through acquisitions while minimizing equity dilution
going forward.”
ABOUT SANDSTORM GOLD
Sandstorm Gold Ltd. is a growth focused resource based company that seeks to complete gold purchase agreements
with companies that have advanced stage development projects or operating mines. A gold purchase agreement
involves Sandstorm making an upfront cash payment to its partners and in exchange, Sandstorm receives the right to
purchase a percentage of the gold produced for the life of the mine, at a fixed price per ounce. Sandstorm helps other
companies in the resource industry grow their business, while acquiring attractive assets in the process.
Sandstorm is focused on low cost operations with excellent exploration potential and strong management teams.
Sandstorm has completed gold purchase agreements with Luna Gold Corp., SilverCrest Mines Inc., Santa Fe Gold
Corp., Rambler Metals and Mining plc, Brigus Gold Corp., Metanor Resources Inc. and Donner Metals Ltd.
For more information visit: http://www.sandstormgold.com.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information
Except for the statements of historical fact contained herein, the information presented constitutes “forward-looking information” within the meaning
of applicable Canadian securities legislation. Forward-looking information is based on reasonable assumptions that have been made by Sandstorm
as at the date of such information and is subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results,
level of activity, performance or achievements of Sandstorm to be materially different from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking
information, including but not limited to: the impact of general business and economic conditions; the absence of control over mining operations
from which Sandstorm will purchase gold and risks related to those mining operations, including risks related to international operations, government
and environmental regulation, actual results of current exploration activities, conclusions of economic evaluations and changes in project parameters
as plans continue to be refined; problems inherent to the marketability of minerals; industry conditions, including fluctuations in the price of metals,
fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and fluctuations in interest rates; stock market volatility; competition; as well as those factors discussed in the
section entitled “Risks to Sandstorm” in Sandstorm’s annual report for the financial year ended December 31, 2010. Although Sandstorm has
attempted to identify important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking information, there
may be other factors that cause results not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended. There can be no assurance that such information will prove
to be accurate, as actual results and future events could differ materially from those anticipated in such information. Accordingly, readers should not
place undue reliance on forward-looking information. Sandstorm does not undertake to update any forward-looking information that is contained or
incorporated by reference herein, except in accordance with applicable securities laws. Sandstorm does not provide any representation as to its
comparability with other companies in its industry including, but not limited to, Silver Wheaton Corp., Royal Gold, Inc., and Franco-Nevada
Corporation.
CONTACT INFORMATION
Sandstorm Gold Ltd.
Erfan Kazemi, Chief Financial Officer
(604) 689-0234
Denver Harris, Investor Relations Contact
(604) 628-1178
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the
TSX Venture Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.