
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported):
January 22, 2014
Newmont Mining Corporation
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or Other Jurisdiction of Incorporation)
001-31240
(Commission File Number)
84-1611629
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.
6363 South Fiddlers Green Circle  
Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111  
(Address of principal executive offices) (zip code)
(303) 863-7414
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
(Former Name or Former Address, if Changed Since Last Report)
Not Applicable
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the filing obligation of the registrant 
under any of the following provisions:  
  
 Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425) 
  
 Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12) 
  
 Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14d-2(b)) 
  
 Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))
ITEM 8.01. OTHER EVENTS.  
On January 22, 2014, Newmont Mining Corporation (the “Company”) provided an update on export issues and new regulations in 
Indonesia impacting PT Newmont Nusa Tenggara, which operates the Batu Hijau copper and gold mine in Indonesia.
A copy of the Company’s news release is furnished as Exhibit 99.1 to this report.
The information disclosed under this Item 8.01, including Exhibit 99.1 hereto, is being furnished and shall not be deemed “filed” for 
purposes of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and shall not be deemed incorporated by reference into any filing made under the 
Securities Act of 1933, except as expressly set forth by specific reference in such filing.
ITEM 9.01. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND EXHIBITS  
(d) Exhibits  
  
Exhibit Number
Description of Exhibit
99.1
News Release, dated January 22, 2014
2
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly caused this report to
be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
/s/ Stephen P. Gottesfeld
By:
Name: Stephen P. Gottesfeld
Title: Executive Vice President, General Counsel
and Corporate Secretary
Dated: January 22, 2014
3
Exhibit Number
Description of Exhibit
EXHIBIT INDEX
99.1
News Release, dated January 22, 2014
4
Exhibit 99.1
Newmont Provides Update on Export Ban in Indonesia
DENVER, Jan. 22, 2014 – Newmont Mining Corporation (NYSE: NEM) (“Newmont” or “the Company”) today provided an update 
on export issues pertaining to PT Newmont Nusa Tenggara (“PTNNT”), which operates the Batu Hijau copper and gold mine on the 
island of Sumbawa in Indonesia.
Although Indonesian government officials have informed PTNNT that the ban on copper concentrate exports from Batu Hijau does 
not take effect until January 11, 2017, as provided for in recently issued regulations, the regulations also include new and potentially 
restrictive conditions to obtain an export permit, as well as a significant export duty. As PTNNT meets with government officials for 
further information and clarity regarding the new regulations, Newmont is evaluating potential impacts to its operating plans at Batu 
Hijau.
“The Contract of Work (CoW) signed with the Government of Indonesia provides PTNNT the right to export the copper concentrate 
produced at Batu Hijau’s processing facility,” said Blake Rhodes, Newmont’s Senior Vice President, Indonesia. “The CoW also 
explicitly sets the types and levels of taxes, levies, and duties PTNNT is required to pay, thereby establishing all tax obligations.”
PTNNT will continue to engage with government officials in Indonesia in an effort to resolve this issue, while also considering other 
remedies, including possible legal action. Newmont plans to provide an update on January 31, 2014, during a call with investors 
regarding the Company’s 2013 preliminary operating and sales results.
PTNNT is currently mining Phase Six of Batu Hijau, with plans to gain access to higher grade ore later this year. PTNNT does not 
have plans to export copper concentrate until later this quarter, as previously scheduled shipments were completed in early January.
The value added through Batu Hijau’s processing plant improves the quality of the copper ore mined by more than 50 times, 
capturing roughly 95 percent of the entire value stream in Indonesia. PTNNT also has supported in-country smelting for many years 
by shipping as much copper concentrate to PT Smelting Gresik – Indonesia’s only copper smelter – as it can take from Batu Hijau.
Since operations began in 2000, PTNNT has paid more than $3 billion in taxes and royalties to the government, in addition to 
investing approximately $10 million each year toward local economic, infrastructure and social development. Approximately 9,000 
people, including employees and contractors, support their families by working at Batu Hijau.
About PTNNT’s Contract of Work and the Export Ban  
The Batu Hijau copper and gold mine was developed under an investment agreement called the Contract of Work (CoW), entered into 
by the Republic of Indonesia and PTNNT.
The CoW details PTNNT’s obligations and rights, including the obligation to produce and the right to export copper concentrate. 
Despite changes in various laws and regulations over the years, the obligations and rights specified in the CoW have continued to 
govern operation of the mine. The CoW’s provisions clearly state: ‘The Company shall not be subject to any other taxes, duties, 
levies, contributions, charges or fees now or hereafter levied or imposed or approved by the Government other than those provided 
for in this Article and elsewhere in this Agreement.’
While multiple studies have demonstrated that it is not economically viable for the Company to build its own smelter, PTNNT has 
negotiated and signed conditional concentrate supply agreements with two Indonesian companies that have publicly announced plans 
to build their own copper smelters in the country.
About Newmont  
Founded in 1921 and publicly traded since 1925, Newmont is a leading producer of gold and copper. Headquartered in Colorado, the 
Company has approximately 40,000 employees and contractors, with the majority working at managed operations in the United 
States, Australia, New Zealand, Peru, Indonesia and Ghana. Newmont is the only gold company listed in the S&P 500 index and in 
2007 became the first gold company selected to be part of the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index. Newmont is an industry leader 
in value creation, supported by its leading technical, environmental, and health and safety performance.
Media Contacts   
Omar Jabara
Diane Reberger   303.967.9455   diane.reberger@newmont.com
303.837.5114   omar.jabara@newmont.com
###
Investor Contact  
Kirsten Benefiel  303-837-6117  kirsten.benefiel@newmont.com
Allysa Howell
303.837.5788   allysa.howell@newmont.com
Cautionary Statement
This news release contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as 
amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended that are intended to be covered by the safe harbor 
created by such sections. Such forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements regarding the Company’s 
expectations relating to timing of future concentrate shipments, enforcement of the Contract of Work, political or governmental 
conditions, impact of the new regulations, ability to obtain export permits, and potential impacts to operating plans at Batu Hijau. 
Where the Company expresses or implies an expectation or belief as to future events or results, such expectation or belief is expressed 
in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis. However, forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and 
other factors. For a detailed discussion of risks, see the risk factors under the heading “Our operations are subject to risks of doing 
business,” “Our Batu Hijau operation in Indonesia is subject to political and economic risks,” and “The Contract of Work has been 
and may continue to be the subject of dispute, legal review, or requests for renegotiation by the Indonesian government, and is subject 
to termination by the Indonesian government if we do not comply with our obligations, which would result in the loss of all or much 
of the value of Batu Hijau” in the Company’s 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is on file with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (“SEC”), as well as the Company’s other SEC filings. The Company does not undertake any obligation to publically 
issue revisions to any “forward-looking statement,” to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this news release, or to reflect 
the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as may be required under applicable securities laws.