
​ Notice of AGM and Distribution of Annual Report - RNS - London Stock Exchange​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Regulatory Story
Go to market news section
ASA Resource Group PLC  -  ASA
​ ​ ​
Notice of AGM and Distribution of
Annual Report
Released 07:00 22-Aug-2016
RNS Number : 7195H
ASA Resource Group PLC
22 August 2016
22 August 2016
Asa Resource Group plc
("Asa Resource", "the Group" or "the Company")
Notice of AGM and Distribution of Annual Report
ASA Resource Group PLC announces that notice has been given of its 2016 Annual General
Meeting ("AGM") to be held at Prince Frederick House, 35-39 Maddox Street, London, W1S 2PP
on 27 September 2016 at 2pm.
The AGM Notice, Proxy Form and Annual Report for the fiscal year ended 31 March 2016 have
been sent to shareholders. The Annual Report is, and copies of the AGM Notice will be,
available on the Company's website or at the Company's registered office, One Fleet Place,
London, EC4M 7WS.
For more information:
London
Asa Resource Group plc.
One Fleet Place, London EC4M 7W
Yim Kwan, Finance Director
Tel: +44 (0) 203 696 5470
Communications@asaukplc.com
Hong Kong
Asa Resource Group plc.
Units 509-510, Level 5, Core E, Cyberport 3, 100 Cyberport Road, Hong Kong
Samuel Ng, Investment Manager
Tel: +852 25662638
Communications@asaukplc.com
Nominated Adviser and Joint Broker
SP Angel Corporate Finance LLP
Prince Frederick House, 35-39 Maddox Street, London W1S 2PP
Jeff Keating, Caroline Rowe
Tel: +44 (0) 20 3470 0470
Asa Resource's Strategic vision
Our strategic vision is to be a fully integrated pan-African commodity group, strengthening each
commodity group through exploiting Asa Resource's wide portfolio of mining interests. We also
continue to engage with trusted partners in many regions to help us exploit the true value of our
assets.
The process of segmenting assets at Group level and integrating resources operationally is
fundamental to both our short and long-term strategies. Over time we seek to shift our focus to
having individual exposure in each of our key commodities including nickel, gold, copper and
diamonds. Shareholders can have an interest in the whole Group or on a single-commodity
basis. Our interests in agriculture and property will add valuable income during times of low
commodity prices.
This strategy is already showing promise with significant efficiencies achieved through a transfer
of skills at mine level and considerable efficiencies across our entire portfolio.
These developments would not be made possible without the commitment, versatility and
expertise of management at all levels. This new vision has inspired us all within the Group to
double our efforts to re-build Asa Resource Group plc as a strong and sustainable company.
For more information please visit the company's website:
http://www.asaukplc.com/ or email Communications@asaukplc.com
This information is provided by RNS
The company news service from the London Stock Exchange
 
END
 
 
MSCFMGMRKLNGVZM ​ ​ ​ 
Close
London Stock Exchange plc is not responsible for and does not check content on this
Website. Website users are responsible for checking content. Any news item (including
any prospectus) which is addressed solely to the persons and countries specified therein
should not be relied upon other than by such persons and/or outside the specified
countries. Terms and conditions, including restrictions on use and distribution apply.
©2014 London Stock Exchange plc. All rights reserved
Notice of AGM and Distribution of Annual Report - RNS
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​