
NT 10-K 1 ecgi_nt10k.htm NT 10-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 12b-25
NOTIFICATION OF LATE FILING
(Check one): x Form 10-K ¨ Form 20-F ¨ Form 11-K ¨ Form 10-Q ¨ Form 10-D ¨ Form N-SAR
¨ Form N-CSR
For Period Ended: September 30, 2014
¨ Transition Report on Form 10-K
¨ Transition Report on Form 20-F
¨ Transition Report on Form 11-K
¨ Transition Report on Form 10-Q
¨ Transition Report on Form N-SAR
For the Transition Period Ended: ___________________
Read Instruction (on back page) Before Preparing Form. Please Print or Type.
Nothing in this form shall be construed to imply that the Commission has verified any
information contained herein.
If the notification relates to a portion of the filing checked above, identify the Item(s) to which the
notification relates:
PART I — REGISTRANT INFORMATION
EVENT CARDIO GROUP INC.
Full Name of Registrant
 
Former Name if Applicable
 
2798 Thamesgate Dr.
Address of Principal Executive Office (Street and Number)
 
Mississauga, Ontario
Canada, L4T 4E8
City, State and Zip Code
PART II — RULES 12b-25(b) AND (c)
If the subject report could not be filed without unreasonable effort or expense and the registrant
seeks relief pursuant to Rule 12b-25(b), the following should be completed. (Check box if
appropriate)
x
(a) The reason described in reasonable detail in Part III of this form could not be eliminated
without unreasonable effort or expense
(b) The subject annual report, semi-annual report, transition report on Form 10-K, Form 20-
F, Form 11-K, Form N-SAR or Form N-CSR, or portion thereof, will be filed on or before
the fifteenth calendar day following the prescribed due date; or the subject quarterly
report or transition report on Form 10-Q or subject distribution reporton Form 10-D, or
portion thereof, will be filed on or before the fifth calendar day following the prescribed
due date; and
(c) The accountant’s statement or other exhibit required by Rule 12b-25(c) has been
attached if applicable.
PART III — NARRATIVE
State below in reasonable detail why Forms 10-K, 20-F, 11-K, 10-Q,10-D, N-SAR, N-CSR, or the
transition report or portion thereof, could not be filed within the prescribed time period.
The Registrant is unable to file its Form 10-K within the prescribed time period without
unreasonable effort or expense due to a delay in compiling information required to be included in
the Company’s 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014. In accordance with Rule12b-
25 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Company anticipates that it will file
its Form 10-K no later than the fifteenth day following the prescribed due date.
(Attach extra Sheets if Needed)
PART IV — OTHER INFORMATION
(1)
(2)
(3)
Name and telephone number of person to contact in regard to this notification
John Bentivoglio
(289)
(Name)
(Area Code)
407-4377
(Telephone
Number)
Have all other periodic reports required under Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 or Section 30 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 during the
preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such report(s) been filed? If answer is no, identify report(s). Yes x No ¨
 
Is it anticipated that any significant change in results of operations from the
corresponding period for the last fiscal year will be reflected by the earnings statements
to be included in the subject report or portion thereof ? Yes ¨ No x
 
If so, attach an explanation of the anticipated change, both narratively and quantitatively,
and, if appropriate, state the reasons why a reasonable estimate of the results cannot be
made.
SEC 1344
Persons who are to respond to the collection of information contained in this
form are not required to respond unless the form displays a currently valid
(04-09)
OMB control number.
2
EVENT CARDIO GROUP INC.
(Name of Registrant as Specified in Charter)
has caused this notification to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly
authorized.
Date December 29, 2014
By:/s/ John Bentivoglio
 
  CEO and Acting CFO
John Bentivoglio
INSTRUCTION: The form may be signed by an executive officer of the registrant or by any other
duly authorized representative. The name and title of the person signing the form shall be typed
or printed beneath the signature. If the statement is signed on behalf of the registrant by an
authorized representative (other than an executive officer), evidence of the representative’s
authority to sign on behalf of the registrant shall be filed with the form.
Intentional misstatements or omissions of fact constitute Federal Criminal Violations (See
ATTENTION
18 U.S.C. 1001).
3