
THIS  CIRCULAR  AND  THE  ACCOMPANYING  FORM  OF  PROXY  ARE  IMPORTANT  AND  REQUIRE  YOUR 
IMMEDIATE  ATTENTION.  If  you  are  in  any  doubt  about the action to be taken  you should immediately take your 
own  independent  financial  advice  from  your  stockbroker,  bank  manager,  solicitor,  accountant  or  other 
independent  professional  adviser  duly  authorised  under  the  Financial  Services  and  Markets  Act  2000,  as 
amended,  if  you  are  in  the  United  Kingdom  or,  if  not,  another  appropriately  authorised  independent  financial 
adviser. 
 
If you have sold or transferred all of your existing Shares or CDIs in Zeta Petroleum plc (the “Company”), please send this 
document, together with the accompanying Form of Proxy, as soon as possible to the purchaser or transferee or to the 
stockbroker, bank or other agent through whom the sale or transfer was effected, for transmission to the purchaser or transferee. If 
you have sold part only of your holding of existing Shares or CDIs in the Company, you should retain these documents.
ZETA PETROLEUM PLC
Incorporated and registered in England and Wales with registered number 5560854 and registered as a foreign company in Australia
with Australian registered business number 24 154 575 872
NOTICE OF GENERAL MEETING
RE-ELECTION OF COMPANY DIRECTOR,  APPROVALS FOR SECURITY ISSUES AND
REDENOMINATION OF NOMINAL SHARE CAPITAL,
DISAPPLICATION OF PRE-EMPTION RIGHTS
Notice convening a  General Meeting  of the  Company  to  be held  at the  offices  of Transcontinental  Investments Pty  Ltd, 
level 14, 191 St Georges Terrace, Perth, Western Australia, Australia  on 14 September 2016 at 4.00 p.m. AWST (9.00 
a.m. BST) is set out at the end of this document. Shareholders will find enclosed  with this document a Form of Proxy for use 
in connection with the General Meeting. To be valid, the Form of Proxy must be  signed and returned in accordance with the 
instructions printed thereon so as to be received by the Company’s registrars, Computershare Investor Services PLC, The 
Pavilions, Bridgwater Road, Bristol BS99 6ZY, United Kingdom, as soon as possible but in any event by not later than 4 p.m. 
AWST (9.00a.m. BST) on 12 September 2016. Completion and posting of the Form of Proxy does not prevent a Shareholder 
from attending and voting in person at the General Meeting. 
 
This document does not comprise or form part of any offer or invitation to acquire or to dispose of or to subscribe for any 
interests in shares or securities in the Company and none of its contents nor the fact of its existence may be relied on in 
connection with any contract therefor.
1
PART 1
NOTICE OF GENERAL MEETING
ZETA PETROLEUM PLC
(Incorporated and registered in England and Wales with company number 5560854)
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that a general meeting of Zeta Petroleum Plc (Company) will be 
held at the offices of Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd, level 14, 191 St Georges Terrace, 
Perth, Western Australia, Australia at 4 p.m. AWST (9 a.m. BST) on 14 September 2016, for the 
transaction of the following business: 
 
 
Ordinary Business 
 
 
RESOLUTION 1 – Redenomination of nominal Share value 
 
To consider, and if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“That, in accordance with section 622 of the Companies Act , with effect from 25 August 2016 
(Specified  Date)  the  existing  Shares  of  £0.04  each  in  the  capital  of  the  Company  shall  be 
redenominated  as  an  ordinary  share  of  A$0.0655  in  the  capital  of  the  Company  using  the 
Australian  dollar:  Pound  Sterling  sell  rate  of  exchange  prevailing  as  at  the  day  before  the 
Specified Date (A$1.6375:£1), using the mechanism specified by s623 of the Companies Act.
RESOLUTION 2 – Renounceable Rights Issue
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following Resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
 
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  Resolutions  1  and  9  the  Directors  be  authorised  pursuant  to 
s551  of  the  Companies  Act  2006  (the  “Companies  Act”),  to  allot  up  to  a  maximum  of 
27,165,111 new securities via a pro rata  Renounceable Rights Issue (the “Rights Issue”) for 
the issue of 2 new CHESS Depository Interests (“CDIs”) for every 1 CDI or Ordinary Share held 
by Zeta Shareholders at A$0.06 per CDI, with 1 free attaching option to be issued for every 2 
new  CDIs  subscribed  for  exercisable  at  A$0.10  each  on  or  before  30  September  2019,  and 
otherwise  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory  Statement.  The  maximum 
number of securities to be allotted under the Rights Issue will consist of 18,110,074 new CDIs 
and 9,055,037 free attaching options. The authority referred to in this Resolution shall expire no 
later than the date of the Company’s 2017 Annual General Meeting, unless previously revoked, 
renewed or varied by the Company in general meeting.”
RESOLUTION 3 – Election of Mr Simon Trevisan as a Director of the Company 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“For  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  14.4,  Article  20.2  of  the  Company’s  Articles  of 
Association,  and  for  all  other  purposes,  to  elect  Mr  Simon  Trevisan  as  a  Director  of  the 
Company, who was appointed by the Board of Directors (the “Board”) as a Director since the 
Company’s last Annual General Meeting.”
2
RESOLUTION  4  –  Approval  of  issue  of  Free  Attaching  Options  to  Transcontinental 
Investments Pty Ltd 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“That for the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 10.11 and for all other purposes, approval is given for 
the Company to issue up to 900,000 free attaching options exercisable at A$0.10 each on or 
before 30 September 2019 to Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd, on the terms and conditions 
set out in the Explanatory Statement.” 
Voting  Exclusion  Statement:  The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  resolution  by  Transcontinental 
Investments Pty Ltd and any of its Associates.  However, the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person 
as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Form of Proxy, or, it is cast by 
the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the Form 
of Proxy to vote as the proxy decides. 
 
 
RESOLUTION 5 – Ratification of the issue of CDIs to Transcontinental Investments Pty 
Ltd 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“That subject to the passing of Resolution 10 and for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.4 and for all 
other purposes, Shareholders approve and ratify the issue of 1,088,256 CDIs at an issue price 
of $0.06 each, to Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd on the terms and conditions set out in 
the Explanatory Statement.” 
Voting  Exclusion  Statement:  The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  resolution  by  Transcontinental 
Investments Pty Ltd and of its Associates. However, the Company will not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a 
proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Form of Proxy or it is cast by the 
person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the Form of 
Proxy to vote as the proxy decides. 
 
RESOLUTION  6  –  Approval  for  Related  Parties  to  participate  in  the  shortfall  to  the 
Renounceable Rights Issue – Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“That, subject to the passing of Resolutions 1,2, 9 and 10, for the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 
10.11 and for all other purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue up to 1,000,000 
CDIs and 500,000 free attaching options exercisable at A$0.10 each on or before 30 September 
2019  to  Transcontinental  Investments  Pty  Ltd,  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the 
Explanatory Statement.” 
Voting  Exclusion  Statement:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  resolution  by  Transcontinental 
Investments Pty Ltd and any of its Associates and a person who might obtain a benefit, except a benefit solely in the 
capacity of a Shareholder, if the resolution is passed.  However, the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a 
person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Form of Proxy, or, it is 
cast by the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on 
the Form of Proxy to vote as the proxy decides.
RESOLUTION  7  –  Approval  for  Related  Parties  to  participate  in  the  shortfall  to  the 
Renounceable Rights Issue – Mr Greg Hancock 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“That, subject to the passing of Resolutions 1,2, 9 and 10, for the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 
10.11 and for all other purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue up to 370,000 CDIs 
and 185,000 free attaching options exercisable at A$0.10 each on or before 30 September 2019 
to Mr Greg Hancock (or his nominee), on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory 
Statement.” 
Voting Exclusion Statement:  The Company will disregard any votes cast on this resolution by Mr Greg Hancock (or 
his nominee) and any of their Associates and a person who might obtain a benefit, except a benefit solely in the capacity 
of a holder of a Shareholder, if the resolution is passed.  However, the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by 
a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Form of Proxy, or, it is 
cast by the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on 
the Form of Proxy to vote as the proxy decides.
3
RESOLUTION  8  –  Approval  for  Related  Parties  to  participate  in  the  shortfall  to  the 
Renounceable Rights Issue – Mr Oliver Cairns 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
“That, subject to the passing of Resolutions 1, 2, 9 and 10, for the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 
10.11 and for all other purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue up to 100,000 CDIs 
and 50,000 free attaching options exercisable at A$0.10 each on or before 30 September 2019 
to  Mr  Oliver  Cairns  (or  his  nominee),  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory 
Statement.” 
Voting Exclusion Statement:  The Company will disregard any votes cast on this resolution by Mr Oliver Cairns (or his 
nominee) and any of their Associates and a person who might obtain a benefit, except a benefit solely in the capacity of 
a holder of a Shareholder, if the resolution is passed.  However, the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a 
person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Form of Proxy, or, it is 
cast by the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on 
the Form of Proxy to vote as the proxy decides. 
 
 
Special Business 
 
RESOLUTION  9  –  Adjustment  of  nominal  value  of  Shares 
redenomination 
 
To consider, and if thought fit, to pass with or without amendment, the following resolution as a 
special resolution: 
“That, subject to the passing of Resolution 1 by the required majority, the share capital of the 
Company be and is hereby reduced by rounding down the fixed nominal value of the Company’s 
ordinary shares to A$0.06 in accordance with section 626 of the Companies Act 2006”.   
 
 
RESOLUTION 10 – No Pre-emption Rights on the Allotment of Securities under Rights Issue 
 
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as a special resolution:
in  connection  with
“That, the Directors be and they are hereby empowered pursuant to s570 of the Companies Act 
2006 (the “Companies Act”) to allot equity securities (as defined in s560 of the Companies Act) 
for cash as if s561(1) of the Companies Act did not apply to any such allotment, provided that 
this power shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities up to an aggregate number of 
27,165,111 securities and provided that this power shall, unless previously revoked or varied by 
special  resolution  of  the  Company  in  general  meeting,  expire  no  later  than  the  date  of  the 
Company’s 2017 Annual General Meeting. The Company may, before such expiry, make offers 
or agreements which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and 
the  Directors  are  hereby  empowered  to  allot  equity  securities  in  pursuance  of  such  offers  or 
agreements as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.” 
 
 
If granted this authority will replace the existing authority granted at the general meeting of the 
Company held on 17 September 2012. 
 
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD 
 
Ben Hodges 
Company Secretary  
 
Dated: 26 August 2016 
 
Registered office: 
1 Berkeley Street 
London 
W1J 8DJ 
United Kingdom
4
NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF GENERAL MEETING
Action to be taken 
Each Shareholder is entitled to appoint one or more proxies to attend, speak and vote instead of 
that Shareholder. A proxy need not be a Shareholder. 
Shareholders  should  kindly  complete  and  return  the  enclosed  Form  of  Proxy  as  soon  as 
possible, whether or not they expect to be able to attend the General Meeting. Return of a Form 
of  Proxy  will  not  prevent  a  Shareholder  from  attending,  speaking  and  voting  in  person  at  the 
meeting if that Shareholder so wishes. 
Holders of CHESS Depository Interests (CDIs) are invited to attend but are not entitled to vote 
personally at the General Meeting.  Chess Depository Nominees Pty Ltd (CDN) holds legal title 
in the Company's Shares for and on behalf of CDI holders.  As the holders of beneficial interest 
in the Company's Shares that are held by CDN, CDI holders should direct CDN on how to vote 
with respect to the Resolution described in the Notice of General Meeting using the enclosed 
CDI  Voting  Instruction  Form.   CDN  must  exercise  its  rights  to  vote  by  proxy  at  the  General 
Meeting in accordance with the directions of CDI holders.
NOTES 
1.  A member of the Company entitled to attend and vote at this meeting is entitled to appoint one or more proxies to 
attend, speak and vote in that member’s place. A member may appoint more than one proxy in  relation to this 
meeting provided that each proxy is appointed to exercise rights attached to a different Share or Shares held by 
that member.  To appoint more than one proxy you may photocopy the Form of Proxy.  Please indicate the proxy 
holder’s name and the number of Shares in relation to which they are authorised to act as your proxy (which, in 
aggregate, should not exceed the number of Shares held by you).  Please also indicate if the proxy instruction is 
one of multiple instructions being given.  All forms should be signed and returned together in the same envelope.  
A proxy need not also be a member. Completion and return of a Form of Proxy will not preclude a member from 
attending the meeting and voting in person, if they so wish and are so entitled.
2.  To be valid, the enclosed Form(s) of Proxy and any power(s) of attorney or other authority (if any) under which it is 
signed  or  a  notarially  certified  copy  thereof,  must  be  completed  and  returned  so  as  to  be  received  by  the 
Company’s registrars, Computershare Investor Services PLC, The Pavilions, Bridgwater Road, Bristol BS99 6ZY 
by 4 p.m. AWST (9.00 a.m. BST) 12 September 2016 or, in the event that the meeting is adjourned, not less than 
48  hours  (excluding  any  part  of  a  day  which  is  not  a  working  day)  before  the  time  fixed  for  the  holding  of  the 
adjourned meeting.
3.  Members will be entitled to attend and vote at this meeting if they are registered on the register of members of the 
Company by 6.00 p.m. AWST on 12 September 2016 or, in the event of any adjournment of the meeting, at 6.00 
p.m. AWST on the date which is 2 days before the start of the adjourned meeting (excluding any part of a day 
which is not a working day). 
In the case of joint holders, the vote of the senior who tenders a vote will be accepted to the exclusion of the votes 
of the other joint holders. For this purpose, seniority is determined by the order in which the names are stated in 
the register of members of the Company in respect of the joint holding.
4.
5.  Any corporation which is a member can appoint one or more corporate representatives who may exercise, on its 
behalf, all of the powers as a member provided that they do not do so in relation to the same Shares. A resolution 
of  the  directors,  or  other  governing  body,  of  the  corporation  will  be  required  in  order  to  evidence  the  valid 
appointment of the corporate representative, in accordance with section 323 of the UK Companies Act 2006.
6.  You may not use any electronic address (within the meaning of section 333(4) of the UK Companies Act 2006) 
provided  in  this  notice  or  in  any  related  documents  (including  the  form  of  proxy  and  the  annual  report  and 
accounts) to communicate with the Company for any purposes other than those expressly stated.
7.  Your personal data includes all data provided by you, or on your behalf, which relates to you as a Shareholder, 
including your name and contact details, the votes you cast and your reference number (as attributed to you by the 
Company  or  its  registrars).  The  Company  determines  the  purposes  for  which,  and  the  manner  in  which,  your 
personal data is to be processed. The Company and any third party to which it discloses the data (including the 
Company’s registrars) may process your personal data for the purposes of compiling and updating the Company’s 
records, fulfilling its legal obligations and processing the shareholder rights you exercise.
8.  To  change  your  proxy  instructions  simply  submit  a  new  proxy  appointment  using  the  methods  set  out  above.
Note  that  the  cut-off  time  for  receipt  of  proxy  appointments  (see  above)  also  apply  in  relation  to  amended 
instructions; any amended proxy appointment received after the relevant cut-off time will be disregarded. 
Where you have appointed a proxy using the hard-copy form of proxy and would like to change the instructions 
using another hard-copy form of proxy, please contact Computershare Investor Services Plc at the address shown 
in note 2, above. 
If you submit more than one valid proxy appointment, the appointment received last before the latest time for the 
receipt of proxies will take precedence.
9.
In order to revoke a proxy instruction you will need to inform the Company by sending a signed hard copy notice 
clearly  stating  your  intention  to  revoke  your  proxy  appointment  to  Computershare  Investor  Services  Plc  at  the 
address  shown  in  note  2,  above.  In  the  case  of a  member  which  is  a  company,  the  revocation  notice  must  be
5
executed  under  its  common  seal  or  signed  on  its  behalf  by  an  officer  of  the  company  or  an  attorney  for  the 
company.  Any  power  of  attorney  or  any  other  authority  under  which  the  revocation  notice  is  signed  (or  a  duly 
certified copy of such power or authority) must be included with the revocation notice. 
The revocation notice must be received by Computershare Investor Services Plc no later than 4 p.m. AWST (9.00 
a.m. BST) 12 September 2016. 
If  you  attempt  to  revoke  your  proxy  appointment  but  the  revocation  is  received  after  the  time  specified  then, 
subject to the paragraph directly below, your proxy appointment will remain valid. 
Appointment  of  a  proxy  does  not  preclude  you  from  attending  the  Meeting  and  voting  in  person.  If  you  have 
appointed a proxy and attend the meeting in person, your proxy appointment will automatically be terminated.
6
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT TO THE NOTICE OF GENERAL MEETING
PART 2
This  Explanatory  Statement  forms  part  of  a  Notice  convening  the  General  Meeting  of 
Shareholders of Zeta Petroleum plc to be held at the offices of Transcontinental Investments 
Pty  Ltd,  level  14,  191  St  Georges  Terrace,  Perth,  Western  Australia,  Australia,  at 4.00 p.m. 
AWST  (9.00  a.m.  BST)  on  14  September  2016.  This  Explanatory  Statement  is  to  assist 
Shareholders  in  understanding  the  background  to  and  the  legal  and  other  implications  of  the 
Notice  and  the  reasons  for  the  Resolution  proposed.  Certain  terms  used  in  this  Explanatory 
Statement are defined in Part 4.
RESOLUTION 1 – REDENOMINATION OF NOMINAL SHARE VALUE 
 
Section 622 of the Companies Act 2006 allows a Company to change the denomination of the 
nominal value of its shares. The Company is listed on the Australian Stock Exchange with its 
CDIs being quoted in Australian dollars. The Directors consider it appropriate that the nominal 
value  of  the Company’s 9,055,037  Shares  on  issue as  at  the date  of  this Notice  be  changed 
from  British  Pounds  Sterling  into  Australian  dollars  to  align  the  currency  of  its  nominal  share 
value with the currency in which it is quoted. 
 
The  new  nominal  value  of  the  Company’s  Shares  will  be  A$0.0655  post  redenomination, 
calculated in accordance with section 623 of the Companies Act 2006 using the NatWest Bank 
sell currency rate of A$1.6375 prevailing at close of business in London on the day before the 
Specified Date. 
 
 
RESOLUTION 2 – RENOUNCEABLE RIGHTS ISSUE 
 
Background 
 
On 27 July 2016 the Company announced its intention to undertake a renounceable rights issue 
(Renounceable Rights Issue) for the issue of two (2) new CDIs for every one (1) CDI or Share 
held by Shareholders as at the Record Date, at an issue price of A$0.06 per new CDI, with one 
(1) free attaching option to be issued for every two (2) new CDIs subscribed for, exercisable at 
A$0.10 each on or before 30 September 2019 (Free Attaching Option). 
 
Requirements of Companies Act 2006 
 
Shareholder approval is hereby being sought to the grant to the Board of authority to allot equity 
securities  (within  the  meaning  of  section  560  of  the  Companies  Act)  up  to  a  maximum  of 
27,165,111 equity securities to enable the Company to execute the Renounceable Rights Issue. 
 
Timetable 
 
An indicative timetable for the Renounceable Rights Issue is as follows:
Event 
Prospectus lodged with ASIC and provided to ASX 
Securities quoted on an “ex” basis 
Rights trading commences 
Record date 
Prospectus and Application Form sent to CDI holders and 
Shareholders 
Offer opens 
Rights trading ends 
Offer closes
Target date 
Wednesday, 14 September 2016 
Monday, 19 September 2016 
Monday, 19 September 2016 
Tuesday, 20 September 2016 
Friday, 23 September 2016
Friday, 23 September 2016 
Tuesday, 27 September 2016 
Wednesday, 5 October 2016
7
Issue date 
Ordinary trading of new securities commences
Monday, 10 October 2016 
Tuesday, 11 October 2016
Note:  These  dates  are  indicative  only  and  subject  to  change.    The  Company  may  vary  these  dates  without  notice, 
including  whether  to  close  the  Offer  early  or  accept  late  Applications,  either  generally  or  in  particular  cases,  without 
notification.  Potential Applicants who wish to submit an Application and subscribe for CDIs and Free Attaching Options 
are encouraged to do so as soon as possible after the Offer opens as the Offer may close at any time without notice. 
 
 
RESOLUTION 3 – ELECTION OF MR SIMON TREVISAN AS A DIRECTOR OF THE 
COMPANY 
 
Article  20.2  of  the  Company’s  Articles  of  Association  and  ASX  Listing  Rule  14.4  require  any 
Director appointed by the Board since the date of the last Annual General Meeting to retire at 
the next General Meeting. Mr Simon Trevisan was appointed as a Director of the Company on 
28 July 2016 and is accordingly retiring from office and offering himself for election.  
Mr    Trevisan    is    the    managing    director    of    the    Transcontinental    Group  of  companies  
including TRG Properties Pty Ltd and Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd. He has 20 years’ 
experience in public and private investments, corporate  finance  and  management  of  large  
public  and  private  businesses. He has been responsible for the funding and management of a 
number  of  public  companies  and  TRG  Properties’  substantial  property  investments.  His 
experience includes the establishment  and  listing  of  Mediterranean  Oil  &  Gas  plc,  an  AIM  
listed  oil  and  gas company  with  production  and  a  substantial  oil  discovery  in  Italy.  Mr  
Trevisan  was Executive  Chairman  of  ASX  listed  gold  explorer  Aurex  Consolidated  Ltd  
and  a founding executive director of ASX listed Ausgold Limited and Regalpoint Resources Ltd.  
He  was  also  responsible  for  arranging  debt  funding  for  the  development  of  in excess of 
$500 million of property and significantly involved in arranging and drawing down  one  of  the  
first  foreign  bank  project  facilities  for  a  resources  development  in Indonesia. He has  a  
Bachelor  of  Economics  and  a  Bachelor  of  Laws  from  the  University  of Western  Australia  
and  a  Masters  Degree  in  Business  and  Technology  from  the University   of   New   South   
Wales.   Before   becoming   managing   director   of   the Transcontinental  Group,  Mr  Trevisan 
practiced    as    a    solicitor   with    Allens    Arthur  Robinson      Legal      Group    firm,    Parker   and  
Parker,  in  the  corporate  and  natural resources divisions. 
Mr      Trevisan      is      currently      a      director      of      medical      devices      company,      Neurotech 
International    Ltd  and  ASX  listed  companies  Regalpoint  Resources  Ltd  and  BMG  Resources 
Limited. He is a board member of not for profit St George’s College Foundation. 
The Directors, other than Mr Trevisan, support the election of Mr Trevisan and recommend that 
Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 3.
RESOLUTION  4  –  APPROVAL  OF  ISSUE  OF  FREE  ATTACHING  OPTIONS  TO 
TRANSCONTINENTAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
Background 
As  announced  on  27  July  2016,  the  Company  has  entered  into  a  placement  agreement 
(Placement  Agreement)  with  Transcontinental  Investments  Pty  Ltd  (Transcontinental) 
pursuant to which the Company raised A$108,000, issued to Transcontinental 1,800,000 new 
fully paid CDIs at an issue price of A$0.06 each, and agreed to issue to Transcontinental one 
free  attaching  option  exercisable  at  A$0.10  each  on  or  before  30  September  2019  (Free 
Attaching  Option)  for  every  two  new  fully  paid  CDIs  issued,  being  a  total  of  900,000  Free 
Attaching Options. 
 
Resolution  4  seeks  Shareholder  approval  pursuant  to  Listing  Rule  10.11  for  the  issue  to 
Transcontinental of up to 900,000 Free Attaching Options. 
 
No  funds  will  be  raised  from  the  issue  of  the  900,000  Free  Attaching  Options  as  they  are 
proposed  to  be  issued  as  free  attaching  options  pursuant  to  the  Placement  Agreement,  in 
respect of which the Company has already received A$108,000.
8
Requirements of Listing Rules 
Listing  Rule  10.11  restricts  the  Company  from  issuing  securities  to  a  Related  Party  of  the 
Company, unless approval is obtained from Shareholders. 
The effect of passing Resolution 4 will be to allow the Company to issue up to 900,000 Free 
Attaching Options to Transcontinental without using up the Company’s 15% placement capacity 
under Listing Rule 7.1. 
If Shareholder approval is not received for Resolution 4, the Company will not issue the 900,000 
Free Attaching Options to Transcontinental.
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 10.13 
Listing  Rule  10.13  requires  that  information  be  provided  to  Shareholders  for  the  purposes  of 
obtaining Shareholder approval pursuant to Listing Rule 10.11 as follows: 
(a)  The Free Attaching Options will be issued to Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd.  
(b)  The  maximum  number  of  Free  Attaching  Options  to  be  issued  is  900,000  Free  Attaching
Options.
(c)  The Free Attaching Options will be issued no later than one (1) month after the date of the 
General  Meeting  (or  such  later  date  to  the  extent  permitted  by  any  ASX  waiver  or 
modification of the Listing Rules).
(d)  Transcontinental  is  a  Related  Party  of  the  Company  as  Mr Simon  Trevisan,  who  is  a 
Director  of  the  Company, is  also  a director,  joint controller  and  substantial  shareholder  of 
Transcontinental.
(e)  The Free Attaching Options will have an issue price of A$nil each, and will be exercisable at 
A$0.10  each  on  or  before  30  September  2019.  The  full  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Free 
Attaching Options is set out in Part 3.
(f)  Any  CDIs  issued  on  the  exercise  of  any  Free  Attaching  Options  will  rank  equally  in  all
respects with the Company’s existing class of quoted CDIs.
(g)  A voting exclusion statement is included in the Notice of Meeting for Resolution 4.   
(h)  No funds will be raised by the issue of the Free Attaching Options as they are proposed to 
be  issued  as  free  attaching  options  pursuant  to  the  Placement  Agreement,  pursuant  to 
which the Company has already received A$108,000.
5
ISSUE  OF  CDIs  TO
–  RATIFICATION  OF  THE
Approval  pursuant  to  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  is  not  required  for  the  issue  of  the  Related  Party 
Shares  to  the  Related  Parties  as  approval  is  being  obtained  under  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11.  
Accordingly, the issue of the Related Party Shares to the Related Parties will not be included in 
the use of the Company’s 15% annual placement capacity pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 7.1. 
Directors’ recommendation 
The  Directors  (except  Mr  Simon  Trevisan)  recommend  that  Shareholders  vote  in  favour  of 
Resolution 4. 
 
 
RESOLUTION 
TRANSCONTINENTAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD 
 
Background 
As set out with respect to Resolution 4 above, on 27 July 2016, the Company entered into the 
Placement Agreement with Transcontinental pursuant to which the Company raised A$108,000, 
and issued to Transcontinental 1,800,000 new fully paid CDIs at an issue price of A$0.06 each, 
and agreed to issue to Transcontinental one Free Attaching Option exercisable at A$0.10 each 
on or before 30 September 2019 for every two new fully paid CDIs issued. 
Of  the  1,800,000  CDIs  issued  by  the  Company,  1,088,256  CDIs  were  issued  under  the 
Company’s existing capacity under Listing Rule 7.1, and the remainder were issued under the 
Company’s existing capacity under Listing Rule 7.1A. 
At the time Transcontinental was issued the CDIs, being 27 July 2016, Transcontinental was not
9
a Related Party of the Company, as Mr Simon Trevisan, who is a director, joint controller and 
substantial  shareholder  of  Transcontinental,  had  not  been  appointed  as  a  Director  of  the 
Company until 28 July 2016. Consequently, approval for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.11 is 
not required for the issue of the 1,800,000 CDIs. 
Requirements of Listing Rules 
Listing Rule 7.1 permits entities to issue equity securities up to 15% of its issued capital over a 
12 month period without shareholder approval.   
Listing Rule 7.4 states that an issue of securiites by a company made without approval under 
Listing Rule 7.1 is treated as having been made with approval for the purpose of Listing Rule 7.1 
if the issue did not breach Listing Rule 7.1 and the company’s members subsequently approve 
it.    Accordingly,  if  Resolution  4  is  approved,  the  1,088,256  CDIs  issued  by  the  Company  to 
Transcontinental will not be included in calculating the Company’s 15% issuing capacity for the 
purposes of Listing Rule 7.1. 
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 7.4 
In  accordance  with  Listing  Rule  7.5,  the  following  information  is  provided  in  to  enable 
Shareholders to assess the merits of Resolution 4 for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.4: 
(a)  The number of new fully paid CDIs that were issued is 1,088,256 CDIs.  
(b)  The issue price of the CDIs issued was A$0.06 each. 
(c)  The CDIs that were issued were issued on the same terms and conditions as all other CDIs
on issue in the Company.
(d)  The CDIs were issued to Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd. 
(e)  The  funds  raised  from  the  issue  of  the  CDIs  will  be  used  by  the  Company  to  settle 
outstanding  creditors,  maintain  and  fund  exploration  costs  in  Zeta’s  39%  interest  in  the 
Jimbolia licence and for general working capital purposes.
(f)  A voting exclusion statement is included in the Notice of Meeting for Resolution 5. 
Directors’ recommendation 
The Directors recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 5. 
 
RESOLUTIONS 6 TO 8 – APPROVAL FOR RELATED PARTIES TO PARTICIPATE IN THE SHORTFALL 
TO THE RENOUNCEABLE RIGHTS ISSUE
Background 
On 27 July 2016, the Company announced its intention to undertake a renounceable rights issue 
(Renounceable Rights Issue) on the basis of two (2) new CDIs for every one (1) CDI or Share 
held by Shareholders as at the Record Date, at an issue price of A$0.06 per new CDI (CDI), with 
one (1) free attaching option to be issued for every two (2) new CDIs subscribed for, exercisable 
at A$0.10 each on or before 30 September 2019 (Free Attaching Option).  
Transcontinental  Investments  Pty  Ltd  (Transcontinental),  which  is  a  Related  Party  of  the 
Company  as  Mr  Simon  Trevisan  who  is  a  Director  of  the  Company  is  also  a  director,  joint 
controller and substantial shareholder in Trancontinental, has indicated its intention to participate 
in any shortfall of the Renounceable Rights Issue up to a maximum of 1,000,000 of new CDIs 
and 500,000 Free Attaching Options.  
Mr Greg Hancock, being a Related Party of the Company by virtue of being a Director of the 
Company has indicated his intention to participate in any shortfall of the Renounceable Rights 
Issue up to a maximum of 370,000 of new CDIs and 185,000 Free Attaching Options. 
Mr  Oliver  Cairns,  being  a  related  party  of  the  Company  by  virtue  of  being  a  Director  of  the 
Company has indicated his intention to participate in any shortfall of the Renounceable Rights 
Issue up to a maximum of 100,000 of new CDIs and 50,000 Free Attaching Options. 
The  non-interested  Directors  of  the  Company  being  Messrs  Stephen  West  and  Timothy 
Osborne, have determined that subject to Shareholder approval being obtained:
10
(a)  Transcontinental  be  permitted  to  participate  in  any  shortfall  of  the  Renounceable  Rights
Issue up to a maximum of 1,000,000 of new CDIs and 500,000 Free Attaching Options;
(b)  Mr  Greg  Hancock  be  permitted  to  participate  in  any  shortfall  of  the  Renounceable  Rights
Issue up to a maximum of 370,000 of new CDIs and 185,000 Free Attaching Options; and
(c)  Mr  Oliver  Cairns  be  permitted  to  participate  in  any  shortfall  of  the  Renounceable  Rights 
Issue  up  to  a  maximum  of  100,000  of  new  CDIs  and  50,000  free  attaching  Options 
exercisable at A$0.10 at any time on or before 30 September 2019.
Resolutions  6  to  8  seek  Shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  the  aforementioned  CDIs  and 
Free Attaching Options to Transcontinental, Mr Hancock and Mr Cairns.   
Resolutions 6 to 8 are subject to the approval by Shareholders of Resolutions 1, 2, 9 and 10. 
The effect of passing each of Resolutions 6 to 8 will be to allow the Company to issue up to 
1,470,000  CDIs  and  735,000  Free  Attaching  Options  without  using  up  the  Company’s  15% 
placement capacity under Listing Rule 7.1. 
Approval  pursuant  to  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  is  not  required  for  the  issue  of  the  Related  Party 
Shares  to  the  Related  Parties  as  approval  is  being  obtained  under  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11.  
Accordingly, the issue of the Related Party Shares to the Related Parties will not be included in 
the use of the Company’s 15% annual placement capacity pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 7.1. 
 
 
 
 
Requirements of Listing Rules 
Listing  Rule  10.11  restricts  the  Company  from  issuing  securities  to  a  Related  Party  of  the 
Company, unless approval is obtained from Shareholders. 
The effect of passing each of Resolutions 6 to 8 will be to allow the Company to issue up to 
1,470,000 and 735,000 without using up the Company’s 15% placement capacity under Listing 
Rule 7.1. 
If Shareholder approval is not received for any of Resolutions 6, 7 or 8, the Company will not 
issue to the relevant Related Party, the CDIs and Free Attaching Options that are the subject of 
the relevant Resolution.  
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 10.13 
Listing  Rule  10.13  requires  that  information  be  provided  to  Shareholders  for  the  purposes  of 
obtaining Shareholder approval pursuant to Listing Rule 10.11 as follows: 
(a)  The CDIs and Free Attaching Options will be issued to the following persons:
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)
pursuant to Resolution 6, to Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd;  
pursuant to Resolution 7, to Mr Greg Hancock; and  
pursuant to Resolution 8, to Mr Oliver Cairns.
(b)  The maximum number of CDIs and Free Attaching Options to be issued pursuant to each
of Resolutions 6 to 8 is as follows:  
(i)
1,000,000  CDIs  and  500,000  Free  Attaching  Options 
Investments Pty Ltd;  
370,000 CDIs and 185,000  Free Attaching Options to Mr Greg Hancock; and 
100,000 CDIs and 50,000 Free Attaching Options to Oliver Cairns.
to  Transcontinental
(ii) 
(iii)
(c)  Subject to ASX granting a waiver from Listing Rule 10.13.3, the CDIs and Free Attaching 
Options proposed to be issued pursuant to Resolutions 6 to 8 will be issued at the same 
time  as  other  CDIs  and  Free  Attaching  Options  to  be  issued  to  other  participants  in  the 
Renounceable  Rights  Issue,  rather  than  within  1  month  after  the  date  of  the  General 
Meeting, but in any event no later than 3 months after the date of the Meeting, or within 
such other time as may be permitted by the Listing Rules or any waiver(s) of the Listing 
Rules granted by ASX.
11
(d)  Transcontinental  Investments  Pty  Ltd  is  a  Related  Party  of  the  Company  as  Mr  Simon 
Trevisan who is a Director of the Company is also a director, joint controller and substantial 
shareholder of Transcontinental, and Messrs Greg Hancock and Oliver Cairns are Related 
Parties of the Company as they are Directors of the Company.
(e)  The CDIs will be issued on the same terms and conditions as all other CDIs on issue in the
Company.
(f)  The Free Attaching Options will have an issue price of A$nil each, and will be exercisable 
at A$0.10 each on or before 30 September 2019. The full terms and conditions of the Free 
Attaching Options is set out in Part 3.
(g)  Any  CDIs  issued  on  the  exercise  of  any  Free  Attaching  Options  will  rank  equally  in  all
respects with the Company’s existing class of quoted CDIs.
(h)  A voting exclusion statement is included in the Notice. 
(i)  The funds raised will be used to settle outstanding  creditors, maintain and fund exploration 
costs in the Company’s 39% interest in the Jimbolia licence and for general working capital.
RESOLUTION 9 – ADJUSTMENT OF NOMINAL VALUE OF SHARES IN 
CONNECTION WITH REDENOMINATION 
 
Subject to the passing of Resolution 1 by the required majority, the Company seeks Shareholder 
approval  with  effect  from  the  Specified  Date  to  round  down  the  fixed  nominal  value  of  the 
Company’s  Shares  to  A$0.06  in  accordance  with  section  626  of  the  Companies  Act  2006. 
Section 626 allows for an adjustment in nominal value of shares by not more than 10% of the 
Company’s allotted share capital where a Company feels it is suitable to do so. Accordingly, the 
Company  seeks  to  round  down  the  nominal  value  of  the  Company’s  Shares  to  two  decimal 
points.  
 
The change in the nominal value of the Company’s Shares will have no effect on the carrying 
value of the Company’s assets and liabilities in the Company’s accounts and will not affect the 
balance sheet of the Company, nor the trading value of the Company’s CDIs traded on the ASX. 
The principal purpose of the change is to allow the Company to issue shares at an issue price it 
feels is more suitable: either equal to, or above the fixed nominal value, as s626 permits it to do.
Resolution 9 is a special resolution.
RESOLUTION 10 – DISAPPLICATION OF PRE-EMPTION RIGHTS
Resolution 10 seeks authority pursuant to section 570 of the Companies Act for the Directors to 
allot  equity  securities  (as  defined  in  section  560  of  the  Companies  Act)  for  cash  as  if  the 
statutory pre-emption rights contained in section 561(1) of the Companies Act did not apply to 
any such allotment up to an aggregate number of 27,165,111 securities to provide the Company 
with sufficient capacity to allot further shares and to grant further rights to subscribe for, or to 
convert  any  security  into,  shares  at  any  time  until  the  date  of  the  Company’s  2017  Annual 
General Meeting, subject always to the ASX Listing Rules.  
 
The  purpose  of  this  Resolution  is  to  allow  the  Company  to  raise  capital  via  equity  issues  to 
external investors, without having to go through the pre-emption rights process of first offering 
the equity securities to existing shareholders. 
 
Resolution 10 is a special resolution.
12
TERMS OF FREE ATTACHING OPTIONS
PART 3
The Free Attaching Options entitle the holder to subscribe for CDIs on the following terms and 
conditions: 
(a)  Each Free Attaching Option has an issue price of A$nil.  
(b)  Each Free Attaching Option gives the optionholder the right to subscribe for one CDI. 
(c)  The  Free  Attaching  Options  will  expire  at  5.00pm  (WST)  30  September  2019  (Expiry 
Date). Any Free Attaching Option not exercised  before the Expiry Date will automatically 
lapse on the Expiry Date.
(d)  The amount payable upon exercise of each Free Attaching Option will be A$0.10 (Exercise
Price).
(e)  The Free Attaching Options held by each optionholder may be exercised in whole or in part,
and if exercised in part, multiples of 1,000 must be exercised on each occasion.
(f)  An optionholder may exercise their Free Attaching Options by lodging with the Company,
before the Expiry Date: 
(i)
A written notice of exercise of Free Attaching Options specifying the number of Free 
Attaching Options being exercised; and 
A cheque or electronic funds transfer for the Exercise Price for the number of Free 
Attaching Options being exercised;
(ii)
(Exercise Notice).
(g)  An Exercise Notice is only effective when the Company has received the full amount of the
Exercise Price in cleared funds.
(h)  Within  5  Business  Days  of  receipt  of  the  Exercise  Notice  accompanied  by  the  Exercise 
Price,  the  Company  will  issue  the  number  of  CDIs  required  under  these  terms  and 
conditions  in  respect  of  the  number  of  Free  Attaching  Options  specified  in  the  Exercise 
Notice.
(i)  On  receipt  of  an  Exercise  Notice  accompanied  by  the  Exercise  Price,  the  Company  will
either: 
(i)
(ii)
within 5 business days after the issue of CDIs issued upon exercise of the Options, 
issue a “cleansing notice” that complies with section 708A(6) of the Corporations Act 
to  meet  certain  requirements  in  respect  of  the  “secondary  trading”  provisions 
contained in sections 707 and 708A of the Corporations Act; or 
within  15  business  days  of  receipt  of  the  Exercise  Notice,  issue  the  CDIs  issued 
upon  exercise  of  the  Options  pursuant  to  a  prospectus  which  the  Company  will 
prepare and lodge with ASIC.
(j)  The Free Attaching Options are not transferable. 
(k)  All CDIs issued upon the exercise of Free Attaching Options will upon issue rank pari passu
in all respects with the Company’s existing class of CDIs.
(l)  The  Company  will  not  apply  for  quotation  of  the  Free  Attaching  Options  on  ASX.  The 
Company  will  apply  for  quotation  of  all  CDIs  issued  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  Free 
Attaching Options on ASX within 10 Business Days after the date of issue of those CDIs.
(m)  If  at  any  time  the  issued  capital  of  the  Company  is  reconstructed,  all  rights  of  an 
optionholder  are  to  be  changed  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  Corporations  Act  (as 
appropriate), the Listing Rules, the UK Companies Act 2006 and otherwise at the time of 
the reconstruction.
(n)  There are no participating rights or entitlements inherent in the Free Attaching Options and 
optionholders  will  not  be  entitled  to  participate  in  new  issues  of  capital  offered  to 
Shareholders during the currency of the Free Attaching Options.  However, the Company 
will ensure that for the purposes of determining entitlements to any such issue, the record 
date  will  be  at  least  7  Business  Days  after  the  issue  is  announced.    This  will  give 
optionholders the opportunity to exercise their Free Attaching Options prior to the date for 
determining entitlements to participate in any such issue.
13
(o)  A Free Attaching Option does not confer the right to a change in exercise price or a change 
in  the  number  of  underlying  securities  over  which  the  Free  Attaching  Option  can  be 
exercised.
14
PART 4
DEFINITIONS
In the Explanatory Statement: 
 
“Applicant” means a person who applies for new CDIs and Free Attaching Options under and in 
accordance with the Prospectus. 
“Application” means a valid application for new CDIs and Free Attaching Options offered under 
the Prospectus. 
“Application Form” means an application form attached to or accompanying the Prospectus. 
“ASX” means ASX Limited ACN 008 624 691. 
“A$” means Australian dollar. 
“Associate” has the meaning set out in the Listing Rules. 
“Board” means the board of Directors. 
“Business Day” has the meaning given to it in the Listing Rules. 
“Chairman” means the chairman of the Board. 
“CHESS  Depository  Interests”  or  “CDIs”  means  the  depository  interests  representing   
Shares that are traded on the ASX, the legal title to which Shares is held by Chess Depository 
Nominees Pty Ltd for and on behalf of CDI holders. 
“Company” means Zeta Petroleum plc ABN 24 154 575 872. 
“Director” means a director of the Company. 
“Explanatory Statement” means the Explanatory Statement to the Notice of Meeting, set out in 
Part 2. 
“Form of Proxy” means the proxy form accompanying the Notice. 
“Listing Rules” means the official listing rules of ASX, as amended from time to time. 
 “Notice”  or  “Notice  of  Meeting”  means  the  notice  of  meeting  to  which  this  Explanatory 
Statement is attached. 
“Offer” means the offer of new CDIs and Free Attaching Options under the Prospectus. 
“Prospectus”  means  the  prospectus  to  be  issued  with  respect  to  the  Renounceable  Rights 
Issue. 
“Record Date” means the date for determining Shareholders’ entitlement to participate in the 
Renounceable Rights Issue. 
“Related Party” has the meaning given to it in the Listing Rules. 
“Section” means a section of this Explanatory Statement. 
“Share” means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.  
“Shareholder” means the holder of a Share. 
“Transcontinental” means Transcontinental Investments Pty Ltd ACN 009 017 985.
15
E
§
©
@
w
3
@3
c:
(Q
@2)
E
@D
Q
&
©

&

