
EX-31 2 ex31.htm EXHIBIT 31
Exhibit 31   CERTIFICATION
I, Michael J. Rugen, certify that:
1.  I have reviewed this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of Tengasco, Inc. for the quarter ended
June 30, 2016.
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the
period covered by this report;
3.  Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other information included in this
annual report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations
and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.  The registrant’s certifying officers are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and
internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-(f)
for the registrant and we have:
(a)  designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to
the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)  designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over
financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)  evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)  disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting
that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter
in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.  The Registrant’s certifying officers have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of
internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the
registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)  All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal
control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)  Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have
a significant role in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting.
Dated: August 12, 2016
 By:/s/ Michael J. Rugen
   Michael J. Rugen
   Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer