
DEF 14A 1 petro_sept202016.htm DEF 14A petro_sept202016.htm
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Filed by the Registrant  [X]
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant  [   ]
 
Check the appropriate box:
 
[   ]
[   ]
[X]
[   ]
[   ]
Preliminary Proxy Statement
  Confidential, for Use of the SEC Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
  Definitive Proxy Statement
  Definitive Additional Materials
  Soliciting Material Pursuant to 14a-12
PETRO RIVER OIL CORP.
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
 
[X]      No fee required.
[   ]      Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(4) and 0-11.
 
1.   Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
2.   Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
3.
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (set forth the
amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
4.   Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
5.   Total fee paid:
 
[   ]       Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
[   ]      Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for
which the offsetting fee was paid previously.
    Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Amount Previously Paid:
  Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
  Filing Party:
  Date Filed:
PETRO RIVER OIL CORP.
55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702
New York, NY 10003
Tel: (469) 828-3900
Fax: (212) 504-0863
Dear Stockholders of Petro River Oil Corp.:
August 16, 2016
You are cordially invited to attend the 2016 Annual Meeting of Stockholders (“Annual Meeting”) of Petro River Oil Corp.
(the “Company”), which will be held at the Company’s New York office, located at 55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702, New York,
New York 10003, on September 20, 2016 at 11:00 AM Eastern Time. Details of the business to be conducted at the
2016 Annual Meeting are provided in the attached Notice of Annual Meeting of Stockholders and Proxy Statement. In
order  for  us  to  have  an  efficient  Annual  Meeting,  please  sign,  date  and  return  the  enclosed  proxy  promptly  in  the
accompanying reply envelope. If you are able to attend the Annual Meeting and wish to change your proxy vote, you
may do so simply by voting in person at the Annual Meeting.
 
Our Board of Directors has unanimously approved the proposals set forth in the Proxy Statement and we recommend
that you vote in favor of each such proposal.
 
                We look forward to seeing you at the Annual Meeting.
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,
 
 
Scot Cohen
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Chairman
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT
All  stockholders  are  cordially  invited  to  attend  the  Annual  Meeting  in  person.  However,  to  ensure  your
representation at the Annual Meeting, you are urged to complete, sign, date and return, in the enclosed postage
paid  envelope,  the  enclosed  proxy  card  as  soon  as  possible.  Returning  your  proxy  will  help  us  assure  that  a
quorum will be present at the Annual Meeting and avoid the additional expense of duplicate proxy solicitations.
Any stockholder attending the Annual Meeting may vote in person, even if he or she has returned a proxy.
-1-
PETRO RIVER OIL CORP.
55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702
New York, NY 10003
Tel: (469) 828-3900
Fax: (212) 504-0863
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
To Be Held on September 20, 2016
Dear Stockholders of Petro River Oil Corp.:
We are pleased to invite you to attend the 2016 Annual Meeting (the “Annual Meeting”) of the Stockholders of Petro
River Oil Corp., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), which will be held at the Company’s New York office, located
at 55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702, New York, New York 10003, on September 20, 2016 at 11:00 AM Eastern Time, for the
following purposes:
 
1.  To elect four directors to our Board of Directors, each to serve until the next Annual Meeting of stockholders or until
his respective successor is elected and qualified;
2.  To approve a stockholder resolution to authorize the Board of Directors, in its sole and absolute discretion, without
further action of the stockholders, to amend our Certificate of Incorporation to implement a reverse stock split of the
issued and outstanding shares of our common stock, par value $0.00001 per share (“Common Stock”), at a ratio of
not less than 1-for-2, and not greater than 1-for-10, within one year from the date of the Annual Meeting, with the exact
ratio to be determined by the Board of Directors (the “Reverse Split”);
3.  To ratify the appointment of GHB CPAs, PC as the Company’s independent registered public accountants for the
fiscal year ending April 30, 2017; and
4.  Such other matters as may properly come before the Annual Meeting or any adjournment or postponement of the
Annual Meeting.
These matters are more fully discussed in the attached Proxy Statement.
 
The close of business on August 15, 2016 (the “Record Date”) has been fixed as the Record Date for the determination
of stockholders entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the Annual Meeting or any adjournments or postponements thereof.
Only holders of record of our Common Stock at the close of business on the Record Date are entitled to notice of, and to
vote at the Annual Meeting. A complete list of stockholders entitled to vote at the Annual Meeting will be available for
examination by any of our stockholders for purposes pertaining to the Annual Meeting at our New York office, 55 5th
Street, Suite 1702, New York, New York, during normal  business  hours  for  a  period  of  ten  days  prior  to  the  Annual
Meeting, and at the time and place of the Annual Meeting.  We are providing a copy of our Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended April 30, 2016 with the accompanying Proxy Statement.
    
Whether or not you expect to attend in person, we urge you to vote your shares as promptly as possible by signing and
returning the enclosed proxy card in the postage-paid envelope provided, so that your shares may be represented and
voted at the Annual Meeting. If your shares are held in the name of a bank, broker or other fiduciary, please follow the
instructions on the voting instruction card furnished by the record holder.
 
Our Board of Directors unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” the Annual Meeting Proposal Nos. 1, 2 and 3, all
of which are described in detail in the accompanying Proxy Statement.
IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING THE AVAILABILITY OF PROXY MATERIALS FOR THE STOCKHOLDER
MEETING TO BE HELD ON SEPTEMBER 20, 2016:
THE ANNUAL REPORT AND PROXY STATEMENT ARE AVAILABLE ONLINE AT:
WWW.PROXYCONNECT.COM/PETRORIVER
By Order of the Board of Directors,
 
 
Scot Cohen
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Chairman
New York, New York
August 16, 2016
-2-
PETRO RIVER OIL CORP.
55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702
New York, NY 10003
Tel: (469) 828-3900
Fax: (212) 504-0863
PROXY STATEMENT
GENERAL INFORMATION
This Proxy Statement and the accompanying proxy are being furnished with respect to the solicitation of proxies by the
Board of Directors (the “Board”) of Petro River Oil Corp., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), for the 2016 Annual
Meeting (the “Annual Meeting”) of Stockholders to be held at 11:00 AM Eastern Time on September 20, 2016 and at any
adjournment or adjournments thereof, at the Company’s New York office, located at 55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702, New
York, New York 10003.
 
These proxy solicitation materials were mailed on or about August 16, 2016, to all stockholders entitled to notice of, and
to  vote  at  our  Annual  Meeting.  The  proxy  materials  are  also  available  free  of  charge  on  the  Internet  at:
www.proxyconnect.com/petroriver
Stockholders  are  invited  to  attend  the  Annual  Meeting  to  vote  on  the  proposals  described  in  this  proxy  statement.
However, stockholders do not need to attend the Annual Meeting to vote. Instead, stockholders may simply complete,
sign and return the enclosed proxy card.
 
We will bear the expense of solicitation of proxies for the Annual Meeting, including the printing and mailing of this Proxy
Statement. We may request persons, and reimburse them for their expenses with respect thereto, who hold stock in their
name or custody or in the names of nominees for others to forward copies of such materials to those persons for whom
they  hold  shares  of  Common  Stock  (as  defined  below)  and  to  request  authority  for  the  execution  of  the  proxies.  In
addition, some of our officers, directors and employees, without additional compensation, may solicit proxies on behalf of
the Board of Directors personally or by mail, telephone or facsimile.
VOTING SECURITIES, VOTING AND PROXIES
Record Date
 
Only stockholders of record of our common stock, $0.00001 par value (the “Common Stock”), as of the close of business
on August 15, 2016 (the “Record Date”) are entitled to notice and to vote at the Annual Meeting and any adjournment or
adjournments thereof.
 
Voting Stock
 
As of the Record Date, there were 15,827,997 shares of Common Stock outstanding. Each holder of Common Stock on
the Record Date is entitled to one vote for each share then held on the matter to be voted at the Annual Meeting. No
other class of voting securities was then outstanding.
 
Quorum
 
The presence at the Annual Meeting of a majority of the outstanding shares of Common Stock as of the Record Date, in
person or by proxy, is required for a quorum. Should you submit a proxy, even though you abstain as to the proposal, or
you  are  present  in  person  at  the  Annual  Meeting,  your  shares  shall  be  counted  for  the  purpose  of  determining  if  a
quorum is present.
 
Broker “non-votes” are included for the purposes of determining whether a quorum of shares is present at the Annual
Meeting. A broker “non-vote” occurs when a nominee holder, such as a brokerage firm, bank or trust company, holding
shares of record for a beneficial owner, does not vote on a particular proposal because the nominee holder does not
have discretionary voting power with respect to that item and has not received voting instructions from the beneficial
owner.
-3-
Voting
The proposals set forth in this proxy statement require the following votes for approval at the Annual Meeting:
 
Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors. For the four nominees who receive the greatest number of votes cast at the Annual
Meeting by the shares present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote will be elected. For purposes of the Proposal
No. 1, abstentions and broker “non-votes” will have no effect on the outcome.
Proposal No. 2:  Reverse Stock Split.  For the approval of a stockholder resolution to authorize the Board, in its sole and
absolute discretion, without further action of the stockholders, to amend our Certificate of Incorporation to implement a
reverse stock split of the issued and outstanding shares of our Common Stock at a ratio of not less than 1-for-2 and not
greater than 1-for-10, within one year from the date of the Annual Meeting, with the exact ratio to be determined by the
Board  of  Directors  (the  “Reverse  Split”), the  number  of  votes  cast  “FOR”  must  exceed  the  number  of  votes  cast
“AGAINST” Proposal No. 2.
Proposal No. 3: Ratification of Appointment of Auditors. To ratify the appointment of GHB CPAs, PC as our independent
auditors for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2017, the number of votes cast “FOR” must exceed the number of votes cast
“AGAINST” Proposal No. 3.
 
If you are the beneficial owner, but not the registered holder of shares of Common Stock, you cannot directly vote those
shares at the Annual Meeting. You must provide voting instructions to your nominee holder, such as your brokerage firm
or bank.
 
If you wish to vote in person at the Annual Meeting but you are not the record holder, you must obtain from your record
holder a “legal proxy” issued in your name and bring it to the Annual Meeting.
 
At the Annual Meeting, ballots will be distributed with respect to the proposals to each stockholder (or the stockholder’s
proxy if not the management proxy holders) who is present and did not deliver a proxy to the management proxy holders
or another person. The ballots shall then be tallied, one vote for each share owned of record. For proposals one through
five, the votes will be in three categories: “FOR,” “AGAINST” or “ABSTAIN.”
 
Proxies
 
The form of proxy solicited by the Board affords you the ability to specify a choice among approval of, disapproval of, or
abstention with respect to, the matters to be acted upon at the Annual Meeting. Shares represented by the proxy will be
voted and, where the solicited stockholder indicates a choice with respect to the matter to be acted upon, the shares will
be voted as specified. If no choice is given, a properly executed proxy will be voted in favor of each of the nominees
identified in Proposal No.1 and in favor of Proposal Nos. 2 and 3.
 
Revocability of Proxies
 
Even if you execute a proxy, you retain the right to revoke it and change your vote by notifying us at any time before your
proxy is voted. Such revocation may be affected by execution of a later dated proxy, or by a written notice of revocation,
sent to the attention of the Executive Chairman at the address of our New York office set forth above in the Notice to this
Proxy Statement or your attendance and voting at the Annual Meeting. Unless so revoked, the shares represented by the
proxies, if received in time, will be voted in accordance with the directions given therein.
 
You are requested, regardless of the number of shares you own or your intention to attend the Annual Meeting, to sign
the proxy and return it promptly in the enclosed envelope.
 
Interest of Officers and Directors in Matters to Be Acted Upon
 
None of the officers or directors has any interest in the matters to be acted upon.
 
Dissenters’ Rights of Appraisal
Under the Delaware General Corporation Law and the Company’s Bylaws, stockholders are not entitled to any appraisal
or similar rights of dissenters with respect to any of the proposals to be acted upon at the Annual Meeting.
-4-
MATTERS TO BE CONSIDERED AT ANNUAL MEETING
PROPOSAL NO. 1
ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
General
 
The Company’s Board is currently comprised of four members. Vacancies on the Board may be filled by a vote of a
majority  of  the  remaining  directors,  although  less  than  a  quorum  is  present.  A  director  elected  by  the  Board  to  fill  a
vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of that director and until a successor is elected and qualified. This
includes vacancies created by an increase in the number of directors.
 
The Board has recommended that stockholders elect Scot Cohen, Glenn C. Pollack, John Wallace, and Fred Zeidman
(each, a “Nominee”). If elected at the Annual Meeting, these directors would serve until the end of their respective terms
and until their successors are elected and qualified, or until their earlier death, resignation or removal.
 
Directors are elected by a plurality of the votes present in person or represented by proxy and entitled to vote at the
Annual  Meeting.  Shares  represented  by  executed  proxies  will  be  voted,  if  authority  to  do  so  is  not  withheld,  for  the
election of Scot Cohen, Glenn C. Pollack, John Wallace, and Fred Zeidman. In the event that any Nominee should be
unavailable  for  election  as  a  result  of  an  unexpected  occurrence,  such  shares  will  be  voted  for  the  election  of  such
substitute  Nominee  as  the  Board  may  propose.  Each  of  Scot  Cohen,  Glenn  C.  Pollack,  John  Wallace,  and  Fred
Zeidman has agreed to serve if elected, and we have no reason to believe that they will be unable to serve.
Our directors and Nominees, their ages, biographies (including positions with the Company) and the dates of their initial
election or appointment as director are as follows:
Name
Scot Cohen
Served as
Director
Since
2012
Age
47
in
Principal Business Experience
Mr.  Cohen  has  over  20  years  of  experience 
institutional  asset
management, wealth management, and capital markets.  Scot is the founder
and principal of the Iroquois Capital Opportunity Fund, a closed end private
equity fund focused on investments in North American oil and gas assets.  He
is also the co-founder of Iroquois Capital, a New York based hedge fund.  In
addition,  he  manages  several  operating  and  non-operating  partnerships,
which actively invest in the energy sector.
 
Prior to founding Iroquois Capital, Scot founded a merchant bank based out of
New  York,  which  was  one  of  the  most  active  participants  in  structured
investments in public companies (PIPES) in the United States over the four
year period he was actively managing the business.  Scot began his career at
Oppenheimer and Company in a sales capacity and transitioned from there to
a boutique investment-banking firm where he spent two years. Scot currently
sits on the board of directors of True Drinks Holding, Inc. (OTCBB:  TRUU),
as well as several private companies, and is involved a number of charitable
ventures.  Scot earned a Bachelor of Science degree from Ohio University in
1991.
 
The  Board’s  Nomination  Committee  believes  Mr.  Cohen’s  extensive
investment banking experience advising oil and gas companies, as well as
Glenn C. Pollack
2012
58
-5-
John Wallace
2013
42
Fred Zeidman
2012
70
his  operational  expertise  developing  oil  and  gas  assets,  is  valuable  to  the
Board of Directors and its deliberations, and is particularly beneficial as the
Company continues to develop its oil and gas assets.
 
Mr. Pollack s a Managing Director and Founder of Candlewood Partners, LLC
(“Candlewood”),  a  merchant  bank  focused  on  middle  market  corporate
finance and infrastructure projects, and is the Manager of Green Bull Georgia
Partners,  LLC,  a  special  purpose  vehicle  controlled  by  Mr.  Pollack
established to purchase certain senior debt of Register Communications, Inc
(“Register”). In connection with the purchase of the senior debt, Mr. Pollack
became a director of Register, which filed for Chapter 11 protection under the
United  States  Bankruptcy  Code  in  December  2015.  Prior  to  founding
Candlewood, Mr. Pollack was a Managing Director and Principal of a middle
market  investment  banking  firm  with  offices  in  Chicago  and  Cleveland.  He
was  responsible  for  the  Restructuring  Group  and  was  involved  in  other
corporate finance transactions including mergers and acquisitions and capital
raising  for  special  situations.  He  also  spent  five  years  as  the  CEO  of  a
regional distributor of perishable foods with annual revenues of $180 million
and  over  250  employees  in  four  states.  Mr.  Pollack  is  a  certified  public
accountant  and  has  worked  for  Price  Waterhouse  as  a  consultant  and  for
Deloitte as an auditor.
 
The  Board’s  Nomination  Committee  believes  Mr.  Pollack’s  success  with
multiple 
the
investment community, his executive management experience and financial
and accounting expertise will assist the Company’s efforts to raise capital to
fund the continued implementation of the Company’s business plan.
firms,  his  extensive  contacts  within
investment  banking
team  aligned  with
Mr.  Wallace  graduated  from  Syracuse  University  in  May  1996  with  a
Bachelor’s  of  Science  degree  in  sociology.  From  June  1996  through  May
2004, Mr. Wallace was a professional basketball player associated with the
National Basketball Association. Since April 2009, Mr. Wallace has been an
alumni relations and fan development representative for the New York Knicks,
a  professional  basketball 
the  National  Basketball
Association. In that capacity, Mr. Wallace works on community public relations
and  fan  development  initiatives,  along  with  sponsorship  and  marketing
programs. In January 2013, Mr. Wallace joined Hotaling Insurance Group as
an  insurance  agent.  In  February  2013,  Mr.  Wallace  became  an  Executive
Board Member of Heavenly Productions Foundation, a not for profit charitable
organization  dedicated  to  helping  children  in  need  or  in  distress.  Since
October 2007, Mr. Wallace has served as Vice President of Winning Because
I Tried, a non-profit he co-founded in 2007, and whose focus is on academic
success,  social  interaction,  peer  pressure  awareness,  and  sound  decision-
making for children ages 8-18. Since 2006, Mr. Wallace has been President
and General Manager of Rochester AAU Basketball, a program he founded in
March  2006,  which  is  designed  to  leverage  sports  as  a  means  for  youth  to
obtain a college education.
 
The Board’s Nomination Committee believes that Mr. Wallace brings effective
management and leadership skills to the Board of Directors, which assists the
Board and management in in developing its organization and business plan.
 
Mr. Zeidman has served as Director of the Company since September of 2012.
Mr.  Zeidman  has  also  served  as  a  director  of  Hyperdynamics  Corporation
since 2009 and as a director of Prosperity Bancshares, Inc. since 1986. He
served  as  trustee  for  the  AremisSoft  Liquidating  Trust  since  2004.  In  March
2008,  Mr.  Zeidman  was  appointed  the  Interim  President  of  Nova  Biosource
Fuels,  Inc.  (“Nova”),  a  publicly  traded  biodiesel  technology  company,  and
served in that position until the company’s acquisition in November 2009. Mr.
Zeidman also served as a director of Nova from June 2007 to November 2009.
From  August  2009  through  November  2009,  Mr.  Zeidman  served  as  Chief
Restructuring  Officer  for  Transmeridian  Exploration,  Inc.  He  also  served  as
CEO, President and Chairman of the Board of Seitel Inc., an oil field services
company, from June 2002 until its sale in February 2007. Mr. Zeidman served
as a Managing Director of the law firm Greenberg Traurig, LLP from July 2003
to  December  2008.  Mr.  Zeidman  has  served  as  CEO,  Interim  CEO  and
Chairman of the Board of a variety of companies, including several in the oil
and gas sector. In March 2013, Mr. Zeidman was appointed to the Board of
Straight Path Communications Inc. Mr. Zeidman is the Chairman Emeritus of
the  United  States  Holocaust  Memorial  Council.  He  was  appointed  to  that
position  by  former  President  George  Bush  in  March  2002  and  served  from
2002-2010. He is also Chairman Emeritus of the University of Texas Health
Science System Houston and is on the Board of Trustees of the Texas Heart
Institute  (where  he  currently  serves  as  Interim  Chief  Financial  Officer).  Mr.
Zeidman received his Bachelor of Science from Washington University and a
Masters of Business Administration from New York University.
 
The  Board’s  Nomination  Committee  believes  that  Mr.  Zeidman’s  extensive
experience as an executive in senior management positions, including with oil
and  gas  exploration,  oil  services  and  related  companies,  together  with  his
legal  and  board  experience,  add  significant  value  to  the  Company  and  its
Board of Directors in assessing challenges and in addressing organizational
and development issues facing the Company.
There are no family relationships between any directors and executive officers.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE, BOARD COMPOSITION AND BOARD COMMITTEES
Term of Office
 
Pursuant to our bylaws, each member of our Board of Directors shall serve from the time they are duly elected and
qualified, until the next Annual Meeting of stockholders or their until death, resignation or removal from office.
Board of Directors Meetings and Committees
 
The Board held nine meetings during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016. Each director attended, either in person or
telephonically,  at  least  75%  of  the  aggregate  Board  of  Directors  meetings  and  meetings  of  committees  on  which  he
served during his tenure as a director or committee member.
 
 
-6-
Audit Committee
 
Our  Audit  Committee  currently  consists  of  three  directors,  Glenn  Pollack,  Fred  Zeidman  and  John  Wallace,  each  of
whom are “independent” as independence is currently defined in the NASDAQ Stock Market Rules and SEC rules and
regulations. The Board has determined that Glenn Pollack qualifies as an “Audit Committee financial expert,” as defined
in applicable SEC rules implementing Section 407 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. The Board made a qualitative
assessment  of  Mr.  Pollack’s  level  of  knowledge  and  experience  based  on  a  number  of  factors,  including  his  formal
education and experience. The Audit Committee held three meetings during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016.
The Audit Committee is responsible for overseeing the Company’s corporate accounting, financial reporting practices,
audits of financial statements and the quality and integrity of the Company’s financial statements and reports. In addition,
the  Audit  Committee  oversees  the  qualifications,  independence  and  performance  of  the  Company’s  independent
auditors.  In  furtherance  of  these  responsibilities,  the  Audit  Committee’s  duties  include  the  following:  evaluating  the
performance  of  and  assessing  the  qualifications  of  the  independent  auditors;  determining  and  approving  the
engagement  of  the  independent  auditors  to  perform  audit,  review  and  attest  services  and  performing  any  proposed
permissible  non-audit  services;  evaluating  employment  by  the  Company  of  individuals  formerly  employed  by  the
independent  auditors  and  engaged  on  the  Company’s  account  and  any  conflicts  or  disagreements  between  the
independent auditors and management regarding financial reporting, accounting practices or policies; discussing with
management and the independent auditors the results of the annual audit; reviewing the financial statements proposed
to  be  included  in  the  Company’s  annual  report  on  Form  10-K;  discussing  with  management  and  the  independent
auditors the results of the auditors’ review of the Company’s quarterly financial statements; conferring with management
and  the  independent  auditors  regarding  the  scope,  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of  internal  auditing  and  financial
reporting controls and procedures; and establishing procedures for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints
regarding accounting, internal accounting control and auditing matters and the confidential and anonymous submission
by employees of concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters. The Audit Committee operates under
the written Audit Committee Charter adopted by the Unanimous Written Consent. A copy of the Audit Committee Charter
is available on the Company’s website.
 
Compensation Committee
 
Our Compensation Committee is currently comprised of two directors, Glenn Pollack and Fred Zeidman, each of whom
is  independent  as  independence  is  currently  defined  in  the  NASDAQ  Stock  Market  Rules  and  SEC  rules  and
regulations. The Compensation Committee held two meeting during the year ended April 30, 2016.
The Compensation Committee reviews, and as it deems appropriate, recommends to the Board, policies, practices, and
procedures relating to the compensation of the officers and other managerial employees, and the establishment and
administration of employee benefit plans. It advises and consults with the officers of the Company as may be requested
regarding managerial personnel policies. The Compensation Committee also has such additional powers as may be
conferred upon it from time to time by the Board.
The Compensation Committee operates under the written Compensation Committee Charter that was adopted by the
Unanimous Written Consent. A copy of the Compensation Committee Charter is available on the Company’s website.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee  
 
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee is currently comprised of two directors, Glenn Pollack and Fred
Zeidman, each of who is independent as independence is currently defined in the NASDAQ Stock Market Rules and
SEC rules and regulations. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee held one meeting during the year
ended April 30, 2016.
The  Nominating  and  Corporate  Governance  Committee  is  responsible  for  making  recommendations  to  the  Board  of
Directors regarding candidates for directorships and the size and composition of the Board. In addition, the Nominating
and Corporate Governance Committee is responsible for overseeing our corporate governance guidelines and reporting
and making recommendations to the Board concerning corporate governance matters.
Board Nominations
 
In lieu of a formal Board Nomination Committee, Board nomination decisions are made by the independent directors of
the Board. The independent directors prepare a list of candidates to fill the expiring terms of directors serving on our
Board, which they then submit to the Board who determines which candidates will be nominated to serve on the Board.
The  names  of  nominees  are  then  submitted  for  election  at  our  Annual  Meeting  of  Stockholders.  The  independent
directors also submit to the entire Board a list of nominees to fill any interim vacancies on the Board resulting from the
departure of a member of the Board for any reason prior to the expiration of his term. In recommending nominees, the
independent  directors  are  to  consider  various  criteria,  including  general  business  experience,  general  financial
experience, knowledge of the Company’s industry (including past industry experience), education, and demonstrated
character and judgment. The independent directors will also consider director nominees recommended by a stockholder
if the stockholder mails timely notice to the Secretary of the Company at its principal offices. Any person nominated by a
stockholder for election to the Board will be evaluated based on the same criteria as all other nominees.
Code of Ethics
Our current Code of Ethics became effective July 3, 2013. A copy of our Code of Ethics an exhibit to our Transition
Report on Form 10-K, filed on August 28, 2013. The Code of Ethics applies to all officers, directors, and employees of
the Company.
 
 
-7-
Indemnification of Officers and Directors
As permitted by the Delaware General Corporation Law, the Company will indemnify its directors and officers against
expenses  and  liabilities  they  incur  to  defend,  settle,  or  satisfy  any  civil  or  criminal  action  brought  against  them  on
account of their being or having been Company directors or officers unless, in any such action, they are adjudged to
have acted with gross negligence or willful misconduct.
 
Stockholder Communications with the Board of Directors
    
Our Board of Directors provides stockholders with the ability to send communications to the Board of Directors, and
stockholders may do so at their convenience. In particular, stockholders may send their communications to: Board of
Directors, c/o Corporate Secretary, Petro River Oil Corp., 55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702, New York, New York 10003. All
communications received by the Corporate Secretary are relayed to the Board of Directors of the Company. Members of
the Board of Directors are not required to attend the Annual Stockholders Meeting.
 
Required Vote and Recommendation
 
The election of directors requires the affirmative vote of a plurality of the voting shares present or represented by proxy
and entitled to vote at the Annual Meeting. The four nominees receiving the highest number of affirmative votes will be
elected. Unless otherwise instructed or unless authority to vote is withheld, shares represented by executed proxies will
be voted “FOR” the election of the nominees.
The Board of Directors recommends that the stockholders vote “FOR” the election of Messrs. Cohen, Pollack, Wallace
and Zeidman.
-8-
PROPOSAL NO. 2
AMENDMENT TO OUR CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION
TO IMPLEMENT A REVERSE STOCK SPLIT
General
 
We are asking you to approve a proposal to authorize our Board, in its sole and absolute discretion, to effect a reverse
stock split of the issued and outstanding shares of our Common Stock at a specific ratio, ranging from one-for-two (1:2) to
one-for-ten  (1:10)  (the  “Approved  Split  Ratios”),  to  be  determined  by  the  Board  (the  “Reverse  Split”).  A  vote  for  this
Proposal No. 2 will constitute approval of the Reverse Split that, once authorized by the Board and affected by filing an
amendment  to  the  Company’s  Certificate  of  Incorporation  with  the  Delaware  Division  of  Corporations  (the
“Amendment”), will combine between two and ten shares of our Common Stock into one share of Common Stock. If
implemented, the Reverse Split will have the effect of decreasing the number of shares of our Common Stock issued
and outstanding, but will not decrease the number of shares authorized for issuance by our Certificate of Incorporation. 
 
If this Proposal No. 2 is approved by stockholders, the Board will have the authority, but not the obligation, in its sole and
absolute discretion, and without further action on the part of the stockholders, to select one of the Approved Split Ratios
and effect the Reverse Split by filing the Amendment with the Delaware Division of Corporations. If the Amendment has
not been filed with the Delaware Division of Corporations within one year from the date of the Annual Meeting, the Board
will abandon the Reverse Split.
  
The text of the proposed Amendment to affect the Reverse Split is included as Appendix A to this Proxy Statement. Such
text is however subject to revision for such changes as may be required by the Delaware Division of Corporations, or
other changes consistent with this Proposal No. 2 that we may deem necessary or appropriate.
Purpose of the Reverse Split
We have applied for listing of our Common Stock on the NASDAQ Capital Market (“NASDAQ”) under the symbol
“PTRC,” and our primary objective in proposing the Reverse Split is to attempt to raise the per share trading price of our
Common Stock to satisfy the NASDAQ listing requirement that our Common Stock have a minimum bid price of $3.00
per share. On August 15, 2016, the closing bid price of our Common Stock was $1.59 per share, as reported on the OTC
Pink Marketplace.
 
We anticipate that the Reverse Split will increase the per share bid price per share of our Common Stock above $3.00.
However, we cannot be certain that the Reverse Split will, initially or in the future, have the intended effect of raising the
bid  price  of  our  Common  Stock  above  $3.00  per  share,  or  that  a  listing  of  our  Common  Stock  on  NASDAQ  will  be
achieved in a timely manner or at all.
 
In addition to our desire to be listed on NASDAQ, the Board believes that the current market price of our Common Stock
may  impair  our  marketability  and  acceptance  by  institutional  investors  and  other  members  of  the  investing  public.
Theoretically,  decreasing  the  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  outstanding  should  not,  by  itself,  affect  the
marketability  of  the  shares,  the  type  of  investor  who  would  be  interested  in  acquiring  them,  or  our  reputation  in  the
financial  community.  In  practice,  however,  many  investors  and  market  makers  consider  low-priced  stocks  as  unduly
speculative in nature and, as a matter of policy, avoid investment and trading in such stocks. The presence of these
negative perceptions may adversely affect not only the pricing of our Common Stock but also the trading liquidity. In
addition, these perceptions may affect our commercial business and our ability to raise additional capital through equity
and debt financings.
  
We expect that the decrease in the number of issued and outstanding shares of our Common Stock after the Reverse
Split, and the anticipated increase in the per share trading price will encourage greater interest in our Common Stock
among members of the financial community and the investing public, and possibly create a more liquid market for our
stockholders. However, the possibility exists that stockholder liquidity may be adversely affected by the reduced number
of shares outstanding if the Reverse Split is affected, particularly if the price per share of our Common Stock begins a
declining trend after the Reverse Split takes effect.
Determination of the Ratio for the Reverse Stock Split
 
If this Proposal No. 2 is approved by stockholders and the Board decides to move forward with the Reverse Split, the
Approved Split Ratio will be selected by the Board, in its sole discretion. However, the ratio will not be less than a ratio
of one-for-two (1:2) or exceed a ratio of one-for-ten (1:10). In determining which Approved Split Ratio to use, the Board
will  consider  numerous  factors,  including  the  historical  and  projected  performance  of  our  Common  Stock,  prevailing
market conditions and general economic trends, and will place emphasis on the expected closing price of our Common
Stock  in  the  period  following  the  effectiveness  of  the  Reverse  Split.  The  Board  will  also  consider  the  impact  of  the
Reverse  Split  ratio  on  investor  interest.  The  purpose  of  selecting  a  range  is  to  give  the  Board  the  flexibility  to  meet
business  needs  as  they  arise,  to  take  advantage  of  favorable  opportunities  and  to  respond  to  a  changing  corporate
environment. Based on the number of shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding as of the Record Date, after
completion  of  the  Reverse  Split,  we  will  have  approximately  between  7,913,999  and  1,582,800  shares  of  Common
Stock issued and outstanding, depending on the Approved Split Ratio selected by the Board of Directors. 
 
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  approximate  number  of  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  Common  Stock,  and
estimated per share trading price following a 1:2 to 1:10 Reverse Split. In any of the following scenarios, we will continue
to have 150.0 million shares authorized for issuance.
Common Stock issued and
outstanding
Price per share, based on the
After a 1:2
Reverse
After a 1:4
Reverse
After a 1:6
Reverse
After a 1:8
Reverse
After a 1:10
Reverse
Current
Split
Split
Split
Split
Split
15,827,997     7,913,999      3,956,999      2,637,200      1,978,500      1,582,800
closing price of our Common
Stock on August 15, 2016
$1.59
$3.18
$6.36
$9.54
$12.72
$15.90
We  do  not  anticipate  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  holders  of  record  of  our  Common  Stock  in  the  event  the  Board
determines to implement the Reverse Split, including in the event the Approved Split Ratio selected by the Board is one-
for-ten (1:10).
 
 
-9-
Effects of the Reverse Split
 
If this Proposal No. 2 is approved by our stockholders at the Annual Meeting and our Board elects to implement the
Reverse Split, the principal effect will be to proportionately decrease the number of issued and outstanding shares of
Common Stock based on the Approved Split Ratio selected by the Board. Our shares of Common Stock are currently
registered under Section 12(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”), and the Company is thus
subject  to  the  periodic  reporting  and  other  requirements  of  the  Exchange  Act.  The  Reverse  Split  will  not  affect  the
registration  of  the  Common  Stock  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  or  on  the  OTC  Pink  Marketplace,
where  our  Common  Stock  is  currently  quoted.  Following  the  Reverse  Split,  our  Common  Stock  will  receive  a  new
CUSIP number.
 
Proportionate voting rights and other rights of the holders of shares of the Company’s Common Stock will not be affected
by the Reverse Split, other than as a result of the treatment of fractional shares as described below. For example, a
holder of 2% of the voting power of the outstanding shares immediately prior to the effectiveness of the Reverse Split will
generally continue to hold 2% of the voting power of the outstanding Common Stock after the Reverse Split. The number
of stockholders of record will not be affected by a Reverse Split, other than as a result of the treatment of fractional
shares as described below.
Effective  Date. A  Reverse  Split  would  become  effective  on  the  date  of  filing  of  the  Amendment  with  the  Delaware
Division  of  Corporations.  On  the  effective  date,  shares  of  Common  Stock  issued  and  outstanding  and  the  shares  of
Common Stock held in treasury will be combined and converted, automatically and without any action on the part of the
stockholders, into new shares of Common Stock in accordance with the Approved Split Ratio selected by the Board.
Increase of Authorized Common Stock. If implemented, the Reverse Split will have the effect of reducing the number of
shares  of  our  Common  Stock  issued  and  outstanding,  without  reducing  the  total  number  of  authorized  shares  of
Common Stock. As a result, approval of this Proposal No. 2 will give the Board the ability to effectively increase the
number  of  authorized  but  unissued  shares  of  our  Common  Stock.  This  would  give  us  the  ability  to  issue  additional
shares of Common Stock, or securities convertible or exercisable into shares of Common Stock, without stockholder
approval.  The  Company  currently  does  not  have  any  plans  to  issue  additional  shares  of  Common  Stock,  or  shares
convertible or exercisable into shares of Common Stock in the event this Proposal No. 2 is approved, and the Reverse
Split is implemented.
Treatment  of  Fractional  Shares. No  fractional  shares  will  be  issued  if,  as  a  result  the  Reverse  Split,  a  registered
stockholder  would  otherwise  become  entitled  to  a  fractional  share.  Instead,  stockholders  who  would  otherwise  be
entitled to receive fractional shares because they hold a number of shares not evenly divisible by the selected Approved
Split Ratio will automatically be entitled to receive an additional share of the Company’s Common Stock. In other words,
any fractional share will be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
Effect  on  the  Company’s  2012  Equity  Incentive  Plan. As of August 15, 2016, the Company had 2,256,950 shares of
Common  Stock  subject  to  stock  options  outstanding  under  the  Company’s  2012  Equity  Incentive  Plan  (the  “Plan”).
Should the Reverse Split be implemented, proportionate adjustments will be made to the number of shares outstanding
and available for issuance under the Plan following the Reverse Split and to the exercise price, grant price or purchase
price relating to any award under the Plan. The Board will determine the treatment of fractional shares subject to stock
options under the Plan.
Effect on Registered  and  Beneficial  Stockholders.  In  the  event  the  Reverse  Split  is  implemented,  we  intend  to  treat
stockholders holding shares of Common Stock in “street name,” through a bank, broker or other nominee, in the same
manner as registered stockholders whose shares are registered in their names. Banks, brokers or other nominees will
be instructed to affect the Reverse Split for their beneficial holders of common stock in “street name.” However, these
banks, brokers or other nominees may apply their own specific procedures for processing the Reverse Split. If you hold
your shares with a bank, broker or other nominee, and if you have any questions in this regard, we encourage you to
contact your nominee.
Book-Entry  Shares. If a Reverse Split is effectuated, stockholders who hold uncertificated shares (i.e., shares held in
book-entry form and not represented by a physical share certificate), either as direct or beneficial owners, will have their
holdings  electronically  adjusted  automatically  by  the  Company’s  transfer  agent  (and,  for  beneficial  owners,  by  their
brokers or banks that hold in “street name” for their benefit, as the case may be) to give effect to the Reverse Split.
 
Stockholders who hold uncertificated shares as direct owners will be sent a statement of holding from the Company’s
transfer agent that indicates the number of shares owned in book-entry form.
 
Certificated Shares. If a Reverse Split is effectuated, stockholders holding certificated shares (i.e., shares represented by
one or more physical share certificates) may receive a transmittal letter from the Company’s transfer agent promptly after
the  effectiveness  of  the  Reverse  Split.  Any  transmittal  letter  will  be  accompanied  by  instructions  specifying  how
stockholders holding certificated shares can exchange certificates representing the pre-split shares for a statement of
holding.
 
Beginning after the effectiveness of the Reverse Split, each certificate representing pre-split shares will be deemed for
all corporate purposes to evidence ownership of post-split Common Stock.
 
 
-10-
STOCKHOLDERS SHOULD NOT DESTROY ANY PRE-SPLIT STOCK CERTIFICATE AND SHOULD NOT SUBMIT
ANY CERTIFICATES UNTIL THEY ARE REQUESTED TO DO SO.
Certain Risk Factors Associated with the Reverse Split
Reduced Market Capitalization. As noted above, the principal purpose of the Reverse Split will be to raise the per share
price  of  our  Common  Stock  to  meet  the  NASDAQ  listing  requirements.    We  cannot  assure  you,  however,  that  the
Reverse  Split,  if  implemented,  will  accomplish  this  objective.  While  we  expect  that  the  reduction  in  our  outstanding
shares of Common Stock will increase the market price of our Common Stock, we cannot assure you that the Reverse
Split will increase the market price of our Common Stock by a multiple equal to the number of pre-Reverse Split shares,
or  result  in  any  permanent  increase  in  the  market  price,  which  can  be  dependent  upon  many  factors,  including  our
business and financial performance and prospects. Should the market price decline after implementation of the Reverse
Split, the percentage decline may be greater, due to the smaller number of shares outstanding, than it would have been
prior to the Reverse Split. In some cases the share price of companies that have implemented reverse stock splits has
subsequently declined back to pre-reverse split levels. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that the market price of our
Common Stock immediately after the Reverse Split takes effect will be maintained for any period of time or that the ratio
of post and pre-split shares will remain the same after the Reverse Split is effected, or that the Reverse Split will not
have an adverse effect on our stock price due to the reduced number of shares outstanding after the Reverse Split. A
reverse stock split is often viewed negatively by the market and, consequently, can lead to a decrease in our overall
market capitalization. If the per share price does not increase proportionately as a result of the Reverse Split, then our
overall market capitalization will be reduced.
Increased Transaction Costs. The number of shares held by each individual stockholder will be reduced if the Reverse
Split is implemented. This will increase the number of stockholders who hold less than a “round lot,” or 100 shares.
Typically, the transaction costs to stockholders selling “odd lots” are higher on a per share basis.  Consequently, the
Reverse Split could increase the transaction costs to existing stockholders in the event they wish to sell all or a portion of
their position.
Liquidity. Although the Board of Directors believes that the decrease in the number of shares of our Common
Stock outstanding as a consequence of the Reverse Split and the anticipated increase in the price of our Common Stock
could encourage interest in our Common Stock and possibly promote greater liquidity for our stockholders, such liquidity
could also be adversely effected by the reduced number of shares outstanding after the Reverse Split.
Reservation of Right to Abandon the Reverse Split
 
We reserve the right to abandon the Reverse Split without further action by our stockholders at any time before the filing
of the Amendment, even if our stockholders authorize the Reverse Split at the Annual Meeting. By voting in favor of the
Reverse Split, you are expressly authorizing the Board of Directors to determine not to proceed with, and abandon, the
Reverse Split if it should so decide.
 
Accounting Matters
 
The Reverse Split will not change total stockholders’ equity on our balance sheet. However, because the par value of
our Common Stock will remain unchanged after the Reverse Split, the components that make up total stockholders’
equity  will  change  by  offsetting  amounts.  Depending  on  the  Approved  Split  Ratio  selected  by  the  Board,  our  stated
capital component will be reduced to an amount between one-half (1/2) and one-tenth (1/10) of its present amount, and
our additional paid-in capital component will be increased with the amount by which the stated capital is reduced. The
per share net income or loss and net book value of our Common Stock will be increased because there will be fewer
shares of our Common Stock outstanding. In addition, our historical amounts of net income or loss per share of Common
Stock previously reported by us, as well as all references to Common Stock share amounts, will be restated to reflect the
Reverse Split as if it had been in effect as of the earliest reported period.
No Appraisal Rights
 
Under  the  Delaware  General  Corporation  Law,  stockholders  are  not  entitled  to  dissenters’  rights  of  appraisal  with
respect  to  the  proposed  Amendment  to  our  Certificate  of  Incorporation  to  effect  a  Reverse  Split,  and  we  will  not
independently provide our stockholders with any such right.
 
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences
 
The following discussion summarizes certain material U.S. federal income tax consequences relating to the participation
in the Reverse Split by a U.S. stockholder that holds the shares as a capital asset. This discussion is based on the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), final, temporary and proposed U.S. Treasury
regulations promulgated thereunder and current administrative rulings and judicial decisions, all as in effect as of the
date hereof. All of these authorities may be subject to differing interpretations or repealed, revoked or modified, possibly
with retroactive effect, which could materially alter the tax consequences set forth herein.
 
For purposes of this summary, a “U.S. stockholder” refers to a beneficial owner of Common Stock who is any of the
following for U.S. federal income tax purposes: (i) a citizen or resident of the United States, (ii) a corporation created or
organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof, or the District of Columbia, (iii) an estate the
income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source, or (iv) a trust if (z) its administration is
subject to the primary supervision of a court within the United States and one or more U.S. persons have the authority to
control all of its substantial decisions, or (y) it has a valid election in effect under applicable U.S. Treasury regulations to
be treated as a U.S. person. A non-U.S. holder of Common Stock is a stockholder who is not a U.S. stockholder.
 
 
-11-
This summary does not represent a detailed description of the U.S. federal income tax consequences to a stockholder in
light of his, her or its particular circumstances. In addition, it does not purport to be complete and does not address all
aspects of federal income taxation that may be relevant to stockholders in light of their particular circumstances or to
stockholder  that  may  be  subject  to  special  tax  rules,  including,  without  limitation:  (i)  stockholders  subject  to  the
alternative minimum tax; (ii) banks, insurance companies, or other financial institutions; (iii) tax-exempt organizations;
(iv) dealers in securities or commodities; (v) regulated investment companies or real estate investment trusts; (vi) traders
in  securities  that  elect  to  use  a  mark-to-market  method  of  accounting  for  their  securities  holdings;  (vii)  foreign
stockholders  or  U.S.  stockholders  whose  “functional  currency”  is  not  the  U.S.  dollar;  (viii)  persons  holding  Common
Stock as a position in a hedging transaction, “straddle,” “conversion transaction” or other risk reduction transaction; (ix)
persons who acquire shares of Common Stock in connection with employment or other performance of services; (x)
dealers and other stockholders that do not own their shares of Common Stock as capital assets; (xii) U.S. expatriates,
(xii) foreign entities; or (xiii) non-resident alien individuals. Moreover, this description does not address the U.S. federal
estate and gift tax, alternative minimum tax, or other tax consequences of the Reverse Split.
 
There can be no assurance that the IRS will not take a contrary position to the tax consequences described herein or
that such position will be sustained by a court. In addition, U.S. tax laws are subject to change, possibly with retroactive
effect, which may result in U.S. federal income tax considerations different from those summarized below. No opinion of
counsel  or  ruling  from  the  IRS  has  been  obtained  with  respect  to  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  of  the
Reverse Split.
 
This  discussion  is  for  general  information  only  and  is  not  tax  advice.  All  stockholders  should  consult  their  own  tax
advisors with respect to the U.S. federal, state, local and non-U.S. tax consequences of the Reverse Split.
 
Based on the assumption that the Reverse Split will constitute a tax-free reorganization within the meaning of Section
368(a)(1)(E) of the Code, and subject to the limitations and qualifications set forth in this discussion and the discussion
below  regarding  the  treatment  of  cash  paid  in  lieu  of  fractional  shares,  the  following  U.S.  federal  income  tax
consequences should result from a Reverse Split:
 
  ●   A stockholder should not recognize gain or loss in the Reverse Split;
the aggregate tax basis of the post-Reverse Split shares should be equal to the aggregate tax basis of the pre-
Reverse Split shares; and
●
●
the holding period of the post-Reverse Split shares should include the holding period of the pre-Reverse Split
shares.
THE  PRECEDING  DISCUSSION  IS  INTENDED  ONLY  AS  A  SUMMARY  OF  CERTAIN  FEDERAL  INCOME  TAX
CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVERSE SPLIT AND DOES NOT PURPORT TO BE A COMPLETE ANALYSIS OR
DISCUSSION OF ALL POTENTIAL TAX EFFECTS RELEVANT THERETO. YOU SHOULD CONSULT YOUR OWN
TAX  ADVISORS  AS  TO  THE  PARTICULAR  FEDERAL,  STATE,  LOCAL,  FOREIGN  AND  OTHER  TAX
CONSEQUENCES OF THE REVERSE SPLIT IN LIGHT OF YOUR SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES.
Vote Required for Approval
The affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of our Common Stock entitled to vote at the
Annual  Meeting  is  required  to  approve  this  Proposal  No.  2.  Abstentions  will  have  the  same  effect  as  shares  voted
against this proposal.
Board of Directors Recommendation
The Board recommends that you vote “FOR” the grating the Board authorization to amend our Certificate of Incorporation
to implement a Reverse Split of our Common Stock at a ratio of between 1-for-2 and 1-for-10.
-12-
PROPOSAL NO. 3
RATIFICATION OF THE APPOINTMENT OF
GHB CPAs, PC TO SERVE AS OUR
REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM FOR THE CURRENT FISCAL YEAR
The Board of Directors has appointed GBH CPAs, PC (“GBH”) as our independent registered public accounting firm for
the current fiscal year and hereby recommends that the stockholders ratify such appointment.
The  Board  of  Directors  may  terminate  the  appointment  of  GBH  as  the  Company’s  independent  registered  public
accounting  firm  without  the  approval  of  the  stockholders  whenever  the  Board  of  Directors  deems  such  termination
necessary or appropriate.
 
 Representatives of GBH will be present at the Annual Meeting, or available by telephone, and will have an opportunity
to make a statement if they so desire and to respond to appropriate questions from stockholders.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
 
Our  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm  for  the  year  ended  April  30,  2016  was  GBH,  and  Marcum  LLP
(“Marcum”) for the year ended April 30, 2015. Set forth below are the aggregate fees we were billed or expected to be
billed  by  GBH  and  Marcum,  respectively,  for  professional  services  rendered  for  the  years  ended  April  30,  2016  and
2015.
 
Audit Fees
During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016, the fees for GBH were approximately $28,750, as compared to $112,000
billed by Marcum for the year ended April 30, 2015.
Tax Fees
 
During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016, the fees paid to GHB for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning were
$0, as compared to $110,500 paid to Marcum for similar services during the year ended April 30, 2015.
All Other Fees
During the fiscal years ended April 30, 2016 and April 30, 2015 there were no fees billed for products and services
provided by either GBH or Marcum, other than those set forth above.
The Audit Committee has reviewed the above fees for non-audit services and believes such fees are compatible with the
independent registered public accountants’ independence.
Required Vote and Recommendation
 
Ratification of the selection of GBH as the Company’s independent auditors for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2017
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares present or represented by proxy and entitled to vote at the Annual
Meeting. Under the Delaware General Corporation Law and the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws, an
abstention will have the same legal effect as a vote against the ratification of GHB, and each broker non-vote will reduce
the  absolute  number,  but  not  the  percentage,  of  affirmative  votes  necessary  for  approval  of  the  ratification.  Unless
otherwise instructed on the proxy or unless authority to vote is withheld, shares represented by executed proxies will be
voted “FOR” the ratification of GHB as the Company’s independent auditors for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2017.
 
The Board of Directors recommends that stockholders vote “FOR” the ratification of the selection of GBH CPAs, PC as
the Company’s independent auditors for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2017.
 
 
-13-
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
 
The following table sets forth information regarding the executive officers of the Company:
Name
Scot Cohen
Stephen Brunner
David Briones
58
Age
47
40
Title
  Executive Chairman
  President
  Chief Financial Officer
Scot Cohen. Mr. Cohen’s biography appears on p. 8 of this Proxy Statement, under Proposal No.1.
Stephen Brunner was appointed President on October 30, 2015.  Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Brunner served as
President and Chief Executive Officer of Sanchez Production Partners LLC (NYSE MKT: SPP), formerly Constellation
Energy Partners LLC (“Sanchez Production”), from March 2008 until March 2015, and served as a member of the board
of managers of Sanchez Production from December 2008 until August 2011. Mr. Brunner also served as Vice President
for Constellation Energy Commodities Group, Inc. from February 2008 to January 2009. Mr. Brunner holds a B.S. in
Petroleum Engineering from Louisiana Tech University.
David Briones.  Mr.  Briones  was  appointed  Chief  Financial  Officer  on  August  15,  2013.  Since  October  1,  2010,  Mr.
Briones has acted as the managing member of Brio Financial Group, LLC, a financial reporting consulting firm. From
January 2006 through September 2010, Mr. Briones had managed the public company and hedge fund practices at
Bartolomei  Pucciarelli,  LLC  (“BP”).  Within  that  capacity,  Mr.  Briones  performed  audit  services,  outsourced  CFO
functions, and/or consulted clients through difficult SEC comment periods particularly through application of complex
accounting principles for a vast public company client base. BP is a registered firm with the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board. BP is an independent member of the BDO Seidman Alliance. Mr. Briones served as the chief financial
officer of NXT Nutritionals Holdings, Inc. from February 2, 2009 to May 15, 2012. Mr. Briones also served as the chief
financial officer of Clear-Lite Holdings, Inc. from August 3, 2009 to March 21, 2011. Prior to joining BP, Mr. Briones was
an auditor with PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in New York, New York. Mr. Briones specialized in the financial services
group, and most notably worked on the MONY Group, Prudential Financial, and MetLife initial public offerings.
 
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
 
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires the Company’s directors, executive officers
and persons who own more than 10% of a registered class of the Company’s equity securities, to file with the SEC initial
reports of ownership and reports of changes in ownership of Common Stock and other equity securities of the Company.
Directors, officers and greater than 10% stockholders are required to furnish the Company with copies of all Section
16(a) forms they file.
 
To the Company’s knowledge, based solely on a review of the copies of such reports furnished to the Company, with
respect to the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016, all officers, directors and beneficial owners of more than 10% of our
common stock have filed their initial statements of ownership on Form 3 on a timely basis, and the officers, directors and
beneficial owners of more than 10% of our common stock have also filed the required Forms 4 or 5 on a timely basis.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Summary Compensation Table
The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation paid to the Company’s Executive Chairman, and
the Company’s two most highly compensated executive officers other than its Executive Chairman, who were serving as
executive  officers  as  of  April  30,  2016  and  whose  annual  compensation  exceeded  $100,000  during  such  year
(collectively the “Named Executive Officers”).
Bonus
Stock
$
awards $
Option
awards
$ (1)
Nonequity
Nonqualified
Deferred
All other
Incentive plan
  
compensation $
compensation 
Earnings $
compensation
Year
Ended
 
April 30  Salary $
Name and
Principal
Position
Scot Cohen,
Executive
Chairman(2)   2016    219,000   
 
   2015    120,000   
Stephen
Brunner,
President(3)   2016     25,000     
 
David
Briones,
CFO
 
 
(1)
2016     60,000   
   2015     94,000
2015
--
--   
--
---   1,028,947   
--    401,245
--
--
29,974   
--
--   
--
--   
--
--   
1,022
--   
--
--
--   
--
--   
--
--
--   
--
$
Total $
--   1,247,947 
--    521,245
--
54,974 
--
--   
--
60,000 
95,022
“Option  awards”  include  the  expense  recorded  for  all  options  granted  by  us  as  compensation  for
employment services or office during the current and prior years.
Of the total cash compensation paid to Mr. Cohen during 2016, $7,500 was paid to V3 Capital Partners, a
single member limited liability company owned by Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Brunner was appointed President of the Company effective on January 1, 2016.
(2)
(3)
 
 
-14-
The Company’s compensation program is designed to provide our executive officers with competitive remuneration and
to reward their efforts and contributions to the Company. Elements of compensation for our executive officers include
base  salary  and  bonuses  paid  as  stock  options  pursuant  to  the  Company’s  Amended  and  Restated  2012  Equity
Compensation Plan (the “Plan”). Company performance does not play a significant role in the determination of base
salary. 
 
The  Compensation  Committee,  working 
the  Executive  Chairman,  reviews  and  makes
recommendations  to  the  Board  regarding  all  forms  of  compensation  to  be  provided  to  officers  and  directors  of  the
Company,  including  all  bonus  and  stock  compensation.  The  Compensation  Committee  may  also  set  general
compensation goals and guidelines for the Company’s employees from time to time.
in  conjunction  with
In 2013, the Company entered into an Employment Agreement with Scot Cohen, the Company’s Executive Chairman
(the “Employment Agreement”). Under the terms of the Employment Agreement, Mr. Cohen will be entitled to all earned
but unpaid salary, expense reimbursements, bonuses (if applicable), and any vested benefits, upon termination of the
Employment  Agreement  by  the  Company  for  cause,  by  Mr.  Cohen  without  good  reason,  or  upon  the  Employment
Agreement’s expiration date in the event Mr. Cohen does not choose to renew his contract. In the event Mr. Cohen’s
employment is terminated by the Company without cause, upon a change in control of the company, or by Mr. Cohen for
good reason, he shall be entitled to any accrued obligations (detailed in the preceding sentence), severance in a single
lump sum installment in an amount equal to twice the sum of the base salary in effect on the termination date plus two
times  the  maximum  annual  bonus  for  which  Mr.  Cohen  was  eligible  in  the  fiscal  year  in  which  the  termination  date
occurred, a pro-rata portion of Mr. Cohen’s annual bonus for the fiscal year in which the termination occurred, and a full
vesting in the initial grant and in any and all previously granted outstanding equity-based incentive awards subject to
time-based vesting criteria.
On November 20, 2013, the Company and the Executive Chairman entered into an amendment (the “Amendment”) to
the  Employment  Agreement.  Under  the  terms  of  the  Amendment,  the  Company  substituted  a  stock  option  grant  of
208,333  fair  market  value  stock  options  under  the  Plan,  at  the  exercise  price  of  $11.80  per  share,  for  cash-settled
restricted stock units representing 331,703 shares of the Company’s common stock, which the Company had previously
agreed  to  grant  Mr.  Cohen  under  the  terms  of  the  Employment  Agreement.  These  options  will  vest  in  five  equal
installments,  with  the  first  20%  vesting  immediately  upon  grant,  and  the  remaining  options  vesting  in  four  equal
installments on the anniversary of the grant date.
On October 28, 2015, the Company entered into an Employment Agreement with Stephen Brunner.  Pursuant to the
terms and conditions of the Employment Agreement, Mr. Brunner will receive a base salary of $5,000 per month from
January 2016 until March 2016, which amount will increase to $10,000 per month thereafter, and will be eligible for an
annual  bonus,  payable  in  cash  and/or  equity  at  the  sole  discretion  of  the  Board  of  Directors.  Upon  execution  of  the
Employment Agreement, Mr. Brunner received options to purchase 53,244 shares of the Company’s common stock, or
1.25% of the Company’s outstanding shares of common stock, for $2.00 per share, subject to certain vesting conditions
contained in the Employment Agreement. Additionally, upon completion of certain transactions, including an increase of
the  number  of  shares  of  common  stock  authorized  for  issuance  under  the  Company’s  current  stock  option  plan,  Mr.
Brunner will receive options to purchase an additional 1.75% of the Company’s outstanding shares of common stock.  
 
On November 26, 2013, the Company entered into a consulting agreement with Brio Financial Group (“Brio”) and its
Managing  Member,  David  Briones,  was  appointed  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  the  Company  on  August  15,  2013.
Under the terms of this agreement, as amended, Brio will receive a monthly consulting fee of $5,000, as well as a grant
of  3,750  stock  options  of  the  Company  pursuant  to  the  Plan.  The  options  will  vest  in  six  installments.  The  first  625
options vested immediately upon execution of the consulting agreement, and the remaining five installments will vest
monthly, on the 26th of each subsequent month.
Director Compensation for the Year Ended April 30, 2016
The  Company  has  no  formal  arrangement  pursuant  to  which  directors  are  compensated  for  their  services  in  their
capacity as directors, except for the granting from time to time of incentive stock options. During the year ended April 30,
2016, no compensation was paid to any of the Company’s directors.
 
 
-15-
Outstanding Equity Awards at April 30, 2016
 
The  Plan  was  adopted  to  promote  the  success  and  enhance  the  value  of  the  Corporation  by  continuing  to  link  the
personal  interest  of  participants  to  those  of  its  Shareholders  and  by  providing  participants  with  an  incentive  for
outstanding  performance.  The  Plan  is  administered  by  the  Board,  and  all  employees  of  the  Corporation  and  its
subsidiaries, as determined by the Board, and all members of the Board are eligible to participate. An aggregate of 3.0
million shares of common stock are authorized for issuance under the Plan.
The Plan was approved at a special meeting of the shareholders on September 7, 2012, and an amendment to the plan
was approved at the Company’s annual meeting of shareholders on April 16, 2014. The following table outlines awards
issued to the Company’s Named Executive Officers and Directors pursuant to the Plan as of April 30, 2016.
Number of
securities
underlying
unexercised
Option
Exercise
Option
Expiration
Number of securities
underlying unvested
Date
options
Price
2.00
Plan Category
Scot Cohen
David Briones
Glenn Pollack
John Wallace
Fred Zeidman
Stephen Brunner
Total
  
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans.
208,333    $
-    $
4,237    $
4,237    $
4,237    $
53,244    $
274,288
10/21/25      
     
     
      10/21/25      
      10/21/25      
      10/21/25      
      10/30/25
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
-
-
options
208,333    $
-    $
4,237    $
4,237    $
4,237    $
21,296    $
242,340
Weighted-average
exercise price of
-
2.00
outstanding options,
warrants, and rights
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
As of the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016:
Number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise
of outstanding
Weighted-
average exercise
price of
outstanding
options, warrants
options, warrants
Number of
securities
remaining available
for future
issuance under
equity
compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected
at left)
and rights
and rights
743,050    $
Plan category
4.00
Equity compensation plans approved by security holders    
 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
  
Separation and Release Agreement
 
In June and July of 2013, the Company signed a series of agreements with Jeffrey Freedman, former Chief Executive
Officer, in relation to his departure from the Company. Pursuant to these agreements, the Company has provided to Mr.
Freedman the sum of $12,000 and issued 2,326 options to purchase Common Stock with a $56,047 aggregate fair value
as of the July 24, 2013 option grant date. These options will expire on July 23, 2016 and have an exercise price of $43.
The Company computed the economic benefit of the grant as of the date of grant utilizing a Black-Scholes option-pricing
model.  The  options  were  immediately  vested  and  the  Company  recorded  the  $56,047  to  general  and  administrative
2,256,950
expense on the date of grant.
 
Horizon Investments, LLC
On May 3, 2016, the Company consummated the acquisition of Horizon I Investments, LLC (“Horizon Investments”). Scot
Cohen, the Company’s Executive Chairman, is the sole managing member of Horizon Investments, and owned, prior to
the Company’s acquisition of Horizon Investments, a 9.2% membership interest in Horizon Investments. As a result of
the  Company’s  acquisition  of  Horizon  Investments,  Mr.  Cohen  received  a  distribution  from  Horizon  Investments  of
1,379,250 shares of the Company’s Common Stock.  Although Mr. Cohen remains the managing member of Horizon
Investments, he is not paid separately for his role.
Horizon Investments owns a 20% membership interest in Horizon Energy Partners, LLC (“Horizon Energy”). Mr. Cohen
owns a 2.8% membership interest in Horizon Energy.
 
Stephen Brunner, the Company’s President, is a member of Horizon Energy, and owns a 2.52% membership interest.
Prior to the Company’s acquisition of Horizon Investments, Mr. Brunner held a 1.68% membership interest in Horizon
Investments, and received a distribution from Horizon Investments of 166,667 shares of the Company’s Common Stock
after the acquisition.
Pearsonia West Investment Group.
 
On May 30, 2014, the Company entered into a Subscription Agreement pursuant to which the Company was issued a
50% interest in Bandolier Energy, LLC (“Bandolier”) in exchange for a capital contribution of $5.0 million (the “Bandolier
Acquisition”). Mr. Scot Cohen, the Company’s Executive Chairman was a manager of, and owned a 20% membership
interest in, Pearsonia West Investment Group, LLC (“Pearsonia West”), a special purpose vehicle formed for the purpose
of investing in Bandolier with the Company.  On October 15, 2016, the Company indirectly transferred its controlling
interest  in  Pearsonia  West  as  a  result  of  the  transfer  of  the  Company’s  50%  membership  interest  in  Bandolier  to
MegaWest Energy Kansas Corp. (“MegaWest”) under the terms of the Contribution Agreement, although the Company
still retains a 29.26% indirect interest in Bandolier as a result of its interest in MegaWest.
 
 
-16-
SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND  MANAGEMENT  AND  RELATED
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
 
The following table sets forth information regarding the beneficial ownership of our Common Stock as of August 15,
2016 for each of our officers, directors and persons known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our
outstanding shares of Common Stock. We have determined beneficial ownership in accordance with the rules of the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.    Except  as  indicated  by  the  footnotes  below,  we  believe,  based  on  the
information furnished to us, that the persons and entities named in the table below have sole voting and dispositive
power with respect to all securities they beneficially own.  Each percentage ownership identified below is based on
15,827,997 shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding.
Number of
Shares
Beneficially
Stock
Options
Exercisable
within 60
Name and Address of 
Beneficial Owner(1)
Scot Cohen
David Briones
Stephen Brunner
Glenn C. Pollack
John Wallace
Fred Zeidman
All Directors and Officers as a Group (6
persons)
-
Owned
2,181,924(2)   
   
   
166,667(3)   
   
   
16,709 
   
   
  - 
   
   
  -
Percentage
of Shares 
Beneficially
Owned  
14.9%
- 
1.2%
* 
* 
*
days
   
208,333     
-     
21,296     
4,237     
4,237     
4,237
Position
Executive Chairman
Chief Financial Officer
President, Operations
Director
Director
Director
2,440,973(3)
242,340
16.7%
2,465,200(4)
15.5%
5% Owner
Except where otherwise indicated, the address of the beneficial owner is deemed to be the same address of the
Company.
 
The beneficial owner is a Managing Member of ICO Liquidating Trust, which beneficially owns 305,431 shares of
common stock, and Structure Oil Corp., which beneficially owns 36,813 shares of common stock.  In addition, he
serves  as  a  director  of  the  Scot  Jason  Cohen  Foundation,  which  beneficially  owns  34,702  shares  of  common
stock.      As  a  result  of  these  relationships,  the  beneficial  owner  may  be  deemed,  pursuant  to  Rule  13d-3
promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), to beneficially own all
common stock directly owned by such entities.
 
Includes stock options exercisable within 60 days of August 15, 2016.
 
The principal business address of the beneficial owner is 45 Main Street, Suite 800, Brooklyn, New York 11201.
Fortis Property Group(4)
_________________
* Less than 1%
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
(4)
 
 
-17-
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
 
Deadline for Receipt of Stockholder Proposals
 
Pursuant to Rule 14a-8 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, stockholder proposals to be presented
at our 2015 Annual Meeting and included in our Proxy Statement and form of proxy relating to that Meeting must be
received by us at our corporate offices at 55 5th Avenue, Suite 1702, New York, New York 10003, addressed to our
Corporate Secretary, not later than April 17, 2017. These proposals must comply with applicable Delaware law, the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the procedures set forth in our Bylaws.
 
Stockholders who intend to present a proposal at such Meeting without inclusion of such proposal in our proxy materials
pursuant to Rule 14a-8 under the Exchange Act are required to provide advanced notice of such proposal to us at the
aforementioned address not later than April 17, 2017.
 
We reserve the right to reject, rule out of order, or take other appropriate action with respect to any proposal that does not
comply with these and all other applicable requirements.
  
Other Matters
 
At the date of this Proxy Statement, the Company knows of no other matters, other than those described above, that will
be presented for consideration at the Annual Meeting. If any other business should come before the Annual Meeting, it is
intended that the proxy holders will vote all proxies using their best judgment in the interest of the Company and the
stockholders.
 
The Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 is being mailed to all stockholders
of record as of the Record Date concurrently with the mailing of this Proxy Statement. The Annual Report on Form 10-K,
which includes audited financial statements, does not form any part of the material for the solicitation of proxies.
 
The Board of Directors invites you to attend the Annual Meeting in person. Whether or not you expect to attend the
Annual Meeting in person, please sign, date and return the enclosed proxy card promptly in the enclosed envelope, so
that your shares will be represented at the Annual Meeting.
 
PLEASE  DATE,  SIGN  AND  RETURN  THE  PROXY  CARD  AT  YOUR  EARLIEST  CONVENIENCE  IN  THE
ENCLOSED RETURN ENVELOPE. A PROMPT RETURN OF YOUR PROXY CARD WILL BE APPRECIATED AS IT
WILL SAVE THE EXPENSE OF FURTHER MAILINGS.
By order of the Board of Directors
Scot Cohen
Executive Chairman
-18-
PETRO RIVER OIL CORP.
PROXY SOLICITED ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD
OF PETRO RIVER OIL CORP. FOR THE 2016 ANNUAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
The undersigned revokes all previous proxies and constitutes and appoints Scot Cohen as his or her true and
lawful agent and proxy with full power of substitution in each, to represent and to vote on behalf of the undersigned all of
the shares of common stock of Petro River Oil Corp. (the “Company”) which the undersigned is entitled to vote at the
Company’s  2016  Annual  Meeting  of  Stockholders,  to  be  held  at  the  Company’s  New  York  office,  located  at  55  5th
Avenue,  Suite  1702,  New  York,  New  York  10003,  on  September  20,  2016  at  11:00  a.m.,  local  time,  and  at  any
adjournment(s) or postponement(s) thereof, upon the following proposals more fully described in the Notice of Annual
Meeting of Stockholders and Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting (receipt of which is hereby acknowledged).
 
               This proxy when properly executed will be voted in the manner directed herein by the undersigned stockholder.
If no direction is made, this proxy will be voted FOR Proposals Nos. 1, 2 and 3, which have been proposed by our Board,
and in his or her discretion, upon other matters as may properly come before the Annual Meeting.
(continued and to be signed on reverse side)
x       Please mark your votes as indicated in this example.
1.  ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.
A RESOLUTION TO AUTHORIZE
OUR BOARD OF DIRECTORS TO
AMEND OUR CERTIFICATE OF
INCORPORATION TO IMPLEMENT
A REVERSE STOCK SPLIT OF OUR
COMMON STOCK AT A RATIO OF
NOT LESS THAN 1-FOR-2 AND NOT
GREATER THAN 1-FOR-10 AT ANY
TIME PRIOR TO ONE YEAR FROM
THE DATE OF THE ANNUAL
MEETING
Nominees:
    01   Scot Cohen
     02   Glen C. Pollack
     03   John Wallace
    04   Fred Zeidman
¨
¨
¨
¨
FOR   WITHHELD
¨
¨
¨
¨
FOR
¨
AGAINST
ABSTAIN
¨
¨
3.
RATIFYING THE APPOINTMENT
OF GHB CPAs, PC AS PETRO
RIVER OIL CORP.’S INDEPENDENT
AUDITORS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR
ENDING APRIL 30, 2017
AGAINST
¨
FOR
¨
ABSTAIN
¨
IN HIS OR HER DISCRETION, THE PROXY IS AUTHORIZED TO VOTE UPON OTHER MATTERS AS
MAY PROPERLY COME BEFORE THE ANNUAL MEETING.
o   I WILL ATTEND THE ANNUAL MEETING.
 
PLEASE MARK, SIGN, DATE AND RETURN THIS PROXY CARD PROMPTLY, USING THE ENCLOSED
ENVELOPE.
Signature of Stockholder ___________________ Signature of Stockholder ____________________
IF HELD JOINTLY
Dated:  ____________________________________                                                                             
 
Note:     This proxy must be signed exactly as the name appears hereon. When shares are held by joint tenants, both
should sign. If the signer is a corporation, please sign full corporate name by duly authorized officer, giving full title as
such. If the signer is a partnership, please sign in partnership name by authorized person.
Appendix A
STATE OF DELAWARE
CERTIFICATE OF AMENDMENT
OF CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION
Petro  River  Oil  Corp.,  organized  and  existing  under  and  by  virtue  of  the  General  Corporation  Law  of  the  State  of
Delaware, does hereby certify:
 
FIRST:  That  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Petro  River  Oil  Corp.  adopted  a  proposed  amendment  of  the  Certificate  of
Incorporation of said corporation to effectuate a reverse stock split, declaring said amendment to be advisable.
 
The proposed amendment reads as follows:
 
Article Fourth is hereby amended by striking the first paragraph in its entirety and replacing it with the following:
 
The total number of shares of stock the Corporation is authorized to issue is 155,000,000 shares, consisting of 5,000,000
shares of preferred stock, par value $0.00001 per share (the “Preferred Stock”), and 150,000,000  shares  of  common
stock, par value $0.00001 per share (the “Common Stock”);
 
SECOND: That, pursuant to a resolution of its Board of Directors, an annual meeting of the stockholders of Petro River
Oil Corp. was duly called and held upon notice in accordance with Section 222 of the General Corporation Law of the
State  of  Delaware  at  which  meeting  the  necessary  number  of  shares  as  required  by  statute  were  voted  in  favor  of
granting the Board of Directors the authority to amend the Certificate of Incorporation to provide for a reverse stock split.
 
THIRD: That  said  amendment  was  duly  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Section  242  of  the  General
Corporation Law of the State of Delaware.
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, said corporation has caused this certificate to be signed this __ day of ________________,
2016.
A-1
By:
Title:
Name: