
(Conformed Vernon)
CREDIT AGREEMENT

THIS CREDIT AGREEMENT dated as of March 22, 20l3 is made among Mnudorc
Minerals Ltti., as bun-ower (the “Borrower") and [WC Holdings Si’trl, as lender (the
Wonder").

t

WHEREAS the Lender has agreed to provide a senior secured credit facility to the
Borrower on the terms and conditions set out herein.

NOW THEREFORE for good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufﬁciency of
which is hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto hereby covenant and agree as follows:

t
ARTICLE 1
INTERPRETATION
l
H Deﬁnitions. in this Agreement (as deﬁned below), the following terms have the meanings
speciﬁed below:

“Account Control Agreement" means an agreement amongst a Credit Patty, a brokerage ﬁrm
and a Lender intended to grant control to the Lender over a securities account maintained by that Credit
Party with that brokerage ﬁrm and any ﬁnancial assets credited thereto, itt form and substance satisfactory
to the Lender acting reasonably

“Al'tilinte” means, with respch to any Person, another Person that directly, or indirectly thtough
one or more intermediaries, Controls or is Controlled by or is under common Control with, such Person

"Agreement" means this credit agreement and all exhibits and schedules attached hereto.

“Annual Forecast and Operating Plan" means the annual business and operating plan prepared
by llu: Borrower with respect to the operations of” the Credit Patties setting out a detailed consolidated
ﬁnancial forecast for tlte Credit Parties for the ensuing Fiscal Year (broken out by Fiscal Quarter) and for
cach year thcreaﬂcr to and including the Fiscal Year in which the Maturity Date oceuta (prepared on an
annual basis) which includes an income statement, balance sheet, cash ﬂow projections, a capital
expenditures budget that has been approved by the board of directors of the Borrower, and a comparison
to the results of tltc prior Fiscal Year and such other information as is reasonably requested by the Lender,
all in such detail as Lender may reasonably require. Such projections shall also include projected
covenant calculations on a consolidated basis for each Fiscal Quarter of such ensuing Fiscal Yeat:

“Annual Life of Mine Plan” means the Life of Mine Plan regarding each Operating Minc
delivered from time to time pursuant to Section 5.1(n).

“Anti-Money Laundering Legislation" means the Proceeds ofC‘rimc (Muttey laundering) and
Turmrixl Financing Act (Canada) and any other applicable anti<mottey laundering, anti~terrorist
ﬁnancing, government sanction and “know yottr client“ laws, applicable to any Credit Party Member
utttlcr applicable Laws, including any guidelines or orders thereunder.

“Appt'uvcd Credit itnling“ is used with the deﬁned meaning given to the uncapilaliocd form of
this term in National Instrument 81-102 Mutual Furth ol'llte Canadian Securities Administrators

“Asset Disposition" means, with respect to any Crctlit Party, the sale, lease, licence. transfer,
assignment or other disposition of, or the expruptiation, condemnation, destruction or other loss of, all or


_ 2 _
any portion or item or part of its business, assets, rights, revenues or property, real, personal or mixed,
tangible or intangible, whether in nrre transaction or a series of transactions. other than (a) inventory sold
in the ordinary course of business upon customary credit terms, (h) sales of scrap or obsolete material or
equipment which are Ito longer used or useful in the business and are of nominal value" (c) leases ofreal
property or personal property (under which such Person is lessor), and (d) licences granted to third
parties.

"Blocked Account Agreement” means an agreement amongst a Credit Party, a depository
institution and the Lender intended to grant control to the tender over a bank account maintained by that
Credit Party with that depository institution and any credit balance credited thereto, in form and substance
satisfactory to the Lender, acting reasonably; provided that any such agreement (other than with respect to
the interest Escrow Account) will provide that the depository institution shall be entitled to act solely r
upon llle instructions of” the Borrower with regards to such bank account until the Lender provides an
activation notice to the depository institution, which the Lender shall only provide during the continuance
of an Event of Default.

“Bonus Shares" has the meaning set out in Section 2.1 l(d).

“Bonus Wnrrunts“ has the meaning set out in Section 2.l l(d).

“Business Day" means any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which commercial
banks in Toronto, Ontario and in Luxembourg are authorizal or required by applicable Law to remain
closed.

“Canadian Dollars" and “3“ refer to lawful currency of Canada.

“Canadian Pension Plan” means a “registered pension plan", as that term is deﬁned in
subsection 248(1) of the Income Tat 1th (Canada), which is or was sponsored, admininered or
contributed to, or required to be contributed to by. any Credit Party or rrrrder which any Credit Party has
arty actual or potential liability.

“Capital Expenditures” means (without duplication) any expenditure (whether payable in cash
or other property or accrued as a liability) made by the Borrower or any Subsidiary of it that. in
conformity with tFliS, are or would be required to be classified as a capital expenditure on the
consolidated ﬁnancial statements nl‘the Borrower ‘

“Cash Balance” means, for any Business Day, the aggregate net balance of cash and (Instr
Equivalents held by each of the Credit Parties at the close of business on such Business Day as set Forth
on the relevant bank statements of the Credit Par-tics, excluding all cash held in the Interest [Escrow
Account.

“Crush Equivalents" means (a) marketable direct obligations issued by, or unconditionally
guaranteed by, the governurarts of the United States of America or Canada or any agency or
instrrrrnentnlity thereof", and backed by the full faith and credit of the United States of America or Canada,
in each case manning within one year from the date of acquisition; and (b) term deposits, certiﬁcates of

deposit or overnight hank deposits having maturities of one year or less from the date of acquisition
issued by any commercial bank or‘grrrriLerl under the laws ot; and booked with a hmnch located in, Canada
having an Approved Credit Rating.

“Cosh Income Tax Expense" means, with respect to any fiscal period cl‘ the Borrower, the
amount paid in cash with respect to such fisutl period on account of income tax expense.

Credit Itgreernent— Mirudure lttrrmah


. 3 .

“Cash Interest Expense" means, with respect to arty ﬁscal period of the Borrower, the amount
paid in cash with respect to such ﬁscal period on account of interest expense.

“Change in Control” means, (a) the acquisition ot‘owncrship, directly or indirectly, beneficially
or of record, by arty Person or group of Persons acting jointly or otherwise in concert, excluding the
Lender and its Aﬁilintes, of Equity Securities representing more than ﬁfty per cent (50%) ufthe aggregate
ordinary voting power represented by the issued and outstanding Equity Securities of the Borrower,
(b) the occupation of a nutjority of the seats (other than vacant seats) on the board of directors of the
Borrower by Persons who were neither (i) nominated by the board of directors of the Borrower. nor
(ii) appointed by directors so nominated, (c) the acquisition of direct or indirect Control of the Borrower
by any Person or group of Persons acting jointly or otherwise in concert, excluding the Lender and its
Afﬁliates. or (d) if any shareholder of tlte Borrower excluding the Lender and its Atliliatcs, is required to
make a mandatory offer to other shareholders of the Borrower to acquire their liquity Securities.

“Closing Date” means March 22, 2013, being lltc date on wltich this Agreement is executed and
delivered by the parties hereto and all other conditions precedent under Swtion4.l have been satisﬁed or
waived by the Lender:

“Collateral” means any and all property of the Credit Par-tics (or any of them) with respect to
which a Lien is expressed to be created in favour of the Lender under any Loan Document.

“Commitment” has the meaning set out in Section 2 l(a).

“Compliance Certiﬁcate” has the meaning set out in Section 5‘ I(a),

"Contested Tax Proceedings” means proceedings irt respect of a Tax claim which are being
contested in good faith by a Credit Party by appropriate proceedings, in respect of which adequate
reserves in accordance with lFRS have been recorded in the accounts and financial statements of the
Borrower and, to the extent «(wired to ensure that no penalties or interest would be charged it' such
contest is unsuccessful, the amount of Taxes being contested is paid under reserve or protest to the
applicable Govcntmcntal Authority.

“Control” means, irt respect of a particular Person. the possession, directly or indirectly, of the
power to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of such Person. whether through the
ability to exercise voting power, by contract or otherwise. “Controlling” and “Controlled” have
meanings correlative thereto.

“Credit Facility” means the senior secured credit facility up to a principal amount of
$22,000,000 established pursuant to the Commitment.

“Credit Parties” means, collectively, the Borrower and the Guttranlors, and “Credit Party"
means any of them.

"Currency Due” has the meaning set ottl in Section 2. | 0.

“Delunlt” rttcans any event, not or condition which, with the giving of notice or lapse of time (or
both), would constitute an Event of Default.

"Deﬁned Beneﬁt l’lnn" has the meaning set out in Section 3.1(n).

Credit murmur - Mainline Minerals


. 4 _

“Depositary Bank” means National Bank of Canada acting through its hranch located at
[21 King SI. W., Toronto, Ontario MSH 3T9.

“Derivative” means any agreement (including any transaction contemplated thereby) now
existing or hereafter entered into which is an interest rate swap, cap, ﬂoor or collar agreement, interest
rate forward, future or option contract, cross-currency interest rate swap agreement or interest rate ﬂIlIII‘C
or option contract, a spot or forward foreign exchange contract or any other derivative agreement relative
to interest rates, foreign exchange, debt obligations, equities, commodities or other indiccs.

“Derivative Exposure" in relation to any person (the “relevant party”) at any time Incnns the
amount, if any, which is or (as the case may be) would be payable by the relevant party to its counterparty
(referred to herein as “()ut—of-the-Money Derivative Exposure") pursuant to the agreement governing the
Derivatives entered into by the relevant party and that counterparty in effect at that time it' those
Derivatives have been or (as the case may he) were then to be early terminated in accordance with the
provisions tlrcreot‘at such time.

“EBI'I'DA” for any fiscal period of the Borrower means net earnings of the Bonowcr
(determined on a consolidated basis) for that ﬁscal period:

(a) increased (without duplication and to the extent deducted in calculating net earnings) by
the sum of:

(i) any Cash interest Expense;
(it) any Cash Income Taxes;
(iii) depreciation, depletion and amortization expense;
(iv) any and impairment charges;
(v) any non-cash operating expenses, including expensing of share options;
(vi) any foreign exchange translation loss; and
(vii) any losses on sales of capital assets,
all as determined in relation to that ﬁscal period in accordance with IFRS;
(b) decreased (without duplication and to the extent added in calculating net earnings) by the
snrn of:
(i) interest income;
(ii) any other Itmrcash items increasing net earnings;
(iv) foreign exchange translation gains; and
(v) gains on sales ofcapital assets,
all as determined in relation to that liseal period in accordance with lFltS;
(c) plus/minus (to the extent deducted/added in calculating net earnings):
man A menu: - Manda“: Milwnlls


- 5 .
(i) all extraonllnary and unusual items;
(ii) non-cash gains/losses from wriloups/ write-downs of property, plant and
equipment; and
(iii) any gains or loss on sales of investments,

all as determined in relation to that ﬁscal period in accordance with lFRS; and

(tl) (without duplication) before taking into account any unrealised gains or losses on any
Derivative (other than any Derivative which is accounted for on n hedge accounting basis) as determined

in relation to that ﬁscal period in accordance with l.l-‘RS.

“Employee Beneﬁt Plan” means any employee beneﬁt plan maintained or contributed to by the
Borrower or any Subsidiary of it that are not Pension l‘lans, including any proﬁt sharing. savings,
supplemental retirement. retiring allowance. severance, pension, deferred compensation, welfare, hnnus,
incentive eorupemalion, pliantorn stock, supplementary unemployment beneﬁt plan or arrangement and
any life, health, dental and disability plan or arrangements in which the employees or former employees
of the Borrower or arty Subsidiary of it participate or are eligible to participate. in each case whether
written or oral, funded or unfunded, insured or self-insured, reported or unreported, but excluding all
stock motion or stock purchase plans.

“Environment” means the ambient air, all layers of the atmosphere, surface, water, underground
water, all land, all living organisms and the interacting natural systems that include components of air,
land. water, organic and inorganic matter and living organisms, and includes indoor spaces.

“Environmental and Socinl Ianv" means:

(a) the IFC Perfarnmnce Standards and the World Bank Environmental, Health, and Safety
Guidelines, in arch case, published from time to time by the IFC and World Bank Group respectively;
and

(b) any applicable Law or regulation which relate: to:

(i) the pollution or protection of the Environment;

(ii) the conditions of the workplace;

(iv) the generation, handling, storage, use, release or spillage ol'any Substance which,
alone or in combination with any other, is capable of causing hunu to the Environment including
any waste;

(v) indigenous peoples;

(vi) cultural heritage; or

(vii) resettlement or economic displacement ofpersens.

“Environmental Liability” means any liability, contingent or otherwise (including any liability
for damages, costs of environmental rennxlialion, ﬁnes, penalties or indemnitim), of any Credit l’arty
directly or indirectly resulting from or based upon (a) the violation of any Environmental and Social Law,
(h) any breach of duty or strict liability under common or civil law, (0) the generation, use, handling,
Credit Agcermut -l\lnutlorc Minmls


. 5 .
collection, treatment, storage, transportation, recovery, recycling or disposal of any Havardous Materials,
(d) exposure to any Hazardous Materials, (e) the Release or threatened Release of any Hazardous
Materials into the Environment, or (t) any contract, agreement or other consensual arrangement pursuant
to which liability is assumed or itttposcd with respect to any ot‘thc foregoing
“Environmental Permits" means all permits, licences, authori7ations, certiﬁcates, approvals or
registrations required by any Governmental Authority under any Environmental and Social Law.
“Equity Ratio“ means the ratio of (a) the total market value of the outstanding common shares of i
the Borrower based upon the latest closing price on the TSX Venture Exclumge to (b) its Net interest
Bearing Debt. ‘
“Equity Securities” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests,
panicipntions, rights in, or other equivalents (however designated and whether voting or non-voting) of,
such Person’s capital, whether outstanding on the date hereof or issued after the date hereof, including
any interest in a partnership, limith partnership or other similar Person and any beneﬁcial interest in a 1
trust, and any and all rights. warrants, tlchl securities. options or other rights exchangeable for or
convertible into any of (ht: foregoing,
“Event of Default" has the meaning sci forth in Section 7. l.
“Excess Cash Flow" menus, with respect to any tiscal period of the Borrower, an amount equal ‘
to EBl'l‘DA for that ﬁscal period minus (but without duplication):
(:1) optional principal payments made on the Loan made during that ﬁscal period; l
(b) Cash Inth Expense in respect of that ﬁscal period, only to the extent such payments ‘
are permitted by this Agreement; ‘
(e) Cash laconic Tax Expense in respect of that ﬁscal period: and
(Li) Capital Expenditnrcs made by the Borrower with the approval of the Lender during that
ﬁscal period.
“Exrhidetl Tunes" means, with respect to the Lender or any other recipient of any payment to be
made by or on account of any obligation of the Borrower hereunder, (a) income or ﬁnnchise 't‘nxes
imposed on (or measured by) its taxable income or capital 'l'axes imposed on (or measured by) its taxable
capital, in each case by Canada. or by the jurisdiction under the Laws ofwhicl't such recipient is organized
or in which its principal oﬂiee is located or, in the case of the Lender, in which its applicable lending
office is located, (b) any branch proﬁts taxes or any similar tax imposed by any jurisdiction in which the
Lender is located and (c) arty withholding tax that is solely attributable to the Lender’s failure to deliver
documentation prescribed by applicable Law in compliance with Section 2,9(d).
“Fiscal Quarter" means any fiscal quarter of the Borrower.
“Fiscal Your“ means any ﬁscal year ot'thc Borrower:
“Governmental Authority” means the Government of Canada, any other nation or any political
subdivision thereof, whether provincial, stale, territorial or local, and any agency, authority,
instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank, ﬁscal or monetary authority or other authority, and
Credit Amman ~ Maund Mimme


_ 7 _
any other entity exercising executive. legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or administrative lmwers or
functions of or pertaining to government.

“Guarantor” means any Subsidiary of the Borrower that enters into a guarantee of lltc
Obligations.

“Hazardous Materials” means any substance, product, liquid, waste, pollutant, chemical,
wnlalninanl, insecticide, pesticide, gaseous or solid matter, organic or inorganic matter, Incl,
micro—organism, ray, odour, radiation, energy, Vector, plasma, constituent or material which (a) is or
becomes listed, regulated or addressed under any Environmental and Social Law, or (b) is, or is deemed
to be, alone or in any combination, lltllttl‘tlolls, harardous waste, toxic, a pollutant, a deleterious substance,
a contaminant or a source of pollution or contamination under any Environmental and Social Law,
including arsenic, tailings, asbestos, petroleum and polycltlorinnted bipheuyls, including petroleum or
petroleum distillates, asbestos or asbestos containing materials, polychlorinalcd bipltcnyls, radon gas,
infections or medical wastes and all other substances or wastes of any nature regulated pursuant to any
Environmental and Social Law

“IFRS” menus international accounting standards within the meaning given to that term in MS
Regulation: 1606/2002 to tho chlclll. applicable to the relevant ﬁnancial statements,

"Indebtedness" of any Person includes, without duplication, (a) all obligations of such Person for
borrowed money or with respect to deposits or advances of any kind, (b) all obligations of such Person
evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or similar instruments, (c) all obligations of such Person upon
which interest charges are customarily paid, (d) all obligations of such Person under conditional sale or
other title retention agreements relating to property acquier by suclt Person, (c) all obligations of such
Person in respect of the dcl'crrcd purchase price of property or services (excluding current accounts
payable incurred in the ordinary course of business on usual credit terms of the vendor), (i) all
Indebtedness of others secured by (or for which the holder of such Indebtedness has an existing right,
contingent or otherwise, to be secured by) any Lien on property owned or acquier by such Person,
whether or not the Indebtedness scctucd thereby has been assumed, (g) all guarantees by such Person of
Indebtedness of others, (h) all capital lease obligations of such Person, (i) all obligations, eontingcnt or
othenvise. of such Person as an account party in respect of letters of credit and letters of guarantee (other
than letters of credit and letters of guarantee issued in support of current accounts payable incurred in the
ordinary course of business), 0) all obligations, contingent or otherwise, of such Person in respect of
bankcrs’ acceptances, (k) the Out—of-Moncy Derivative Exposure of such Person under Derivatives, and
(I) all obligations of such Person to purchase, redeem, rclirc, (lcfcasc or otherwise acquire for value (other
than for other Equity Securities) any Equity Securities of the Borrower or any Subsidiary of the Borrower,
valued, in the case of redeemable Equity Securities, at the greater of their vohlutaly or involuntary
redemption price, plus accrued and unpaid dividends, The Indebtedness of any Person shall include the
Indebtedness of any other entity (including any partnership in which such Person is a general or limited
partner) t0 the extent such Person is liable therefor as a result of such Person’s ownership interest in or
other relationship with such entity, except to the extent the terms of such lndebtedness provide that such
Person is not liable thcrcl‘or.

“Indemniﬁed Taxes” means all Taxes other than Excluded ‘

“Insolvency laws“ means the liautriq’tcy and Insolvency Act (Canada), the Companies"
(J'edirnnr Arrangement Ac! (Canada), the Winding-Up and Rerll'uclnring Ac! (Canada), the arrangement
provisions of any curpuralt: slatulc pcrntilling a corporation to propose a compmmise or an arrangement
with respect to creditors or my class of creditors of the corporation or any other like, equivalent or
tntalogous legislation of any jurisdiction, domestic or foreign.

Credit Agreement - Matulute “metals


. 3 _

“Intellectual Property Rights“ means all trade secrets, conﬁdential information and knoerow,
sullwarc, patents, trade-marks, patent or trade mark rights, registrations and applications, designs, logos,
irrdicia. trade names. corporate names, company names, business names, domain names. trade styles.
business identiﬁers, ﬁctitious business names or characters, copyrights, copyright applications, integrated
circuit topography rights, registrations and applications, semi-conductor chip rights, design rights,
registrations and applications, design patents and other indrrstrial designs, goodwill, lctters patent and
other industrial or intellectual property of whatever kind in which the Borrower or any Subsidiary now or
het'cnﬁcr has rights, and any item or part thereof. and each and every such right.

“Intercompany Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of the Borrower to any Subsidiary of the
Borrower or ufany Subsidiary ot‘tlre Borrower to the Borrower or arty other Subsidiary.

“Interest Escrow Account" means a bank account subject to a Blocked Account Agreement over
which the Lender maintains a first-priority security interest maintained by the Borrower with the
Depositary Bank For the purposes set out in Section 2. l(e) or such other account as may be agreed to by
the Lender and the Borrower from time to time

“Inter-cu Rate” means (a) ﬁﬂeerr per cent (15%) per amount if no Event of Default is continuing
or (b) seventeen per cent (17%) per annum il'an Event of Default is continuing; in each case, payable in
cash quarterly in arrears.

“interim Bridge Loan” means collectively. the loan term of $3,000,000 provided to the
Borrower hy City Securities Ltd. and Monernvasia Pty. Ltd. pursuant to the loan agreement dated
December [2, 2012 arid the term loan of $250,000 provided to the Borrower by City Securities Ltd.
pursuant to the loan agreement dated December 17, 20l2.

“Investment” means, as applied to any Person (the “inveslor”), any direct or indirect:
(a) purchase or other acquisition by the investor of Equity Securitiw of any other Person or any beneﬁcial
interest therein; (b) purchase or other acquisition by the investor of bonds, notes, debentures or other debt
securities of any other Person or any beneﬁcial interest therein; (c) loan or advance to arty other Person,
other than (i) advances to employees for expenses incurred in the ordinary course of business, and
(ii) accounts receivable arising from sales or services rendered to such other Person in the ordinary course
of the investor‘s business on usual credit terms; and (d) cpital contribution by the investor to any other
Person, provided that an acquisition shall not constitute an Investment.

“Joint Venture" means any joint venture entity, whether a body corporate, an unincorporated
ﬁrm. undertaking, association, joint venture or partnership or any other entity.

“Joint Venture Consent Agreement” means an agreement amongst a Credit l'nrty. each other
joint vcnturcr participant in a Joint Venture and the Lender intended, subject to the terms of such
agreement. to permit the Lender to preserve the value of that Credit Party’s investment in that Joint
Venture, in form and substance satisfactory to the Lender, acting reasonably.

“Judgment Currency“ has the meaning set out in Section 2.10.

“Laws” means all federal, provincial, state. municipal, foreign and international statutes, acts,
codes, ordinances, decrees, treaties, rules, regulations, municipal try-laws, treaties with first nations
peoples, judicial or arbilml or administrative or ministerial or departmental or regulatory judgments,
orders, decisions, rulings or awards or any provisions of the foregoing, including general principles of
common and civil law and equity, antl all policies, practices and guidelines of any Governmental
Authority binding on or uﬁuting the Person referred to in the context in which such word is used
(MdttAgecrm-nt — Mandate Murrnzlx


_ 9 _
(including. in the case of tax matters, any accepted practice or application! or ollicial interpretation of any
relevant taxation authority), and "Law" mcnns any one or more of the foregoing.

“Lieu” means, (a) with respect to any asset, any mortgage, deed of trust. lien (statutory or
olherwise), deemed lrnsl, pledge, hypolhec, hypolltceatiou, cnuunlbraneg charge, security interest, royalty
interest, adverse claim, defect of title or right of set nﬁ’ in, on or of such asset. (b) the interest of a vendor
or a lesser under any conditional] sale agreemenl. eapilal liaise, litlc retention a grccntent or consignment
agreement (or any ﬁnancing lease having substantially the same economic effect as any oilhc foregoing)
relating to any asset, (0) any purchase option, on“ or similar right of a third party with respect to such
assets, (d) any netting nrrnnganent, defeasnnce un'angemenl or reciprocal fee arrangement. and (c) any
other arrangement having the eii‘ect of providing security.

“Life of Mine" means the period during which metal ore from on Operating Mine is planned lo
be produced in accordance with the Annual Life of Mine Plan must reconlly delivered.

“Life of Mine l’luu” means a ﬁnancial model containing forecasts of all relevant operating
parameters associated with the production of metal ore at no Operating Mine, which the Borrower shall
update annually

“Loan” "leans any loan made by the Lender to the Hammer pursuant to this Agreement.

"Loan Documents” means this Agreement, the Security Documeuls and any other document,
inslrumenl or agreement now or hereafter eulcred into in connection with this Agreement. ‘

“Material Adverse Change” means any circumstance, occurrence, incl, condition (i'uurncial or
otherwise), change (including a change in applicable Laws, event, development or effect (whether or not
(a) foreseeable or known as of the date hereof or (1)) covered by insurance» that. individually or in the
aggregate has, or is reasonably likely lo have, a Material Adverse Ell‘cci.

“Material Adverse Effect" means (a)a material adverse cll‘bcl on the business, operations,
assets, liabilities (including contingent liabilities), condition (financial or otherwise) of the Borrower and
its Subsidiaries (taken as a whole), (b) any nialcrial impairment of any Credit Parly's abilin to perform its
Obligations, (c) the rights and mnedics ol'thc Lender under any ofthc Loan Documean are impaired,
prejudiced or otherwise adversely affected, in all cases in a material manner. (d) the validity or
enforceability of any of the Loan Documents is impaired, prejudiced or otherwise adversely affected, or

(e) the validity, effect, perfection, priority or enforceability of oily Lien credited under any Security
Document over any Collateral is impaired, prejudiced or otherwise adversely affected,

“Material Contract" means (a) the contracts, licences and agreements listed and dctcrilied on
Schedule B, (b) any other contract, licence or agreement (i) to which any Credit Party is a party or bound,
(ii) which is material to, or necessary in, the operation of the business of any Credit Party, and (iii) which
any Credit Party cannot promptly replace by an altcmntive and comparable conlract wilh comparable
commercial terms and (c) any other contract, licence or agreement designated by the Lender in a notice to
the Borrower as being a Material Contract. Agreements pursuant to which a Credit l'aity pays or receives
in excess of$500.000 per amnun shall be deemed to he Material Contracts.

“Maturity Date“ means the earlier of (a) the third anniversary of the Closing Date, being
March 22, 20 I6, and (b) the date ofaceelerution of the Obligations in accordance with this Agreement.

"Mining Properties” has the meaning set out in Section 3.1(2).

Cred-t Agimmnt - Mandate Minerals


. lo .

“Mining Tax Credits" means credits (or duties rel'unduble lhr admissible expenditures
and/or losses under the Mining Du/iex Ac! (Quebec).

“NAP Pension Plan” has the meaning set out in Section 3.1(11).

“NAP Quebec" means NAP Quebec Mines Ltd., a corporation existing under the
Cunqu Businerr (.‘mpnrulirmx Act on the date hereof.

“Net Interest Bearing Debt” means all indebtedness less cash and Cash Equivalents of the
Credit Parties (excluding any amounts held in the intcrcst Escrow Account).

“Net Proceeds" means, with respect to any Asset Disposition, the gross amount of cash proceeds
receiver] by any Credit Party limit such Asset Disposition, including proceeds of any insurance policies
received by any Credit Party in connection with such Asset Disposition and amounts received by any
Credit Party pursuant to any expropriation proceeding or condemnation proceeding in connection with
such Asset Disposition, including any cash received in respect ofnuu-cash proceeds (including any cash
payments received by way ofdcferrcd payment of principal pursuant to a note or instalment receivable or
purchase price adjustment receivaqu or otlrurwisc, but excluding any interest payments), but only as and
when rcccivcd, minus the sum of (a) the amount, if any, of all ‘l'axcs paid or payable by any Credit l'arty
directly resulting from such Asset Disposition (including the amount, ifany, intimated by the Borrower in
good faith at the time ofsuelr Asset Disposition for Taxes payable by any Credit l‘uny on or measured by
net income or gain resulting from such Asset Disposition, taking into account airy Tax losses or credits
available or to be available to any Credit Party at the time such Taxes are payable that are not used to
oﬁsct other income or gains), and (b) the reasonable out of pocket costs and expenses incurred by any
Credit Party in connection with such Asset Disposition (including reasonable brokerage fees paid to a
Person other than an Aﬁiliate of any Credit Party, but excluding any fees or expenses paid to an Affiliate
of any Credit l'rn1y).

“North American Palladium Transaction" means the purchase by the Borrower from North
American Palladium Inc. of all ot'llrc outstanding Equity Securities of NAP Quebec and the “Purchased
Business”, as such term is deﬁned in the Purchase Agreement.

“Obligations” means all present and future indebtedness, liabilities and obligations of any and
every kind, nature and description of the Credit Parties (or any at them) to the Lender under or in
connection with the Loan Documents, and any unpaid balance thereof.

“Operating Mine” means a mining property owned and/or operated by the Borrower or any
Subsidiary of it that has reached commercial production.

“Other Taxes" means any and all present or future stamp or documentary taxes or any othcr
excise or property taxes, charges or similar levies arising from any payment mark: under any Loan
Document or born the execution, delivery or cnlbrcetncnt of, or otherwise with rcspcct to. any Loan

Document.

“Payment Date“ means the ﬁrst Business Day ot‘caclr Fiscal Quarter.

“Pension Plan" means any plan, program or arrangement which is considered to be a pension
plan for the purposes of any applicable pension beneﬁts standards, or tax, statute and/or regulation in
Canada or any Province or Territory thereof established, maintained or contributed to by, or to which
tbch is or may be an obligation to contribute by, the Borrower or any Subsidiary thereof.
mar: Amman - Maltrlnrc Mmmn


_ 1] .
“Permitted Liens” means: (a) Lietrs in favour of the Lender for the obligations of any Credit
Party under or pursuant to lhcl.oau Documents; (1)) Purchase Money l.iens securing Indebtedness to the
extent permitted by Section 6,1(a) and Liens to secure Capital Lease Obligations to the extent permitted
by Section 6. [(3); (c) Liens imposed by any Governmental Authority for 'l‘axes not yet due and
delinquent or which are being contested by Contested Tart Proceedings and, during such period during
which such Liens are being so contested, such Liens shall not he executed on or enforced against any of
the assets of any Credit Party; (d) carrier‘s, \varchouscmcn’s, mcchsnics’, matcrinlmen’s, repairmen’s,
construction and other like Liens arising by operation ofapplieuble Law, arising in the culinary course of
business and securing amounts (i) which are not overdue for a period of more than thirty (30) days or
(ii) being contested in good faith and by appropriate proceedings anti, during such period during which
amounts are being so contested, such lricns shall not be executed on or enforced against any of the assets
of any Credit Party, provided that such Credit Party shall have set aside on its books reserves deemed
adequate therefor and not resulting in qualification by auditors; (e) statutory Liens iucurrul, or pledges or
deposits made, under worker’s compensation, crnploylucrrt insurance and other social security legislation;
provider! llrc claims secured thereby are not past due or are being contested by Contested Tax
Proceedings; (f) undetermined or inclroale Liens and charges arising or potentially arising, under statutory
provisions which have not at the time been ﬁled or registered in accordance with applicable Law or of
which written notice has not been duly given in accordance with applicable law or which although ﬁled
or registered, relate to obligations not due or delinquent; (g) Liens or deposits to secure the performance
of bids, tenders, trade contracts, leases, statutory obligations, surety and appeal bonds, performance bonds
and other obligations ot'a like nature (other than for borrowed money) incun‘ed in the ordinary course of
business; (h) servitudes, easements. rights-of-way, restrictions and other similar encumbrances on real
property imposed by applicnhlc Law or incurred in the ordinary course of business and encumbrances
consisting of zoning or building restrictions, easements, licences, restrictions on the use of property or
minor imperfections in title thereto which, in the aggregate, are not material, and which do not in any case
materially detract from the value of the property subject thereto or interfere with the ordinary conduct of
the business of any Credit Party; provided the same are being complied with, (i) Liens of or resulting
from any judgment or award for an aggreyrte amount for all such judgments and awards rtol exceeding
$500,000, the time for the appeal or petition for rehearing of which shall not have expired, or in respect of
which the applicable Credit Party be prosecuting on appeal or proceeding for review in good faith and by
appropriate proceedings and in respect of which a stay of cxecut ion pending such appeal or proceeding
for review shall have been secured; (i) the rights reserved to or vested in Governmental Authorities by
statutory provisions or by the terms of lenses, licences, franchises, grants or permits, which affect any ‘
land, to terminate the leases, licences, franchises, grants or permits or to require annual or other periodic
payments as a condition of the continuance thereof; provided srrcb condition is at all times complied with;
(k) security to public utilities or to any uurtticlpalitics or Governmental Authorities or other public
authority when required by the utility, municipality or Guvertuueulal Authorities or other public authority
in eornreetion with the supply of services or utilities to the Credit Parties; (l) Liens or covenants restricting
or prohibiting access to or from lands abutting on controlled access highways or covenants alIccting the
use to which lands may be put; provided that such Liens or covenants do not materially and adversely
affect the use of the lands by arty Credit Party; (m) statutory Liens incurred or pledges or deposits made in
favorrr of a Governmental Authority to secure the pcrlormancc of obligations not exceeding $2,500,000
for all Credit Parties under Environmental and Social Law to which any assets of any Credit Party are
subject; provided that no Credit Party is delinquent in performing such obligations; (n) customary rights
of set-on or combination of accounts in favour of the Depository Batik with respect to the deposit
accounts maintained with it which are subject to the Blocked Account Agreement; (0) any Liens against
the property of NAI’ Quebec existing upon the closing of the North American Palladium Transaction and
which are pcruliltcd pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement; (p) security for the interim Bridge
Loan which has been released but registrations [rave not yet been discharged; (q) movable hypothec dated
October 31, 2012 iii the amount of $30,000 granted to Bank of Montreal over a Brink of Montreal
guarantch investment certiﬁcate in the amount of $25,000 which secures credit card obligations of the
Clvdll Agreement - Mandate Mrneruls


_ 12 _
Borrower; and (r) any extension, renewal or replacement utility of the foregoing; provided, however, that
the Lions permitted hereunder shall not be extended to cover any additional Indebtedness of the Credit
Patties or their property.

“Permitted Royalties” has the rimming set out in Section 1min).

“PPSA” means the Pomona! l’raperg/ Security/11:] (Ontario).

“Prepayment Premium" means any prepayment premium payahlc under Section 2].

“Principal Amount” means, at any time, the outstanding aggregate principal amount ol'thc Loan
at such time.

"l'nuehnsc Agreement“ means the agreement dated on or about the date hereof between the
Borrower, North American Palladium Limited, and NAP Quebec with respect to the purchase hy the
Borrower of the outstanding Equity Securities of MAP Quebec and certain indebtedness issued by NAP
Quebec.

“Purchase Money Lien" means a Lion taken or reserved in personal property to secure payment
of all or part of its pnrdrasc price, provided that such Lien (a) secures an amount not exceeding the lesser
of the purchase price of such personal properly and the fair market value of such personal property at the
time such Lien is taken or reserved, (b) extends only to such personal property and its proceeds, and (c) is
granted prior to or within thirty (30) days after the purchase or such personal property.

“Release” is to be brotrlly interpreted nnd shall include an actual or potential discharge, deposit,
spill, leak, pumping, pouring, emission, emptying. injection, escape, leaching, seepage or disposal of :1
Hazardous Materials which may or may not be in breach ofrmy Environmental and Social Law.

“Restricted Payment" means, with respect to any Person, any payment by such Person (whether
in cash or in kind, and whether by way of actual payment, set-oil} counterclaim or otherwise): (a) of any
dividend, distribution or return of capital with respect to the Equity Securities ot‘ it or any Afﬁliate of it;
(b) on account of the purchase, redemption, retirement or other acquisition ofnny of the Equity Securities
of it or any Afﬁliate of it, or any warrants. options or similar rights with respect to such Fquity Securities;
(o) of any principal of or interest or premium on any Indebtedness of such Person or any Afﬁliate of it
ranking in right of payment subordinate to any liability of such Person or any Alﬁlialc of it under the
Loan Documents; (d) of any principal of or interest or premium on any Indebtedness of such Person to a
holder of Equity Securities of such Person or any Alliliate of it or to an Affiliate of a holder of Equity
Securities of such Person or All'ilinte of it; (e) ofnny management, consulting or similar fee or any bonus
payment or compamhle payment, or by way of gilt or other gratuity, to any Afﬁliate of such Person or to
any director or officer of such Person or any Affiliate of such Person or any Person not dealing at arm‘s
length with any such otliccr or director; (f) for the purpose of setting apart any property {or a sinking,
defensunce or other analogous Fund for any of the payments referenced above and (g) any other payment
equivalent or analogous in effect to any of the foregoing.

“Security Documents" means the agreenmits, documents and instruments set out in Schedule A
attached hereto and any and all other agreements, documents or ulstrnulcnts now or hereaher executed
and delivered by any Credit Party to the Lender as security for the payment and performance ofall or part
of the obligations of any Credit Parties hereunder or under any other Loan Documents.

“Solvent” at any time when used with mpect to a Person means that at such time (a) such Person
is not for any reason unable to meet its obligations as they generally become due, (b) such Person has not

omit ytmcnem - hlntrlon: Minerals


. 13 .
ceased paying its current obligations in the ordinary course of businesa as they generally become due and
(c) the aggregate property of such Person is, at a fair valuation, sufﬁcient, or, if disposed of at a fairly
conducted sale under legal process, would be sufﬁcient, to enable payment of all its obligations. due and
accruing dne.

“Subsidiary” ofany l'erson (the “relevant party") at anytime means and includes (a) any Person
that is Controlled by the relevant party and a majority of whose voting Equity Securities is at that time
owned by the relevant party directly or indirectly through Subsidiaries of the relevant party and (b) any
other Person (A) the accounts of which are consolidated with those of the relevant party in lire relevant
party’s consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with lh'RS and (B) that in Controlled by
the relevant party. A Person shall be deemed to bc a Subsidiary of another Person it' it is a Subsidiary ofn
Person that is that nthcr’s Subsidiary. Unless otherwise expressly provided, all references herein to a
“Subsidiary” shall mean a Subsidiary of the Borrower.

“Taxes” means all taxes, charges, tees, levies, inrposts and other assessments, including all
income, sales, use, goods and services, harmonized soles, value added, capital, capital gains, alternative,
net worth, transfer, proﬁls, \villdrolding, payroll, employer health, excise. real property and personal
property taxes. and any other laxes, customs duties, fees, assessments, or similar charge: in the nature ofa
tax, including federal and provincial pcmion plan contributions, unemployment insurance payments and
\Vurkers' compensation premiums, together with any instalments with respect thereto, and any interest,
lines and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by any Governmental Authority (including federal, state,
provincial, municipal and foreign Governmental Authorities), and whether disputed or not.

“Termination Dnte“ means the ﬁrst date on which (a) the Commitments have been terminated,
and (b) llre principal of and interest on each Loan and all other Obligations tinder the Loan Documents
shall have been indefcasibly paid and discharged in full.

“Transactions” means the execution, delivery and performance by the Credit Parties of this
Agreement and the other Loan Documents, the borrowing of the Loan and the use of the proceeds theer
1.2 Extended Meanings. To the extent the context so admits, in this Agreement the following words
and expressions shall be given the following cumspondiug extended meanings:

an “ngreement” — any agreement, oral or written, any simple contract, deed or specialty, and
includes any bond, bill of exchange, indenture, instrument or undertaking.

“arrn’s length" — the meaning attributed llrcrcto under the Income Taxch (Camtda).

an “asset” — any undertaking, bnsirress, property (real, personal or mixed. tangible or intangible)
or other asset.

an “authorization” any authorization, approval, consent, exemption, licence, pernril, franchise,
quota, privilege or Ito—action letter from any Guvernmcntal Authority or from any Person in connection
with any easements or contractual r'iglrls.

“change” — change. modify, alter, amend, supplement, extend, renew, cornpmrnisu, novate,
replace, terminate (excluding, for clarity, termination in accordance with the express terms of an
applicable agreement, but not resulting from any breach, default or other equivalent or analogous cause),
release, discharge, cancel, suspend or waive.

clean Agrrcmsnt - Maudnn: Minerals


. 14 ,

“claim” — claim, claim over, counter-claim, cross-claim, defence, demand or liability (actual or
contingent, now existing or arising ltcrcaltcr), whether arising by agreement or statute, at law or in equity
or otherwise, or any proceeding. judgment or order of any court or other Governmental Authority or
arbitrator.

a “document” — a written agreement, consent, waiver, certiﬁcate, notice or other written
document or instrument.

a "ﬁnal judgment" a judgment, order, declaration or award of a court, other Governmental
Authority, arbitrator- or other alternative dispute resolution authority ol'competentjurisdiction from which
no appeal may be made or from which all rights of appeal have expired or been exhausted,

“grurrantee” ~ any guarantee, indemnity, letter of comfort or other assurance made in respect of
any indebtedness or any other obligation or ﬁnancial wndiliun of another, including (a) any purchase or
repurchase agreement, (b) any obligation to supply funds or invest in such other, (c) any keep-well, take-
or-pay, through»th or other arrangement having the effect of assuring or holding harmless another ‘
against ﬁnancial loss, or maintaining another’s solvency or ﬁnancial viability or (d) any obligation under-
auy credit Derivative; but shall exclude endorsements on notes, bills and cheques presented to financial
institutions for collection or deposit in the ordinary course of business.

“include” include without limitation and such term shall not be construed to limit any word or
statement which it follows to the speciﬁc items or matters immediately following it or similar terms or
matters.

“knowledge” ofnny Person to the best of that Person's knowledge, information and belief alter
reasonable enquiry.

“losses and expenses” losses, costs, expenses, damages, penalties, awards, orders and claims,
including any applicable court costs and legal fees and disbursements on a [tilt indemnity basis.

“obligations” 7- indebtedness, obligations, promises, covenants, responsibilities, drrties and
liabilities (actual or contingent, direct or indirect, matured or unmatured, now existing or arising
hereaﬂer), whether arising by ayeemeul or statute, at law, in equity or nthenvise.

a “proceeding” airy proceeding, legal action, lawsuit, arbitration, mediation, alternative dispute
resolution proceeding or other proceeding.

:1 “receiver” a privately appointed or court appointed receiver or receiver rind manager, interim
receiver, liquidator, mrstce—in-bankrnptcy, administrator, administrative receiver and any other like or
similar ofﬁcial.

“register” register, tile or record with an applicable Governmentle Authority.

a "representative" any Person empowered to act for another, including an agent. an oil-tee: or
other employee of a body corporate or association :1an at trustee, executor or administrator of an estate.

“rigllta"— rights, titles, beneﬁts, interests, powers, authorities, diseretions, privileges, immunities
and remedies (actual or contingent, direct or indirect, matured or unmanned, now existing or arising
hercalter), whether arising by agreement or statute, at law, in equity or otherwise.
man Agrcemcnl- MaurtuteMinmis


. 15 .

“set-an" — any right or obligation of scruff, compensation, oll‘scl, combination of accounts,
netting. retention, withholding, reduction. deduction, counter-claim or any similar right or obligation, or
(as the context requires) any exercise of any such right or performance of such obligation.

“written” and “in writing" — an original writing, a pdf or facsimile copy of a writing or an e-
mail.

1.3 References to Agreements. Unless the context otherwise requires, each reference in this
Agreement to any agreement or document (including this Agreement and arty other deﬁned term that is an
agreement or document) shall he construed so as to include such agreement or document (including any
attached schedules, appendices and exhibits) and each change made to it at or before the time in question;
provided that any change to any agreement or document which is not made in compliance with the loan
Documents shall be disregarded for the purposes of determining whether or not the Credit l’nrty party
thereto has breached its obligations relative thereto under the Loan Documents (save for any obligations
nut to change such agreement or document contained in any Loan Document).
1.4 Grammatical Variations. in this Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires, (i) words
and expressions (including words and expressions (capitalized or not) deﬁned or given extended
meanings) in the singular include the plural and vice wrer (the necessary changes being made to fit the
context), (ii) words in one gender include all genders and (iii) grarrtmalical variations of words and
expressions (capitalized or not) which are defraud. given extended meanings or incorporated by reference
in this Agreement shall be construed in like manner.
1.5 Buy Nut |I Business Day. in the event that any day on or before which any action is required to
be taken hereunder is not a Business Day, then such action shall be required to be taken on or before the
requisite time on the next succeeding day that is a Business Day.
1.6 Time. All time reforms herein shall, unless otherwise speciﬁed, hc references to local time in
Toronto, Ontario. Tiurc is ot’thc csscncc of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
1.7 Permitted Liens. Any reference in any of the Loan Documents to a Permitted Lien is not
intended to subordinate or postpone, and shall not be interpreted as snbordinating or postponing, or as any
agreement to subordinate or postpone, any Lien created by any of the Loan Documents to any Permitted
Lion.
1.8 Onébce Muller‘s. For pulposcs of any assets, liabilities or entities located in the Province of
Quebec and for all other purposes pursuant to which the interpretation or construction of this Agreement
may be subject to the laws of the Province of Quehec or a court or tribunal exercising jurisdiction in the
Province ol'Quéhec, (a) “pcrsmal property” shall include “movable property”. (b) “oral properly" or “real
estate” shall include “immovable property" (including immovable real rights), (0) “tangible property"
shall include “corporeal property“, (d) “intangible property" shall include “incorporcal property",
(e) “security interest", “mortgage” and “lien” shall include a “hypnthec”, “right of retention", “prior
claim" and a rcsolutory clause, (f) all references to ﬁling. perfection, priority, remedies, registering or
recording under the Uniform (.‘muumrcial (.‘ode or a Personal Property Securin Ac] shall include
publication under the Civil Code cf Québec, (g) all references to “perihelion” of or “perfected” liens or
security interest shall include a reference to a lien or security interest “oppusable” to or which can be “set-
up” as against third parties including the State, (it) any "right of ottsct”, "right of scroll“ or similar
expression shall include a “right of compensation”, (i) “goods” shall include “cmpomrl movable
property” other than chattel paper, documents of title, irrstnrrncnts, money and securities, 0) an "agent"
shall include a “nurndntar'y”, (k)“cor|slruction liens" shall include “legal hypothecs”; (l)“jaint and
several” shall include “snlidary”; (in) “gross negligence or wilful misconduct" shall be deemed to he
cit-an Amman — Manda": Minerals


_ 15 _

“intentional or gross fault“; (it) “beneﬁcial ownership" shall include “ownership on hehalfot‘ another as

mandataiy”; (o) “casement” shall include “servitude”; (p) “priority” shall include “prior claim“;
((1) “survey” shall include “certiﬁcate of location and plan”; (r) “state” shall include “province”; (s) “fee
simple title” shall include “absolute ownership”; (t)“au:ounls” shall include “claims”; and
(n) “investment property" shall include ﬁnancial assets. The parties hereto conﬁrm that it is their wish
that this Agreement and any other docrunent executed in connection with the transactions contemplated
herein be drawn tip in the English language only and that all other documents contemplated thereunder or
relating thereto, including notices, may also be drawn up in the English language only. (as pin-(inr- aux
[mammot- Cull/it‘llllllll qne c'crl [cur vnlrmlé qua eerie convention er [en ("mar documents dc crédit .mieni
rt‘rligér r'n lnngne (mglnisc «en/cumin 1" 11m! Iona let- documents, y cnmpria Inns nvir, euvixagés par eerie
convention e! [as ani'res docinnenl: penvenl Eire I'e'digér en Inngne (Inglnixe renlemenl.

ARTICLE 2
THE CREDIT FACILITY

2.] Commitment and Luau.

(a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Lender eonunits to make a
Loan to the Borrower on the Closing Date in a principal amount of522,000,00tl (the “Comnrinuent”).

(b) The Borrower, for value received, unconditionally promises to pay on the Maturity
Date to the Lender the then Principal Amount, together with the amount of all other Obligations then
owing. The Principal Amount and all such other amounts, whether of principal, interest, costs or
otherwise, shall bear interest on the outstanding amount thereof [torn time to tiure at an annual rate of
interest equal to the Interest Rate, such interest to be calculated daily and payable both before and aﬁer
maturity, default and judgment, with intermt on overdue interest at the same rate, until the Principal
Amount and all other such amounts are paid in full. Accrued interest shall he paid quarterly, commencing
on July 2, 201.1 and on each Payment Date thereaﬁer and on the Maturity Date. In addition, in the cvcnl
ofauy prepayment pursuant to Sections 2.3 or 2.6, accrued interest on the Principal Amount prepaid shall
be payable on the date of such prepayment.

(c) All interest hereunder shall be payable for the actual number of days elapsed (including i
the ﬁrst day but exclnding the last day) 'the rate of interest antler this Agreement is a nominal rate. and
not an effective rate or yield. The principle of deemed reinvestment of interest does not apply to any i
interest calculation under this Agreement.

(d) if any provision of this Agreement would oblige the Borrower to make airy payment of
interest or other amount payable to the Lender in an amount or calculated at a rate which would be illegal
or would result in a receipt by the Lender of “interest” at a “criminal rate” (as such terms are construed
under the Criminal Code (Camden, then, notwithstanding such provision, such amount or rate shall be
deemed to have been adjusted with retroactive effect to the maximum amount or rate of interest, as the
case may he, as would not be so illegal or so result in a receipt by the Lender of “interest” at a “criminal
rate”, such adjustment to be effected. to the extent necessary (but only to the extent necessary), as
follows: (i) ﬁrst. by reducing the amount or rate of illlCl‘cSl required to he paid to the Lender under
Section 21(1)); and (ii) thereafter, by reducing any fees, commissions, costs, expenses, premiums and
other amounts required to be paid to the Lender which would constitute interest for purposes of
section 347 of the Criminal Code (Canada).
(0) By the earlier of (i) the date which is three (3) Business Days following the completion
of the private placement referenced in Section 7.1(r) and (ii) April [5, 2013 and on each subsequent
Payment Date, the Borrower shall deposit funds into the Interest Escrow Account equal to the amount of
(rod it Ayetlncnl - Mer Mlmmlt


_ |7 _
interest payable over the following four (4) Payment Dates on the Principal Amount outstanding atter
such borrowing takes place. The amount required to be deposited in the Interest Escrow Account shall be
redctcrmined on each Payment Date, so that it is equal to the amount of interest payable over the next
following four (4) Payment Dates on the Principal Amount outstanding on such date of determination. tn
the event that cash on deposit in the Interest Escrow Account is greater than the amount required by this
subsection Following the payment of interest required hereunder on such Payment Date, such excess
amount may be withdrawn by the Borrower so long as no Default or Event of Default is continuing. 't‘he
Lender may (but shall not be obliged to) front time to time in respect of any overdue payment of interest
hereunder in Its sole discretion withde from the Interest Escrow Account and apply any monies in the
Interest Escrow Account. to a payment of interest that is then overdue under this Agreement. whereupon
the Borrower shall be obliged to deposit a like amount of funds into the Interest Escrow Aeeonnl within
two (2) Business Days of receiving notice ot'sueh withdrawal.
2.2 Lender’s Records. The Lender will maintain records evidencing (a) the amount owing
hereunder from time to time. including interest aunt other amounts payable hereunder, and (b) the amounts
from time to time paid by the “mower to the Lender pursuant to this Agreement. The Borrower agrees ‘
that such records kept by the Lender will constitute conclusive evidence of the matters referred to above,
absent manifest error; provided, however, that the failure of the Lender to make any entry or recording in
such record, or any error in any such entry or recording, shalt not lirrrit or otherwise aﬂ‘ccl the obligations
of the Borrower under this Agreement or with respect to any principal, interest or other amounts owed to
the Lender.
2.3 Promissory Note. To ﬁrrther evidence the Obligations owing by the Borrower lo the Lender
pursuant to this Agreement the Borrower shall execute and deliver to the Lender a promissory note in the
form of Exhibit A attached hereto in the principal amount of the Loan.
2.4 Payment Terms. Each payment under this Agreement shall be made in Canadian Dollars and in
cleared immediately available funds by the Borrower to the Lender by bank or wire transfer to the
account of the Lender as directed by the Leader to the Borrower on or before the date due. All amounts
due under this Agreement shall he payable by the Borrower without abatement, set<olT or counterclaim
for any reason whatsoever.
2.5 Voluntary Pr'epayrncnts. The Borrower may. at its option, at any time and from time to time,
prepay the Principal Amount, in whole or in part, upon giving five (5) Business Days’ prior written notice
to the Lender. Such notice shall specify the date and the amount of prepayment. [fairy such notice is
given, the amount specified in such notice shall be (the and payable on the date specified therein, together
with accrued interest on such date in accordance with Section 2. l(b) and any Prepayment Premium
payable under Seetion2,7. Each voluntary prepayment of any Loan shall he in a minimum principal
amount of $l,000,000 and in an integral multiple of $100,000. No such prepayment of any Principal ‘
Amount may be reborrowed.
2.6 Mandatory I'rcpayurents.

(a) On or before the 90“: day atter the last day of each Fiscal Year of the Borrower, the
Borrower shall deliver to the Lender a certiﬁcate, setting out in reasonable detail the calculation of Excess
Cash Flow for such Fiscal Year. Subject to Section 2.6(c), on the third day after delivery of the notice
provided above, but in no event later than the 93'“ day alter the last day of each Fiscal Year of the
Borrower. the Borrower shall prepay to the Lender an aggregate principal amount of the Loan equal to
seventy-live per cent (75%) of such Ext:er Cash Flow.

Credit Agreement - minor: Milemt:


.13.

(b) Subject to Section 2.6(e), in the event of an Asset Disposition by any Credit Party, the
Borrower shall, within ﬁve Business Days of such Asset Disposition, prepay to the Lender an aggregate
principal amount of the Loan equal to the auroqu of Net Proceeds; provided that this prepayment
requirement shall not apply:

(i) to that portion of such Net Proceeds which, when aggregated with the Net

Proceeds from any other Asset Disposition made in the same Fiscal Year in respect of which

payment has not been made pursuant to this Section 21:. is less than $1,000,000;

(ii) to that portion of such Net Proceeds (other than insurance proceeds) used by a

Credit Party to purchase replacement assets within 90 days of such Asset Disposition it‘, prior to

such Asset Disposition, the Borrower has notiﬁed the Lender of its intention to apply the Net

Proceeds in such manner and the Lender has, in its reasonable discretion, consented to such

application; or

(iii) if such Asset Disposition is made to a Credit l’auty.

(0) Subject to Section 2,6(e), the Borrower shall, within ﬁve Business Days of any sale or
issuance of any Equity Securities (other than ﬂow through olI‘erings which are restricted to exploration
expenditures and other than the private placement referenced in Section 7.|(r) and a further private
placement of approximately $13,000,000 intended for completion by May 3 l, 2013) by, or the trunking of
any capital contribution to, any Credit Party, prepay to the Lender an aggregate principal amount of the
Loan equal to ninety per cent (90%) of the net cash proceeds of any such sale, issuance or contribution;
pmvidcd that this prepayment requirement shall not apply to:

(i) any sale or issuance ot‘Fqnity Securities to another Credit Party;

(ii) any capital contribution made by another Credit Party; or

(iii) any sale or issuance of Equity Securities by the Borrower the proceeds of which
are used solely for the purpose of limiting the Nonh American Palladium Transaction or
transactions associated with the acquisition of the Windfall Lake property (including the Noront

Option), or for funding the Interest Escrow Account or for payment ofany expenses related to the

foregoing.

(d) Prepayment: of the Loan pursuant to this Section 26 shall be applied to the permanent
prepayment of the Loan. In the case of any prepayment pursuant to any of Sections 2.6(a), (b) or (c), the
Borrower shall pmvidc to the Lender written notice of such prepayment at least five (5) Business Days
prior to the date such prepayment is to be made.

(e) In respect of any partial prepayment of the Loan pursuant to this Section 2.6, the Lender

may, at its option, irrevocably decline receipt of such prepayment, and, it the Lender so declines, such
zunount shall be retained by the Borrower. If the Lender wishes to decline receipt of any given
prepayment pursuant to Section 2.6 it shall promptly, and in any event no later than 5:00 pm. on the
second Business Day following its receipt of the notice of such prepayment, notify the Borrower of such
election.
2.7 Prepayment Premium. 11' the Loan is repaid before the Maturity Date (whether by voluntary or
mandatory prqmyment. acceleration or otherwise), the Borrower shall pay, on the date ol'suelt repayment,
a prepayment fee to the Lender in an amount equal to (a) ﬁﬂeen per cent (15%) of the aggregate principal
amount of the Loan being so repaid. if such repayment occurs prior to the ﬁrst anniversary of the Closing.
Credit/\ymnl - Mondale Minuab


. 19 .
Date, (h) ﬁve per cent (5%) of the aggregate principal amount of the Loan being so repaid, it' such
repayment occurs on or alter the rust anniversary of the Closing Date but prior to the second anniversary
of the Closing Date, and (c) no prepayment fee, if such rqmymcnt occurs on or alter the second
atmiversury of the Closing Date.
2.8 Right of Set-uﬂby Lender. The Lender is hereby authorized at any time and from tilne to time,
to the littlest extent permitted by applicable Law, to set off and apply any and all amounts owing by the
Lender to or for the credit or account of the Borrower against any of the Obligations, irrespective of
whether or not the Lender Shit” have made any demand under any Loan Document and although such
Obligations may he lulmatured The rights of the Lender under this Section are in addition to any other
rights and remedies (including other rights nt‘set oft) which the Lender may have.
2.9 Taxes.

(a) No Willi/mlding; Grow-Up Require/nun], Fach payment required to he made by the
Borrower under each Loan Document shall be matte without sel-oll‘ or counterclaim, Free and clear of,
and without deduction or withholding for or on account of, any Taxes, except tn the extent such deduction
or withholding is required by any applicable Law, as modiﬁed by the administrative practice of any
relevant Governmental Authority, then in emu. To the extent and each time the Borrower is so required
to deduct or withhold Taxes from or in respect of any such payment to or for the account of the Lender,
then the Borrower will:

(i) promptly notify the Lender of such requirement;

(ii) pay to the relevant Governmental Authority when due the full amount required to
be deducted or withheld (including the full amount of indemniﬁed Taxes required to be deducted
or withheld ti‘om any additional amount paid by the Borrower to or for the account of the Lender
under this Section 2.9);

(iii) promptly forward to the Lender an oﬂicial receipt (or a certiﬁed copy), or other
documentation reasonably acceptable to the Lender, evidencing such payment to such
Governmental Authority; and

(iv) with respect to Indemniﬁed 'l'axes, forthwith pay to the Lender, in addition to the l
payment to which the Lender is otherwise entitled under such loan Document, such additional
amount as is necessary to ensure that the net amount actually received by the Lender (free and
clear of, and net of, any such Indcnmil'tcd Taxes, including the full amount of Taxes required to
be deducted or withheld from any additional amount paid by the Borrower under this Section 2.9,
whether assessed against the Borrower or the Lender) will equal the full amount the Lender
would have received had no such deduction or withholding been required.

(b) OI/rcl' Tam. The Borrower shall pay any ()ther Times to the relevant Goveriuucntal
Authority in accordance with applicable Law.

(c) Indemnity. The Borrower shall indemnify the Lender forthwith alter written demand l
therefor, for the hill amount of any Indemniﬁed Taxes or Other 'l'axes paid by the Lender on or with l
respect to any payment by or on account of any obligation of the Borrower or under any other Loan
Document (including Indenlni lictl Taxes or Other Taxes imposed or asselted on or attributable to amounts
payable under this Section 2.9) and any penalties, interest and reasonable expenses arising therefrom or
with respect thereto, whether or not such indemniﬁed Taxes or Other Taxes were correctly or legally
imposed or asserted by the relevant (iovcrnmenml Authority. In addition, the Borrower hclehy
L‘rcr-lit Amman-uh Mandate Miner-II:


l
.20-
iudcmniﬁcs and holds harmless the Lender for all interest, penalties and reasonable expenses, resulting
from or relating to the Borrower‘s failure to:
(i) remit to the Lender the documentation referred to in Section 2.9(a)(iii); or
(ii) pay any Taxes or Other ‘l'axes when due to the relevant Governmental Authority

(including, without limitation, any Taxes imposed by any Govemutental Authority on amounts

payable under tltis Section 2.9).

A certiﬁcate as to the amount of such payment or liability delivered to the applicable Borrower by the
Lender shall be conclusive absent numifest error.

(1!) Indemnilyﬁr Additional Incwue Tax. The Borrower shall also itulcntnify the Lender on
a full indemnity nﬂer—‘t'ax basis, for any additional Taxes on net income that the Lender may be obliged to
pay as a result oFtlte payment of additional amounts under this Section 2.9,

(c) Slums of Lemiem. If the Lender is entitled to an exemption front or reduction of
withholding tax under the law of the ﬁtrisdietiun in which the Borrower is resident for tax purposes. or
any treaty to which such a jurisdiction is a party, with respect to payments hereunder or under any otlua~ l
Loan Document, the tender shall, at the ruptcst of the Borrower, deliver to the Borrower, at the time or ‘
times prescribed by applicable Law or reasonably requested by the Borrower, such properly completed
and executed documentation prescribed by applicable Law as will permit such payments to be made
without withholding or at it reduced rate of withholding. In addition, the Lender, if requested by the
Borrower, shall deliver such other documentation prescribed by applicable Law or reasonably requested
by the Borrower as will enable the Borrower to determine whether or not [lie Leader is subject to
withholding or information reporting requirements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tender shall not
be required to deliver any documentation pursuant to this Section 2.9(e) that the Lender is not legally able
to deliver.

(l) Treolmen! of Certain Refrmdr and Tax Reductions. l’r'tlrc Lender determines, in its sole

discretion, that it has received a refund of any Taxes or Other Texas as to which it has been indemniﬁed
by the Borrower or with respect to which the Borrower has paid additional amounts pursuant to this
Section 2.9 or that, because of the payment of such 't'axes or Other Taxes, it has henctittcd from 3
reduction in Excluded 'l'axes otherwise payable by it, it shall pay to the Borrower an amount equal to such
refund or reduction (but only to the extent of indemnity payments made> or additional amounts paid, by
the Borrower under this Section 2.9 with respect to the Taxes or Other Taxes giving rise to such refund or
reduction), net of all out-utipocket expenses of the Lender and without interest (other than any net aller-
Tax interest paid by the relevant Governmental Autltority with respect to such refund). The Borrower
agrees to repay the amount paid over to the Borrower (plus any penalties, interest or other charges
illtposed by the relevant Governmental Authority) to the Lender if the Lender is required to repay such
refund or reduction to such Goverrunental Authority. This paragraph shall not be construed to require the
Lender to make available its tax returns (or arty other information relating to its tnxes that it deems
conﬁdential) to the Bon'owcr' or any other person1 to arrange its affairs in any particular manner or to ‘
claim any available refund or reduction.
2.10 Currency Indemnity. If, for the purposes of obtainiugjurlgment in any court in any jurisdiction
with respect to this Agreement or arty other Loan Document, it becomes necessary to convcrt into n
particultu' currency (the “Judgment Currency") any amount due under this Agreement or under arty
other Loan Document in any currency other than the Judgment Currency (the “Currency Due"), then
conversion shall be made at the rate ot'cxcltange prevailing on the Business Day before the day on which
judgment is given. For this purpose “rate of exchange” means the rate at which the Lender is able, on the
tireth Amman r Mandate Minerals


. 21 .

relevant date, to purchase the Currency Due with the Judgment Currency. In the event that there is a
change in the rate of exchange prevailing between the Business Day immediately preceding the day on
which the judgment is given and the date of receipt by the Lender ol' the amount due, the applicable
Cmdit Party shall, on the date of receipt by the Lender, pay such additional amounts, it‘any, or be entitled
to receive reimbursement of such amount, il‘auy, as may be necessary to ensure that the amount received
by the Lender on such date is the amount in the Judgment Currency which when convened at the rate of
exchange prevailing on the date of receipt by the Lender is the amount their due rrnder this Agreement or
such other Loan Document in the Currency Due. lt‘thc amount of the Currency Duo which the Lender is
so able to purchase is less than the amount of the Currency Duo originally due to it, the applicable Credit
Party shall indcnmil'y and save the Lender harmless horn and against all loss or damage arising as a resull
ofsnch deficiency, 'lhis indemnity shall constitute an obligation sepru'rite and independent from the other
obligations contained in this Agreement and the other Lorin Documents, shall give rise to a separate and
independent cause of nation, shall apply irrespective of any indulgence granted hy the lender from time
to time and shall continue in full force and cruel notwithstanding any judgment or order [or ii liquidated
stun in respect of an amount due irrider this Agreement or any other Loan Document or under any
judgment or order.

2.11 Fees.

a The Borrower shall pay to the Lender a structuring fee (the “Structiu‘ing Fee”) of

if the Commitments determined on the date hereof) payable on the Closing Date.

(b) The Borrower shall pay to the Lender in deal cancellation fee of $550,000 (2.5% ot‘the
Commitment determined at the date hereot) if the Closing Date has not occurred by December 31, 2013
as a result of cancellation by the Borrower; provided that no such deal cancellation fee shall be payable if
the Closing Date does not occur hy reason of the Bun-owcr‘s inability to provide Liens over its assets with
the validity, effect, perfection and priority contemplated hereby and by the Security Documents or by
reason of the occurrence of a Material Adverse Change.

(6) Tire Borrower hereby irrevocably authorizes and directs the Leader to deduct the
Structuring Foe from the proceeds of the Loan and apply the amount so deducted in and towards
satisfaction and payment of the Structuring Fee to the extent so deducted.

(d) in consideration of the Commitment and in lieu of further structuring fees, the i
Borrower agrees to issuc and deliver to the Lender 1,760,000 bonus corrunon shares (the “Bonus
Shares") in the capital of the Borrower as constituted on the Closing Date and manuals to acquire
“0,000 common shares (the “Bonus Warrants”) in the capital of the Borrower as constituted on the r
Closing Date at ii price equal to the closing price on the TSX Venture Exchange of the common shares in
the capital of the Borrower on March 22, 2013 which Bonus Warrants shall he exercisable for a period of
two (2) years following the Closing Date, and the Lender (i) acknowledges that it is acquiring the Bonus
Shares and the Bonus Warrants with the beneﬁt of the prospectus exemption provided by Section 23 of
National instrument 45406 ~ Prospectus Exempt Distributions (“NI 45—106”) and in that. commotion tilt:
Lender represents that it is acquiring as principal and is an “accredited investor” within the meaning of
Section [J of Ni 45406, and (ii) understands that it will not he able to resell the Bonus Shams or the

Bonus Warrants or the common shares of the Borrower issuable upon the exercise of the Bonus \Vnnnnts
until expiry of the applicable hold period under applicable securities laws except in accordance with
limited exemptions and compliance with other requirements ot‘applicnhlc law, arid the Lender (uud not
the Borrower) is responsible for compliance with applicable resale restrictions or hold periods and will ‘
comply with all relevant securities laws in comrcctiou with any resale of the Bonus Shares or the Bonus
Warrants or the common shares of the Borrower issuable upon the exercise of the Bonus Warrants ‘
(.‘leditAgecnuit - Mundorc Mrrersls


_ 22 _
ARTICLE 3
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
3.1 Representations and Warranties. Each Credit l’arty represents and warrants to the Lender that,
as of the date of this Agreement, as of the date of each borrowing under the Credit Facility (unless the
representation is tirade as ot’the date of this Agreement) and as at the date of each Compliance Certiﬁcate
(unless the representation is made as of the date nl'tltis Agreement):

(a) ()rgmriznliun; I‘awem'. Each Credit Party is duly orgnniud, validly existing and in good
standing under the laws nftlrejuristliction of its organization, has all requisite power and authority to own
its assets and carry on its business as formerly, new and hereaﬂer contemplated to be owned and
conducted and, except where the failure to do so, individually or in the aggregate, is not reasonably likely
to result in a Material Adverse Flfcct, is qualiﬁed to do business in, and is in good standing in, cvcry
jurisdiction where such qualiﬁcation is required.

(h) Authorization; Enﬂn‘ceabilim The Transactions are within the Credit Parties’ corporate
powers and have been duly aullroriml by all necessary corporate and shareholder action, as applicable.
This Agreement and the other Loan Documents have been duly executed and delivered by each Credit
Party (as applicable) and constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of each Credit Party (as
applicable), enforceable in accordance with their terms, subject to applicable bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorgnuimtiou, moratorium or other Laws affecting creditars’ rights generally and subject to general
principles of equity, regardless of whether considered in a proceeding in equity or at law.

(c) Governmental Alqtrarra/s: No Canﬂiclr. The Transactions (i) do not require any
authorization of, registration with, or any olher action by, any Governmental Authority other than
registration of hypothees against mining rights, as prescribed by the Mining Ac! (Quebec), (ii) will not
violate any applicable Law or the charter, by—lnws or other organintioual domrments of any Credit Party
or any order of any Geverrnuental Authority, (iii) will not violate or result in a default under any
indcntnre, agreement or other document binding upon any Credit Party or its assets, or give rise to a right
thereunder to require any payment to be made by any Credit Party, and (iv) will not result in the creation
or imposition of any I .icu on any asset of airy Credit Party, except for any Lieu arising in favour of the
Lender rrndcr the Loan Documents.

(d) No Material Advent: Eﬂeel. Since the date of the Borrower’s most recently prepared
audited ﬁnancial statements, there has been no event, development or eirenmslarree that has had or could
reasonably be expected to lrnve a Material Adverse Etl‘eet.

(e) Liligarimn Except for matters relating to the Environment (which are dealt with in
Section 11(5)), there are no proceedings (including any 'l‘ax-related matter) by or before any arbitrator or
Govenuuculal Authority pending against or, to the knowledge of the Credit Parties, threatened against or
affecting any of the Credit Parties (i) as to which there is a reasonable possibility of an adverse
detcnnination and that, if adversely determined, is reasonably likely, individually or in the aggregate, to
result in a Material Adverse Effect, or (ii) that involve this Agreement, any other Loan Document or the
Transact ions.

(t) Financial Srarzlnenrs. Each financial report and linaneial statement for each of the
Borrower and any Subsidiary dclivcrcd lo the Lender pursuant to or ill connection with Ihis Agrccntcut
have been prepared in accordance with IFRS (subject to year-end audit adjustments and the absence of
notes, where applicable), does not contain (or, if audited, would not contain) any qualiﬁcation and fairly
and accurately presents, in all material respects, the ﬁnancial information and [lie liuancial condition and
results of operations of such Person contained therein as at their respective preparation dates.

Credit Agreement - Mundane Minerals


. 23 ,

(3) Accuracy qflry’ormaliwr. Each financial forecast and projection (“Forecast”) preparer!
and t‘umished by or on behnll’ot‘ any Credit Party to the Lender pursuant to or in connection with arty
Loan Document was prepared in good faith based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable at the time
of preparation thereoJ'(it being understood and agreed that projections are not to be viewed as facts or a
guarantee of ﬁnancial performance, are subject to signiﬁcant uncertainties and contingencies many of
which are beyond the Credit Party’s control, that neural results may differ from projected results and such
dill'erences may be material), No information (excluding Forecasts) furnished to the Lender by or on
behalf of any Credit Party in connection with any of the Loan Documents contains, when taken us a
whole, when furnished, any material misstatement of fact or omits to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements contaiqu therein not misleading, in any material respect, in light 01‘ the
circumstances in which they were made and as of the date made (utter giving etl'ect to all supplements
and updates thereto from time to time).

(h) Complime nil/r Laue. Each Credit Party is in compliance with all Laws appliulble to it
and its assets, except where the failure to do so, individually or in the aggregate, has not had and is not
reasonably likely to have a Whit/cried Advcrsc Btl‘cct. No Credit Party has violated or failed to obtain any
authorization necessary for the ownership of any of its assets or the conduct of its business, which
violation or failure has had or is reasonably likely to have (in the event that such a violation or failure
were asserted by any Person through appropriate action) it Material Adverse Effect.

(i) Calrlpliuncc will: Agmmllenls. No Credit Party is in deﬁtult, nor has any cvcnt or
circumstance occurred which, but for the passage of tinte or the giving of notice, or both, would constitute
a default, under (i) any loan or credit agreement, indenture, mortgage, deed of trust, security agreement or
agreement evidencing or pertaining to any Indebtedness of any Credit Party in an aggregate amount
exceeding $500,000 (or equivalent in Foreign currency), (ii) airy Material Contract or (iii) airy other
agreement or document to which a Credit Party is a party or by which any Credit Party is bound, where
the consequences of default under any agreement or document set out in (i), (ii) or (iii) is reasonably
likely to have a Material Adverse Tiﬂ‘cct. No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing.

(i) Trims. Each Credit Party has ﬁled or caused to be tiled all Tax returns and reports
required to have been ﬁled and has paid or caused to be paid all Taxes required to have been paid hy it
(including all instalments with respect to the current period), whether or not shown on any 't‘nx return, and
has made adequate provision for Taxes for the current period, except t'or Taxes that are being contested by
Contested 'l‘nx Proceedings. Nu assets of any Credit Party are subject to any Lien for delinquent Taxes.
No assessment or notice of deficiency with respect to any tax of a Credit Party has been received from,
or has been threatened to be delivered by. any Govcnuucntal Authority. No Governmental Authority has
asserted, or threatened or proposed to assert, thut any Credit Party is subject to Tax in airy jurisdiction in
which the Credit Party has not ﬁled Tax returns

(k) Til/er m l’mpa‘ty. The Credit l’urtics have indefensible fee simple title to their respective
owned real proper-tics With respect to teased real properties. each Credit Party has indct'cas iblc title to
the leasehold estate with respect thereto, pursuant to valid and enforceable lenses, free and clear of all
Liens except Permitted Liens Tire Credit Parties have title to their respective owned pursuian properties,
and with respect to least personal properties, title to the leasehold estate with respect thereto, pursuant to
valid and enforceable leases, free and clear nfnll Liens except l'crnxittcd Liens.

(l) Duel/ileum] Properly.

(i) Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries has used its intellectual Property

Rights that are material to its business in such manner as to preserve its rights therein, including
ErrdttApeenxnI-Mmdm: roman


‘24.

the use of proper notices indicating ownership of and/or rights to use such Intellectual Property
Rights, to the extent reasonably necessary for the protection of such Intellectual Property Rights.

(ii) Except for any claims with respect to which the Borrower has provided to the
lender written notice within ten (10) Business Days of learning thereof, the Borrower is not
aware of any claim having been made that the use of any intellectual Property Rights of any of
the Borrower and its Subsidiaries that are material to its business or the sale or licensing of any
such Intellectual Property Rights that are material to its business does or may violate the rights of
any other Person.

(iii) All licences of Intellectual Properly Rights that are material to the business ofthc

Borrower and its Subsidiaries are in full forte and effect nnantended, the Borrower or Suhsidiry

party thereto has duly observed and performed all of its covenants and obligations under each

such licences, except for non-observance and non»perforntanee that has not had and is not

reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Effect, and, to the knowledge of the Borrower, there

has not been any default under or breach of any such Liceners by the other parties thereto except

for any defaults or brcuehts with respect to which the Borrower has provided to the Lender

written notice within ten (10) Business Days of learning thereof.

(In) Group Organization. As of the date of this Agreement, the organizational structure of the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries is as set forth in Schedule D.

(u) Perrrr’nrr I’larrr. As of the date hereof, no Canadian Pension Plan exists other than the
NAP Quebec rlclined Contribution Pension Plan (the “NAP Pension Plan”). and in particular, no
Canadian Pension Plan which contains a “defined beneﬁt provision”, as deﬁned in subsection l47.l(l) of
the Income I'm: Act (Canada) (a “Deﬁned Beneﬁt Plan") exists. with respect to the NAt’ Pension Plan
and any other Canadian Pension Plan existing alter the (late hereof:

(i) such Canadian Pension Plan is duly registered under the Irrearrre Trix Act
(Canada) and applicable pension standards legislation and no event has occurred
which could reasonably be expected to cause the loss of such registered status;

(ii) such Canadian Pension Plan has been administered, funded and invested in
accordance with the terms of the particular plan, all applicable laws (including.
where applicable, the Incurrw Tut Ac! (Canada)) and pension standards
legislation, and the terms of all applicable collective bargaining agreements and
employment contracts, save for any Iailurc to do so which has not had and is not
reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Effect;

(iii) all obligations 01‘ each of the Credit Parties (including funding, investment and
administration obligations) ruprircd to be performed in connection with such
Canadian Pension Plan and the funding agreements therefor have been performed
on a timely basis, save for any failure to do so which has not had and is not
reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Effect;

(iv) there are no outstanding disputes concerning any assets of such Canadian
Pension Plan, save for any dispute which has not had and is not reasonably likely
to have a Material Adverse Effect; l

l
man Agreement . Mention: Mmean


_  _

(v) no prioritise of material beneﬁt improvements under such Canadian Pension Plan
has been made, except as required by applicable law, and except as disclosed to
the Lender;

(Vi) all employee and employer payments and contributions (including “normal cost",
“special payments” and other paytnents in respect of any tltnding deﬁciencies or
shortfalls) or premiums required to be withheld, rmrtle, remitted or paid to or in
respect of such Canadian Pension Plan from a Credit Party or any of its Affiliates
have been withheld, made, remitted or paid on a timely basis in accordance with
the terms of sttch plans, any applicable collective bargaining agreement.
employment contracts and all applicable laws, save for arty failure tn do so which
has not had anti is not reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Effect;

(vii) any assessments owed to the Pension Beneﬁts Guarantee Fund established under
the Petition Benefits Ac! (Ontario) in respect ofsuclt Canadian Pettsinn Plan has
been paid when duo, save for any failure to do so which has not had and is not
reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse ﬁt'l'cet;

(viii) there has been no improper withdrawal or application or the assets of the
Canadian Pension Plan, save for any withdrawal or application which has not had
and is not reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Eﬂ‘ccl;

(ix) if such Canadian Pension Plan is a Deﬁned Beneﬁt Plan, a copy of the most
recent actuarial valuation report prepared in respect of such plan has been made
available to the Lender;

(x) no event has occurred which could reasonath be expected to give rise to a partial
or full termination of such Canadian Pension Plan, which partial or full
lenniaaliou is reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Effect;

(xi) no event has occurred or is reasonably expected to occur that would trigger or
otherwise require immediate or accelerated funding in respect of such Canadian
Pension Plait, which immediate or accelerated funding is reasonably likely to
have a Material Adverse EiTect; and

(xii) such Canadian Pension Plan is funded on a solvency basis, going concern basis ‘
and wind-up basis (using actuarial methods and assumptions which are consistent
with the actuarial valuations lust ﬁled for the particular plan with the applicable
Govcutntcnlal Authorities and which are consistent with accounting principles).
save to the extent the failure to do so is not reasonably likely to have a Material
Adverse Effect. ‘

(o) Casual/ins; Taking ofPrapw'liex. Since December 31, 2011. neither the business nor the
assets of any Credit Party have been affected in a manner that has bad, or is reasonably likely to have, a
Material Adverse Ett'cet or has resulted or is reasonably likely to rcsnltul in a loss in excess of $250,000
as a result of any ﬁre, explosion. earthquake. ﬂood, drought, Windstorm, accident, strike or other labour
disturbance, embargo, requisition or taking of property or cancellation of contracts, permits or
concessions by any domestic or foreign Governmental Authority, riot. activities of armed forces, or acts
of God or of any public enemy.
mm Ame-mm 7 Math Nimmls


_ 2r, _

(p) Insm‘ancrz. 'lhe Credit Parties maintain insurance policies and coverage in compliance
with Section 5.10). Such insurance coverage (i) is sull'rcient for compliance with all requirements of
applicable Law and of all agreements to which any Credit Party is a party, (ii) is provided under valid,
outstanding and enforceable policies, (iii) provides udcquutc insurance coverage in at least such amounts
and against at least such risks (but including in any event public liability) as are usually ilrsured against in
the some general area by Persons engaged in the same or a similar business to the assets and business of
the Credit Parties. and (iv) will not in any way be affected by, or terminate or lapse by reason of, the
'l‘ransnctimts. All such material policies are in full force and cll'cct, all premiums with respect thereto
have been paid in accordance with their respective terms, and no notice of cancellation or terminntion has
been received with rspect to any such policy. The certiﬁcate of insurance delivered to the Lender
pursuant to Section 4.l(i) contains an accurate and complete description of all material policies of
insurance owned or held by each Credit Party on the Closing Date

((1) Solvency. Eadr Credit Party is Solvent.

(r) Material Contracts. llach of the Material Contracts is in full force and effect. No Credit
Party is in default under or in breach of any term or condition of any Material Contract, nor is any Credit
Party aware of any default rrndcr or hrcaeh of any term or condition ot‘any Material Contract by any other
party tltcrcto. No agrccmcul to which any Credit Party is a puny contains any material provisions which
impose burdensome or onerous obligations on any Credit Party which are inconsistent with prudent
commercial activity by eury Credit Party.

(5) Ember/menial Mal/err.

(i) Neither any property of any Credit Party nor the operations conducted thereon
violate any applicable order of any court or Governmental Authority or any Environmental and
Social Law. which violation l'ltIS resulted or is reasonably likely to result in Environmental
Liability in excess of $500,000 or remedial obligations which could have a Material Adverse
Effect.

(ii) All Environmental Permits, required to be obtained or ﬁled by the Credit Parties
in connection with the exploration, development and opemtion or use of any and all property of
the Credit Parties, including but not limited to past or prwcnt extraction, processing and treatment
of metal ore, and treatment, transportation, storage, disposal or Release of llanrdous Materials
into the Environment, have been duly obtained or l'iled, except lo the extent the failure to obtain ‘
or ﬁle such Environmental Permits has not resulted and is not reasonably likely to result in an
Environmental Liability in excess of $500,000, has not had and is not reasonably likely to have a
Material Adverse Effect, and has not resulted and is not reasonably likely to result in remedial
obligations \vhieh could have a Material Adverse Eﬂ‘cct.

(iii) All Hazardous Materials generated at airy and all property of melt Credit l'ruty
have been treated, transported, stored and disposed of only in accordance with all Environmental
and Social Law applicable to them, except to the exlent the failure to have such Hazardous
Materials transported, treated or disposed of by stroll carriers has not had and is not reasonably
likely to have a Materier Adverse Effect and has not resulted and is not reasonably lilter to result
in an Environmental Liability in excess of $500,000, and only of treatment, storage and disposal ‘
facilities maintaining valid Environmental Pcnuils, which carriers and facilities have been and are
operating in compliance with such Envimmucntal Perm its, except to the extent the failure to have
such Hazardous Materials treated. transportedI stored or disposed of at such facilities. or the
thilure of such carriers or Facilities to so operate, has not had and is not reasonably likely to have
a Material Adverse Effect, has not resulted and is not reasonably likely to result in an

Credit Ayretllenl . rnudm Mir-rials


.27.
Environmental Liability in excess of$500,000, and which has not resulted and is not reasonably
likely to result in remedial obligations having a Material Adverse BchcI.

(iv) The Credit Parties have taken all reasonable steps necessary to determine and
have determined that no Hazardous Materials have been disposed of or otherwise released and
there has been no threatened Release of any Havarduus Materials on or to any property of the
Credit Parties other than in compliance with Environmental and Social Law, except to the extent
the failure to do so has not resulted and is not reasonably likely to result in Environmental
Liability in excess of $500,000, has not. had and is not reasonably likely to have a Material
Adverse Eﬂ'ecl and which has not resulted and is not reasonably likely to result in remedial
obligations which could have a Material Adverse l'ill'ccl.

(v) The Credit Parties have no Environmental Liability in connection with any
Release or threatened Release of any Hazardous Materials into the Envimrnncrrl, except
(X) Environmental Liabilities which do not and are not reasonably likely to exceed, in the
aggregate, $500,000 in excess of applicable insurance coverage at arty one time and from time to
lime, mid for which adequate reserves for the payment thereof have been provided, and
(Y) Environmental Liabilities which have not resulted and are not reasonably likely to result in
remedial obligations which could have a Material Adverse Effect.

(t) Employer: Matters. None ofthc Credit Parties, nor any of their respective employees, is
subject to any collective bargaining agreement other than those set forth in Schedule I. There are no
strikes, slowdowns, work stoppages or controversies pending or, to llre best knowledge of the Credit
Parties, threatened against any Credit Party, or its employees, which have had or are reasonably likely to
have, either individually or in the aggregate. a Material Adverse Effect. Each of the Credit Parties has
withheld from each payment to each of their respective officers, directors and employees the amount of
all 'l‘nxcs, employment insurance premiums and other payments and deductions required to be withheld
therefrom. and has paid the same to the proper taxation or other receiving authority in accordance with
applicable Law. No Credit Party is subject to any claim by or liability to any ot'thcir respective ofﬁcers,
directors or employees for salary (including vacation pay) or beneﬁts which would rank in whole or in
part par'ipuss'u with or prior to the Liens tn'eated by the Security Documents.

(u) Employee Beneﬁt Matters, Each Employee Beneﬁt Plan is in material compliance in
all material respccu with all applicable laws and the respective requirements of the governing documents
for such plan. With respect to any Employee Beneﬁt Plan maintained or contributed to by the Borrower
or any Subsidiary, reasonable reserves have been established in accordance with prudent business practice
or where required by best accounting practices in the jurisdiction in which such plan is maintained having
regard to tax legislation. The aggregate unfunded liabilities, aﬁer giving effect to any reserves for such
liabilities, with respect to all linrployce Beneﬁt Plans could not be reasonably expected to result in a
liability in excess of $100,000. There is no proceeding or claim (other than routine claims for beneﬁts)
pending or, to the knowledge of the Borrower, threatened against the Borrower or any Subsidiary with
respect to any Employee Beneﬁt Plan.

(v) Anlidltloney Laundering legislation. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries is itt
compliance with all Anti-Money Laundering Legislation.

(w) Location qussets. All places of business and locations of the assets of each of the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries, and the chief executive oﬁice (within the meaning oi'Seclion 7(3) of the
l'l’SA) of each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, are described in Schedule E.

Credit Apmmnm - Mandate mama


. 23 .

(x) Security Dnermmnls. Suhjeet to Section 4. l(nr), the Security Documents create valid
and enforceable ﬁrst priority perfected Liens (subject to Permitted Liens) upon the Col lateral on the terms
set out therein, subject only to the terms of this Agreement, and the Security Documents have been
registered ill all places where registration or of advantage is necessary to preserve, protect and perfect the
Liens intended to be created thereby.

(y) Mining Rig/us. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries has acquired or obtained or
will acquire or obtain (when required) all assets (including mining rights), and has obtained or will obtain
(when required) such other surface and other rights, authorizations us are necessary for access rights,
water rights, plant sites, railings disposal, waste dumps, ore dumps, abandoned harps or ancillary ﬁtcilities
which are required in coturcctiou with the development and operation and eventqu closure of each
Operating Mine. Other than its disclosed in Schedule F and Schedule C, no Person has a right or interest
capable of becoming a right to acquire an interest in each Operating Mine or any royalty or other interest
in respect of each Operating Mine.

(2) Mining Properties. As of the date of this Agreement, the mining properties described

ill ScltcdulcF (the “Mining Properties") constitute all uflhe material mining properties owned, leased,
subleascd, or used hy the Borrower or any Subsidiary, including all nrincral licences, claims, mining
leases and concessiosz horn Governmental Authorities in respect of each Operating Mine, [inch of the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries has valid title to all of its owned Mining Properties (subject to Permitted
Lions), and valid leasehold interests in all of its leased Mining Properties (subject to Permitted Lions).
Schedule F further describes any Mining Properties with respect to which the Borrower or any Subsidiary
is a lesser. snblcssor or assignor. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries has received all deeds,
assignments, waivers, consents, bills of sale and other documents, and has duly effected all registrations
and other actions necessary to establish, preserve, protect and perfect the Borrower’s or such Subsidiary‘s
rights in and to all such Mining Properties, where in caeh case the failure to have received or effected
same is reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Effect. All material l'invironrncntal Permits and
other authorizations required to have been issued or appropriated to enable the Mining Properties to be
lawfully occupied and used for all of the purposes for which they are currently occupied and used have
been lawfully issued and are in full force and eﬂ'ect. where in each case the failure to have received,
eﬁ‘eetcd or maintained same is reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse Ell‘ect,

(as) Ram/lies. Schedule G is a complete and correct list of all existing royalties with
respect to each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries (the “Permitted Royalties"). Other than the
Permitted Royalties, in respch 01' which the Borrower has provided the Lender with copies of all material
documents related thereto; there are no other agreements, documents or understandings pursuant to which
any other Person has any royally of any type or ltiud whatsoever or any right similar thereto in respect of
Ilre Mining Properties or any production related thereto.

(lrh) Mining Tat (Trudi/x. Each Credit Party is entitled to a refund of income tax for Quebec
income tax purposr.‘ for each taxation year in the amount set out in Schedule II. Each Credit Party has
ruude all necessary requests, filings and claims for purposes of obtaining Milling Tax Credits and all
credits and other fiscal incentives to which it was entitled under the Taxation Act (Quéhec) in respect of
all prior taxation years, including but not limited to the tax credit for resources and the credit on duties
refundable [or losses. Each Credit Par1y is unconditionally and absolutely entitled to receive payment of
the amounts on or before the dates specified in Schedule ll on account of Mining Tax Credits, subject to
audit variance of tip to live percent (5%) of the amounts speciﬁed.

(cc) Now-1711011311 Obligations. The Borrower has issued “ﬂow-through shares" within the
meaning of subsection 66(15) of the ﬁrearm! Tar Act (Canada) in consideration of which it undertook to
incur certain expenses that qualify as “Canadian exploration expenses" under the ﬁrearm: Tm Ac]
L'rerlirltgm-mnr - Matador: Murmur


. 29 .

(Canada) and the Tara/ion Ac! (Quebec) and to renounce to the subscribers of those llmwlhrough shares,
subject to certain conditions Canadian exploration expenses in an amount at least equal to the
subscription price thereof. The narrower is not in delimlt, nor expects to become in default, in respect of
any obligations, covenants, representations or warranties Contained in any agreements, arrangements or
other documents relating to the ﬂow-through shares issued. The Borrower has ﬁled with relevant tax
authorities, within the prescribed time, all necessary renunciatiens and other Forms relating to the ﬂow-
through shares issued.

(dd) Bntmr Shares amVor the Bonus Warrants. T here is no order or ruling suspending the
sale or ceasing the trading in any securities (including the Bonus Shares and/or the Bonus Warrants) of
the Borrower, nor prohibiting the sale of such securities, issued by any securities regulatory authority and
that is outstanding against any of the narrower, its directors and its officers (in respect only of such
directors’ and ot‘ﬁcets’ involvement with the Borrower) and no investigations or proceedings for such
purposes, to the best of the Borrower’s knowledge. have been threllened or are pending or contemplated.
All representations and warranties contained in the Loan Documents will he considered to have been
relied on by the Lender, and will survive the execution and delivery or the Loan Documents or any
investigation made at any time by or on behalf of the Lender and any disposition or payment of the
Obligations until the ‘l'ermination Dale.

ARTICLE 4
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
4.1 Conditions Precedent to the Borrowing. The obligations of the Lender to make the Loan
hereunder shall not become effective unless each of the conditions below is satisﬁed (or waived by the
Lender in its sole discretion).

(:1) lireeutimr and Delivery of Loan Doc'umenls. Each Credit Party shall have duly
authorized, executed and delivered this Agreement and all documents required hereunder. all in form and
substance satisfactory to the Lender. Such documents may he delivered to the Lender (or its counsel) by
way of facsimile or other means of electronic transmission, provided that such number of original copies
as may be reasonably requested shall be delivered by or on behalf of the Credit Parties to the Lender (or
its counsel) within seven (7) days of the Closing Date.

(b) fryer/nation. ’l'he Lender shall have received such ﬁnancial, business and other l
information regarding the Credit Patties as reasonably requested by the Lendux

(e) I’erﬁ’elion of Liens. The Secltrit y Documents required to be delivered on the Closing \
Date shall have been registered (or arrangemean for registration satisfactory to the Lender within ten (10) ‘ V 7
Business Days following the Closing Date shall have been made) in all otliecs in which, in the opinion of
the Lender or its counsel, registration is necessary or of advantage to preserve, protect and perfect the
Liens intended to be created thereby and render the Lions oppositble to third parties, including the State.
The Lender shall have received and be satisﬁed with the results of all personal and real property, pending
litigation. judgment, bankruptcy, bulk sale, execution and other searches conducted or obtained by the
Lender and its counsel with respect to the Credit Parties in all jurisdictions selected by the Lender and its
counsel.

(d) Pal/rem»: by Central. The Lender shall have received (or arrangements satisfactory to
the Lender have been made to ensure that the Lender receives) the share cu'til'rcalw for the entire issued
share capital of NAI’ Quebec. accompanied by authorited endorsements in blank,
tht Ayrctuent i Mulder: Minerals


_ 3o _

(e) Releases and Discharges. The Lender shall have received such releases and discharges
and undertakings to release and discharge (including evidence of registration of and/or authorizations to
register such releases and discharges) of all Liens that are not Permitth Liens as the Lender may require

(f) Payout Statements. The Lender shall have received such payout statements of all
Indebtedness that is not pcnnitted by this Ayeement to subsist alter the Closing Date, together with such
evidence ofpaymeu! thereof. as the Lender may require.

(g) Legal Opinions, The Lender shall have received a favourable written opinion of Blake,
Camels 84 Gmydon LLP counsel to the Credit Parties (or other counsel which is acceptable to the London
acting reasonably), covering such nlaltcrs t'clating to the Credit Patties, this Agreement, the other Loan
Documents or the 'l‘ransactions as the Lender shall reasonably request (together with copies of all factual
wtilieales and legal opinions delivered to such counsel in connection with such opinion upon which
counsel has relied). All opinions and certificates referred to in this Section 4.1(g) shall he addressed to
the Lendu' and dated the Closing Date. If a Security Document creates a Lion over the interest of a Credit
Party in any material mining rights, the Lender shall have also received a title opinion in form and
subslance salisﬁtotory lo the Lender as to such material mining rights.

(h) Corporale Cerlljicaler. The Lender shall have received: (i) certiﬁed copies of Ihe
resolutions of the board of direclors. general partner or shareholders, as applicable), of each Credit l'arty
approving, as appropriate, the Loan, this Agreement and the other Loan Documents. and all other
documents, il'nny, to which such Credit Party is a party and evidencing authorization! with respect to such
documents; and (ii) a certiﬁcate of the Secretary of each Credit Party, dated as of the Closing Date, and
certifying (i) the name, title and true signature of each ofﬁcer of such PL‘I’SOll authorian to execute this
Agreement and the other Loan Documents to which it is a party, (ii) the name, title and true signature of
each otﬁccr of such Person authorized to provide the certiﬁcations required pursuant to this Agreement,
and (iii) that attached thereto is a true and complete copy of the article: of incorporation, any unanimous
shareholder agreement and bylaws of each Credit Party, as amended to date, and a recent certiﬁcate of
status, certificate of compliance, good standing certiﬁcate or analogous certiﬁcate

(i) Irrmmnce. 'l‘he Lender shall have received a certiﬁcate of insurance coverage, dated not
more than thirty (30) days prior to the Closing Date, evidencing that the Credit Parties are carrying
insurance inaccordancc with Section 5. I(i) hereof.

(i) No Material Adverse Change. The Lender shall be satisﬁed llnn, since Dcccmhcrfll,
20‘ I, there has not been a Material Adverse Change.

(it) Ron/Is Shares and Bonus Warrants. 'l‘he Bonower shall have received the apprmml of
the 'l‘SX Venture Exchange to the issuance of the Bonus Shares and Bonus Warrants and the Bonus
Share»: and Bonus Warrants shall have been issued to the Lender.

(I) Technical Coma/rant Reliance Letters. The Lender shall have received letters from each
technical consultant author of each Environmental report provided by any Credit Party to the Lender in
connection with this Agreement.

(m) [Incrlm Bridge Loan. Arrangements satisfactory to llte lender shall have been made to
repay all outstanding indebtedness of the Borrower in connection with the Interim Bridge Loan aller
purchase by the holders of such Interim Bridge Loan of equity ol'the normwcr in at least an equivalent
subscription amount and arrangements satisfactory to the Lender shall have been made for the release of
all guarantees and security agreements executed and delivered under or in eomtcctinn with the interim
Bridge llonn.

CrﬂﬁlAgKlm‘ﬂl - mer Mmats


. 3] .

(n) (lament: 'l‘he Lender shall have received all consents that may be required from any
party to a contract, including any lease, to the extent required to permit the Liens over such contract
intended to be created pursuant to the Security Documents.

(0) ()I/Ier Docwnemarion. 'l‘he Lender shall have received such ollrer documents as are
customary for transactions of this type or as they may reasonably rcqrrcstt

(p) North American Palladium Traumatic". The Lender shall have received a copy of the
executed Purchase Ageement (which must be satisfactory to the Lender in its sole discretion) and
arrangcrrreuls satisfactory to the Lender have been made to ensure the completion of the North American
Palladium 'l‘ransrrction in accordance with its terms without consent or Waiver being required from either
party thereto to do so.

ARTICLE 5
POSITIVE COVENANTS
5.1 Covenants. From (and including) the Closing Date until the Termination Date, the Borrower
agrees with the Lender that it will, and it will cause each other Credit Party or Subsidiary to covenant and
agree with the Lender that it will, do the following:

(a) Financial Sturemcnm and (.‘mnpliance Certificates. The Borrower shall supply to the

Lender (i) if rrol tlrcn publicly available via the lutcrnet on either the l'lnrrorver"s lutch website or lire
System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval (SEDAR), as soon as they are available, but in
any event within ninety (90) days after the end of each of its Fiscal Years (A) its audited consolidated
ﬁnancial statements for that Fiscal Year, (B) the audited ﬁnancial statements (if available, or otherwise
unaudited ﬁnancial statements) of each other Obligor for that Fiscal Year, (C) an updated report on the
prover) and probable reserves of each Operating Mine as determined in accordance with the Nuliomrl
Ins/171mm! 43-101 Slamlta'dr of Disclosure fur Mineral Projects of the Canadian Securities
Administrators, and (D) an Annual Life of Mine Plan for each Operating Mine, (ii) if not then publicly
available via the Internet on either the Bon'ower’s Internet website or the System for Electronic Docruucnt
Auulysis and Retrieval (SEDAR), as soon as they are available, but in any event within forty-five (45)
days after the end of eoch Financial Quarter of each of its Fiscal Years, its consolidated ﬁnancial
statements for that Financial Quarter, (iii) as soon as is available, but in any event within thirty (30) days
alter the commencement of each of its Fiscal Years, an Annual Forecast and Operating Plan for that
Fiscal Year in form and substance satisfactory to the Lender and (iv) as soon as available, but in any event
within (30) days after the end of each month in each F iscrrl Year, a summary for the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries of such month’s operations and in summary of the Fiscal Ycar to (late operations in Form and
substance satisfactory to the Lender, in each case compared to the budgets and forecasts delivered
pursuant to clause (iii) above, including infomurtion in reasonable detail concerning (A) production and
shipment of production during such period and variations from the related projections for such period
reﬂected in the Annual Forecast and Operating Plan. (B) inventories of ore and metals at the end of such
period, (C) revenues generated during such period from the stile of metals, (D) operating costs during
such period as compared to the Annual Forecast and Operating Plan, (1?) costs constituting Capital
Expenditures during such period as compared to the Capital Expenditures approved by the Lender, (F) the
Borrower’s most recent cash planning forecast covering at least the next following month and (0) any
material developments during such period in operation, including technical problems, rmrterial defects in
any of the physiurl facilities of the Borrower or any Subsidiary, material interruptions to operation,
material disputes with any Governmental Authority or material labour difﬁculties. The Borrower will.
also provide the Lender with internet on—linc access to review daily milling reports as well as Iii—weekly
mine-grade and muck-handling, reports. The Borrower shall supply a duly completed and signed
certiﬁcate in the form of Exhibit B (n “Compliance Certiﬁcate”) to the Lender at the time each set of its
tfmdil Agreement t Mandate mama


. 32 ,
audited consolidated annual ﬁnancial statements and each set of its consolidated quarterly ﬁnancial
statements are so publically available or provided to the Ilendcrl
(b) Ollrer lry'ol'malion. 'l'he Bon'ower shall furnish to the Lender: (i) if not then publicly

available via the interact on either the Borrower‘s Internet website or the System for Electronic
Document Analysis and Retrieval (SEDAR), promptly nﬁer dispatch, copies of all documents dispatched
by the narrower to its shareholders generally (or any class of them) or dispatched by the Borrower or any
Subsidiary to its creditors generally (or airy class of them); (ii) promptly utter a Credit l’arty learns of the
receipt or occurrence of any of the following, a certificate of the Borrower, signed by an ofﬁcer of the
Borrower, specifying (A) any event which constitutes a Default or Event of Default, together with a
detailed statement specifying the nature thereof and the steps being taken to cure strch Default or livent of
Default, (n) the receipt of any notice from, or the taking of any other action by, lltc holder of any
Indebtedness of any Credit Party in an amount in excess of $500,000 with respect to an actual or allcgcd
default, together with a detailed statement specifying the notice given or other action taken by such holder
and the nature of the claimed default and what action the relevant Credit Party is taking or proposes to
take with respect thereto, (C) any notice of termination or other proceedings or actions which is
reasonably likely to adversely affect the interests of the Lender under any of the Loan Documents, (D) the
creation, dissolution, merger, amalgamation or acquisition of arty Credit Party or Subsidiary, (E) any
event or condition not previously disclosed to the Lender which violates any Environmental and Social
Law or which has resulted or is reasonably likely to result in an Envirorurrental Liability in excess of
$500,000 or a Material Adverse Effect, turd (1-) any other event, development or condition, not previously
disclosed to the Lender in writing, which is reasonably likely to have a Material Advent: Effect;
(iii) pronrptly alter the occurrence thereof, notice of the institution of or any adverse development in any
proceeding or any governmental investigation or any arbitration before any court or arbitrator or any
Governmental Authority or ofﬁcial against arty Credit Party or any asset thereof which is reasonably
likely to have a Material Adverse Effect; (iv) promptly, and in any event within ten (10) days (A) alter
the Borrower or any Subsidiary fails to make a required contribution or other payment in accordance with
a schedule of contributions according to the terms of any Pension Plan or as otherwise required by a
Governmental Authority, a notification of such failure and (B) utter request by llrc Lcrtdct, copies of arty
Pension Plan and related documents, reports and correspondence in the possession or control of the
Borrower or any Subsidiary; and (v) promptly on request by the Lender, such further information
regarding the ﬁnancial condition, assets and operations of the Borrower and/or any Subsidiary (including
any requested aritplilication or explanation of arty item in the ﬁnancial statements or other materier
pmvided by the Borrower under this Agreement) or any changes to management of the Borrower or any
Subsidiary as the Lender may reasonably request.

(c) Exislence; Conduct of Business. Bach Credit Party shall do or cause to he done all things
necessary to prescrvc, rcncw and keep in full force and effect its legal existence, and except to the extent
that [lie failure to do so is not rarsonably likely to result in a Material Adverse Effect, obtain, preserve,
renew and keep in tirll force and effect any and all rights, licences, permits, privileges and franchises in
order to conduct its business.

(d) Pro/Inert] of Obligations Each Credit Party shall pay its obligations except where (i) the
validity or amount thereof is being connected in good faith by appropriate proeccdings, and (ii) such
Credit Party has set aside on its books adequate reserves with respect theretot

(e) Maintenme ofAsxers. [Each Credit Party shall keep and maintain all assets material to
the conduct of its business in good working outer and condition, ordinary wear and tear excepted, except
to the extent that the failure to do so is not reasonably likely to have a Material Adverse liﬂ'cct.
man Ayccnront - Mannd Mimrals


. 33 _

(t) Henri-annual meeting; Books and Rector/r; Inspection Rig/Its, Upon request by the
Lender made no more ﬁ'cquerrtly than semi-annually, thc normwer shall make the senior executive
ofﬁcers of each Credit l‘arty available to participate in discussions (in person or by conference call. as the
Lender may request) with the Lender to discuss the current financial position, operations and any other
matter the Lender may identify relevant to the operations of any Credit Party. Fach Credit Party shall
keep proper books of rccortl and account in which ﬁrll, true and correct entries are made of all dealings
and transactions in relation to its business and activities. Each Credit Party shall permit any
representatives designated by the Lender, upon reasonable prior notice, to visit and inspect its properties,
to examine and make extracts from its books and records, and to discuss its affairs, ﬁnances and condition
with its officers and independent! accountants, all at such reasonable times and as nﬁen as reasonably
requested,

(g) Compliance willr Iriwx (Ir/(l Material Common. Bach Credit Party shall comply with all
laws and orders of any Governmental Authority applicable to it or its assets and with all of its contractual
obligations, except where the failure to do so, individually or in the aggregate, is not reasonably likely to
result in a Material Adverse Effect.

(h) Um of Proceeds. The proceeds of the Loan shall be used for working capital and other
general corporate purposes of llrc Borrower and NAP Quehec, payment of the Structuring Fee, providing
cash collateral to the Quebec Minister of Natural Resources to replace letters ot‘crcdit in existence on the
Closing Date issued by The Bank oI'Nova Scotti: upon the application of NAI' Quebec (the “BN8 L/Cs”,
and for consideration payable (including transaction fees and expenses) pursuant to the North Americth
Palladium 'l'ransaction (the “NAP Purchase Costa"), or for any other uses consented to by the Lender in
its sole discretion. The proceeds of the private placement transaction referenced in Section 7. l(r) shall he
used for funding the Interest Escrow Account, to the extent invoiced. reimbursement or payment of all
legal fees and other out-otlpnckct expenses required to be reimbursed or paid by the Credit Parties to the
Lender hereunder, under any other Loan Document or in connection with the Bonus Warrants, Bonus
Shares or such private placement, For capital expenditures and working capital and other general
corporate purposes of the Borrower and NAP Quebec.

(1) Furl/tor Assurances. Each Credit Party shall from lirrrc to time forthwith upon request by
the Lender, make, do, execute or cause to be made, done or cxccutcd all such further and other lawful
acts, deeds, things, devices, documents, matters and assurances whatsoever for the better or more perfect
and absolute perﬁ'nrmance ol' the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
The Borrower shall perform and satisfy to the satisfaction of the Lender and its counsel each of the r
requirements listed in Schedule C on or before the date by which such requirement is to he required to be
performed pursuant thereto.

(j) Insurance. Each Credit Party shall maintain or cause to be maintained, with fuIaIICially
sound and reputable insurers, insurance with respect to their respective assets and business against such
liabilities, casualties, risks and contingencies and in such types (including business interruption insurance
and ﬂood insurance) and amounts and with deductibles as are customary in the case of Persons engaged
in the satire or similar businesses and similarly situated and in accordance with any requirement of any
Governmental Authority. Each Credit Party shall obtain endorsements to the policies pertaining to all ‘

physical properties in which the Lender shall have n Lieu antler the Loan Documents, naming the Lender
as an additional insured (with respect to liability insurance only) and a first loss payee and mortgagee and l
containing (i) provisions that such policies will not be cancelled without the insurance company
endeavouring to provide thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Lender. and (ii)a standard trott-
eontributory “mortgagee”, "lender" or “secured party” clause, as well as such other provisions as the
Lender may require to fully protect the Lender‘s interest in the Collateral and to any payments to he made
[‘redit Amman - Mﬂlldttm nix-mu


.34.
under such policies. At the request of the Lender, the applicable Credit Party shall deliver to the Lender
all original policies or true copies thereof, premium prepaid.

(It) Operation and d/failtlt’lltlllc‘e anr-oper'ot. liaeh Credit Party shall manage and operate its
business or cause its business to be managed and operated (i) in accordance with prudent industry pmctice
in all material respects and in compliance ill all material respects with the terms and provisions of all
applicable Environmental Permits. authorizations, licences and agreements, and (ii) in compliance with
all applicable laws of'thcjurisdietion in which such businesses are carried on, and all applicable Laws of
every other Gm'emmenlal Authority from time to lime constituted to regulate the ownership. management
and operation of' such businesses, except where a failure to so manage and operate is nol reasonably likely
to have a Material Adverse Ell‘ect.

(l) Financial Cave/mum. (i) The Credit Parties shall maintain on Equity Ratio on a
censolidatcd basis of at least 0.75:1.00 calculated as of etch Payment Date. (ii) The Borrower shall
maintain a Cash Balance at all thins of not less than $|,0l]0.00tl.

(m) Paymen/ ume'cr (rm/Claims. Each ot'the Borrower and its Subsidiaries will:

(i) pay and disclmrgc all lawful claims for labour, material and supplies when due,
except for claims being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and in respect of
which adequate ICSCTVCS in accordance with IFRS have been recorded in the accounts and
ﬁnancial statements of the Borrower;

(ii) deliver or cause to be delivered all 'l'ax returns when they are due to the
appropriate Governmental Authority;

(iii) punctunlly pay and discharge all Taxes payable by it when due, except for any
'l‘axes subject to Contested Tax Proceedings;

(iv) withhold and collect all Taxes required to be withheld and collected by it and
remit such Taxes to the appropriate Governmental Authority when due in the manner required by
applicable Law; and

(v) pay and discharge all Tax claims entitled to priority over the Liens created by the
Security Documents when due,

provided that it shall not be a breach of this Section 5.1(1n) if the failure to do any ofthe foregoing has not
resulted and is not reasonably likely to result in an aggregate 'l‘ax liability for all such failures at any time
outstanding exceeding $500,000.

(n) Anti-Money mederiug Legislulion. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries shall
comply with all Anti-Money Laundering Legislation The Borrower acknowledges that, pursuant to Anti-
Moncy Laundering Legislation, the Lender may be required to obtain, verify and record information
regarding each of tire Borrower and its Subsidiaries, its directors, authorized signing ofﬁcers, direct or
indirect shareholders or other persons in Control of the Borrower, and the transactions contemplated
hereby. and disclose such information to Governmental Authorities The Borrower consents to such
information being obtained. veriﬁed, recorded and disclosed to Governmental Authorities and agrees to
promptly provide to the Lender all such information. including supporting documentation rutd other
evidence, as may be reasonably requested by the Lender, or any prospective assiguce or participant of the
Lender, in order to comply with Anti—Money Laundering Legislation.

Cn‘dtlAgrclltem - Miriam Minerals


. 35 .

(o) Errwluyee Beneﬁt Plan Canadian“: The Borrower shall, and shall cause each of its
Subsidiaries to, establish, maintain and operate all Employee Benefit Plans to comply in all material
respects with all laws, regulations and rules applicable thereto and the respective requirements of the
governing documents for such Employee Benefit Plans.

(p) Plan (.‘mnpliance. Each Credit Party shall establish, maintain and operate all limployee
Beneﬁt Plans turd Pension l'lans so as to comply with all applicable Laws and the respective requirements
of the governing documents for such plans. disregarding noncompliance that is not reasonably likely to
give rise to a liability in excess ot'$250,000 or a Material Adverse Effect.

(‘1) Organization Chm-I. in connection with any acquisition by the Borrower or any
Subsidiary pmnitted him-under, the Borrower shall immediately following such acquisition deliver or
cause to be delivered to the Lender an updated ol'gsnimtion chart, in form and substance satisfactory to
the Lender, and such organizational chart shall replace Schedule Dr

(r) chaliolu' (JAJB‘L’IL The Borrower will promptly notify the Lender of any new places of
business or locations of assets of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries or of their respective Chief
Executive Ofﬁces (within the meaning of Section 7(3) of the l'I’SA) together with an updated Schedule F.
incorporating these new locations

(5) Mining Properties. The liormwcr will promptly notify the Lender from time to time of
any new mining rights or Mining Properties acquired or obtained by the Borrower or any Subsidiary from
time to time together with an updated Schedule F revised to include those new additional mining rights or
Mining Properties, including. without limitation, by way of replacements. conversion or issuance of a
mining lease. The Borrower shall cause all mining rights to remain in good standing and in full force and
effect and shall cause their renewal st cxpimtion of their current term in accordance with applicable Laws.

(t) Mining Tax Credits. Fnch Credit Party shall (i) make all necessary requests, ﬁlings and
claims in order to obtain all Milling ‘l‘ax Credits and other credits and other ﬁscal incentives to which it is
entitled under the Taxation/1t?! (Quebec) and the Mining Dalian Ac! (Quebec) for its current and future
taxation years and (ii) provide the Lender with an updated Schedule II promptly alter the information
contained therein is no longer current, because of payment, entitlement to additional Milling Tax Credits
or otherwise.

(it) Join! Vet/timer. Each Credit Party shall use commercially reasonable best efforts to
obtain a Joint Venture Consent Agreement from each other joint venturer participant in each existing
Joint Venture as soon as rcssonnbly practicable

(v) Mani/or. At any time a Del‘aull or an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing the
Lender may appoint n monitor to assess the assets, operations and overall ﬁnancial viability of each
Credit Party and each Credit Party shall t‘nlly cooperate with such monitor in carrying out the monitor's
engagement by the Lender. 'l'he Bon'ower shall promptly pay each invoice of any such monitor following
receipt of such invoice

(\v) Security. To secure the due payment and performance of the Obligations owing by the
Borrower. and as it further condition to the rign of the Borrower to burrow hereunder, the Borrower shall
deliver each Security Document, and physical possession of the investment property and related
documents, listed in Schedule A on the Closing Date (unless a later date is speciﬁed in Schedule A). As
soon as the Borrower acquires any Subsidiary, the Borrower shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the
Lender:

(mm Ayeemrnt .Mimorc Mimals


.36,
(i) a guarantee (in form and substance satisfactory to the Lender) duly signed by
stroll Subsidiary of the Obligations owing by the Borrower in favour of the Lender;
(ii) a security agreement and/or hypothec duly signed by such Subsidiary creating

Lions in all of the assets of such Subsidiary to secure the payment and performance of the

Obligations owing by it, provided that if such Subsidiary owns mining properties, such Liens

shall be limited to material mining properties;

(iii) 8 Blocked Account Agreement relative to each bank account held by it with any
ﬁnancial institution duly signed by such Subsidiary and the applicable ﬁnancial institution;
(iv) an Account Control Agreement relative to each securities account held by it witlt

a brokerage ﬁrm duly signed by such Subsidiary and the applicable brokerage ﬁrm; and

(v) the certiﬁcates representing the entire [Equity Securities of such Subsidiary and
stock transfers in respect thereof duly executed in blank by each Person owning srrch Equity

Securities; and

(vi) a third party legal opinion from the Borrower‘s Counsel concerning the pledgors

of the Equity Securities, guarantee and Security Documents referred to in Clauses (i), (ii), (iii)

and (iv) above and such other matters as the Lender may reasonably require. to he delivered to the

Lender wntemporancously with such guarantee and security being provided.

Each document referred to above must be in form and substance satisfactory to the Lender acting
reasonably.

(x) Registration. Unless the Lender notifies the Borrower otherwise, the Borrower shall
cause the Borrower‘s Counsel and their respective agents to register the Liens created under the Security
Documents (or a ﬁnancing statement, notice or other appropriate document in respect thereof) on behalf
of the Lender in all ofﬁces or registers where (y) such registration is necessary or of advantage to create,
preserve, protect and perfect the Security and its validity. effect. priorin and perfection at all times,
including any land registry or land title: office and/or (1) the Lender’s Counsel speciﬁcally requests, and
to register such security, if and as applicable, against ruining rights resulting from replacement or
conversion of such rights specifically charged by the Security, including issuance of mining leases.

(y) Independent Ibo-[mien] Consultants. the Lender shall be entitled at any time and from
time to time to appoint one or more independent engineers or technical consultmrts to assist it in
evaluating the Borrower’s assets, operations or linvimnmenlnl liabilities and each Credit Party will
cooperate in any investigation or inquiry made by any such independent engineer or technical consultant.
including affording the same inspection rights and cooperation provided for under Section 5. l(t) to other
representatives of the Lender. The Borrower shall promptly pay each invoice of any such engineer or
technical consultant following receipt of such invoieer

(7.) Bonus Shares and Bonus Warrants. The Borrower shall comply with all applicable
securities laws in connection with the issuance of the Bonus Shares and Bonus Wnrmnts, including obtain
the conditional approval of the TSX Venture Exchange in respect of the listing of the Bonus Shares and
the common shares underlying the Bonus \Vrnrants upon the due exercise of the Bonus Warrants, subject
only to customary listing conditions.

(an) tl’lﬂill'llill Lisling. The Borrower shall, at its expense, use its commercially reasonable
efforts to maintain the listing of its common shares on the TSX Venture Exchange and any other stock
Credit Agreement - Marianna Mlmmls


.37,
exchange on which its common shares may be listed from time to time up to and including March 22,
2016, make all requisite ﬁlings under applicable securities laws up to and including March 22, 2016
(including those necessary to remain a reporting issuer not in default under the securities legislation of
Caelt province in which it is or subsequently becomes a reporting issuer up to and including March 22,
ZDllr) and preserve and maintain its corporate existence up to and including March 22, 20I6, except as
permitted herein.
ARTICLE 6
NEGATIVE COVENANTS

6.1 Negative Covenants. From (and including) the Closing Date until the Termination Date, the
Borrower covenants and agrees with the Lender that it will, and it will cause each other Credit Party and
Subsidiary to covenant and agree with the Lender that it will, abide by the following:

(a) Dirichlet/near. No Credit Party shall create, incur, assume or permit to exist any
indebtedness, except (i) any Indebtedness created hereunder and (ii) arty Indebtedness in respect: of capital
lease obligations or secured by Purchase Money Liens, provided that the aggregate principal amount of
such indebtedness shall not exceed $250,000 at any time.

(h) Lie/ls. No Credit Party shall create, incur, assume or permit to exist any Lieu on any
property or asscl now owned or hercatler acquired by such Credit Party, except Permitted Liens.

(e) Corporalc Changer. No Credit Party shall merge into or arnalgaruatc or consolidate with
any other Person, or permit any other Person to merge into or amalgamate or consolidate with it, or
liquidate or dissolve.

(d) Pemrr‘tled Barr'rress. No Credit Party shall engage to any material extent in any business
other than the exploration, exploitation, beueﬁcialion and processing of metal ores (and any hi-pmduct
thereof).

(c) Ilsa-cl Dirpmiliorrr, No Credit Party shal| dispose of any assets having a net book value
exceeding $250,000 during any rolling four Fiscal Quarter Pen'od, except for disposals of inventory in the
ordinary course of business.

(1') lures/mania. No Credil Party shall make or permit to exist any Investment other than:
(i) an Investment by the Borrower in Equity Securities of its Subsidiaries; (ii) an investment by the
Borrower in its Subsidiaries by way of a capital contribution and (iii) an htvtxilnlcnt in Cash Equivalents.

(g) Acquisilious. Other than pursuant to the North American Palladium Transaction, no
Credit Party shall make or enter into any acquisition without the prior written consent of the Lender.

(h) Restricted Puymrmls. No Credit Party shall declare, pay or make, or agree to pay or
rualre= directly or indirectly, any Restricted Payment. except that, so long as no Default or Event oi”
Default is continuing or would be caused therehy: (i) any Guarantor may declare and pay any dividend,
distribution or retum or capital with respect to its Equity Securities payable solely in additional Equity
Securltics; and (ii) the Borrower may make the type of payment referred to in paragraph (c) of the
definition of “Restricted Payment” router Scclion l.l so long as such payment (x) is made in the ordinary
course ofbllsincss of the Borrower, (y) is consistent with the past practices of such Credit Party and (z) in
any Fiscal Year in the aggregate does not exceed the amount set out in tire Annual Forecast and Operating
Plan for such Fiscal Year (or the then equivalent in any other currency), or such other amount as has been
approved by the Lender.

GeditAyeenmtt-hlmldareMinemls


.33.

(i) Truman/iqu will: Aﬂi/ialm. No Credit Party shall sell, lease or otherwise transfer any
assets to, or purchase, lease or otherwise acquire any assets Rom, or otherwise engage in any other
transactions with, any of its Alliliatcs, Except any Restricted Payment permitted by Section 6. Kit).

(1') Resll'iclii-e Agrccmmm‘. No Credit Party shall directly or indirectly, enter into, incur or
permit to exist any agreement or other rurangemeut that prohibits, restricts or imposes any condition
upon: (i) the ability of such Credit Patty to create, incur or permit to exist any Lien upon any of its assets
in favour of the Lender; or (ii) the ability of such Credit Party to pay dividends or other distributions with
respect to any Equity Securities, provided that clauses (i) and (ii) above shall not apply to restrictions and
conditions imposed by Law or by any Loan Document.

(k) Opera/015' Leora ol'ligﬂlinﬂL No Credit Party shall create, incur, assume or suﬁ‘er to
exist any operating lease obligations, whether directly or as a guarantor, it', after giving effect thereto. the
aggregate amount of all payments required to be made by the Credit Parties on a consolidated basis
pursuant to such operating lease obligations in any Fiscal Year would exceed the amount set out ill the
Annual Forecast and Operating Plan for such Fiscal Year.

(I) Sales and Leasebuclrx. No Credit Party shall enter into any arrangement, directly or
indirectly, with any Person whereby such Credit Party shall sell or transfer any property, whether now
owned or hereafter acquired, and whemby such Credit Party shall then or therealler rent or lease as lessee
such property or any part thereof or other property which such Credit Party intends to use for substantially
the same purpose or purposes as the property sold or transfened.

(m) Capital liarpemiilures, No Credit Party shall make any Capital Expenditures in any Fiscal
Year except for those set out in the Annual Forecast and Operating Plan for such Fiscal Year without the
prior written consent of the Lender.

(It) Pension Plans. No Credit Party shall:

(i) except as required by applicable Law, establish, terminate or amend any
Canadian Pension Plan or take any other action with respect to any Canadian
Pension Plan, which is reasonably likely to result in ruiy Material Adverse Elibcl;

(ii) Fail to withhold, make, remit or pay when due any employee or employer
payments, conh'ibutions (including “normal cost”, “special premiums” and any
other payments in respect of any funding deficiencies or shortfalls) or premiums
to or in respect of any Canadian Pension Plan pursuant to the terms of the
particular plan, any applicable collective bargaining agreement or applicable
Law;

(iii) permit to exist any solvency or wind-up funding deﬁciency with rCSpCCt to any
Cruiadian Pension Plan which result is or could be reasonably be expected to i
result in a funding obligation on the part of any Credit Party which is reasonably
likely to result in a Material Adverse lifl'eet;

(iv) contribute to or assume an obligation] to contribute to any “mulliemployer
pension plan” as such term is deﬁned in the Pension Bengt/s rte! (Ontario) or any
similar plan under pension standards legislation in another jurisdiction;

(v) acquire an interest in any Person if such Person sponsols, maintains or
contributes to, or at any time in the six-year period preceding sueh acquisition

ClrdllABtre-twll- MnuhteMinmls


.39.

has sponsored, maintained, or contributed to any Deﬁned Beneﬁt Plan; provided
that, any Credit Party may acquire an interest in any such person it' no Credit
Party has arty legal liability to perform such Person’s obligations or assume such
Person’s liabilities including in respect of any Deﬁned Beneﬁt Plan whatsoever;
or

(vi) assume or otherwise incur any liability in respect of any Deﬁned Beneﬁt Plan of
the nature referred to in Section 6. t(n)(v).

(o) No Amendmenls Io Consulting DUCIHIIL’IIIS, etc. No Credit Party shall amend its
currslating documents, by-laws, partnership agreement or operating agreement, as applicable.

(p) Na Changes In Malaria] Contrach- Nerv Mala-in] Comma-Ir. No Credit Party shall
change, allow to expire, fail to exercise any rcncwal right or tcrnrinatc (or waive any provision of or
provide any consent under) any Material Contract or enter into any new Material Contract, without the
prior written consent of the Lender (such consent not tn he unreasonany withheld).

(q) Car/'1 Mmmgemenl. Except for accounts with Bank of Montreal which shall he closed by
April 30, 2013, and cxccpt For any payroll account maintained by the Borrower with Natiomrl Bank of
Canada, no Credit Party shall open or maintain any bank or deposit account with any Person unless such
Person, such Credit Party artd the Lender enter into a Blocked Account Agreement.

(r) Securities Acculmls. No Credit Party shall open or maintain any securities accorurt with
any Person unless such Person, such Credit Party and the Lender enter into an Account Control
Agreement.

(s) Derivatives. Neither the Borrower nor any Subsidiary shall enter into any Derivative
without the prior written consent of the Lender.

(t) Kayo/lies. Neither the Borrower nor any Subsidiary will enter into any agreement or
arrangement with any Person or other create incur, assume or permit to exist any royalty of any type or
kind whatsoever or any right similar thereto, except for Permitted Royalties

(u) Fiscal Year. No Credit Party shall change its Fiscal Year End unless, with respect to a
newly acquired Subsidiary, such change is made to December 31 of each calendar you:

(v) Subsidiaries. No Credit Party will acquire any Subsidiary unless it is a wholly-owned
Subsidiary and no Credit Party will dispose of any Equity Securities issued by any Subsidiary.

(w) Join] Veil/urns. Neither the Borrower nor any Subsidiary will cnlcr into any new Joint
Venture \vithmrt the prior written consent. of the Lender,

ARTICLE 7
EVENTS 0F DEFAULT
7.1 Events of Default. Each of the following events or circumstances shall constitute an “Event of
Default” hereunder:

(a) the Borrower shall fail to pay any principal of any Loan when and as the same shall
become due and payable, whether at the scheduled maturity date or at a date ﬁxed for prepayment thereof
or otherwise;

L‘lﬁllll‘mlml- rn-umMmmrs


‘40.

(b) any Credit Party shall {all to pay any interest on any Loan or any other amount payable
under any Loan Document (other than an amount referred to in Section 7.1(a)). within three (3) Business
Days of the date that the same shall become due and payable;

(c) any representation or warranty made or deemed made by or on behalf of any Credit
Party in or in connection with any Loan Document shall prove to have been incorrect in any material
respect when made or deemed to be made and, it‘ the circumstances giving rise to the incorrect
representation or warranty are capable of modiﬁcation or rectiﬁcation without material prejudice to the
Lender (such that, therealler the representation or warranty would be correct), the representation and
warranty remains uncorrected for n period of ten (10) Business Days;

(d) any Credit Party shall fail to observe or perform any covenant, condition or agreement
contained in Seetlon 5. t(a)(i) (Notice of Default or Event of Default), Section $.l(c) (Existence; Conduct
of Business), Section 5.1(b) (Use of Proceeds), Section S,l(l) (Financial Covenants) or in Artieleé (or in
any comparable provision of any other Loan Document);

(c) any Credit Party shall fail to observe or perform any covenant, condition or agreement
contained in this Agreement (other than those speciﬁed in Section 7. |(n), (b), (c) or (d)) or any other Loan
Document, and such failure shall continue urrrcmedied for a period of [5 days nller the earlier of
(i) knowledge thereof by any Credit Party, or (ii) notice thereof from the Lender to the Borrower;

(t) any Credit l’nrty: (i) becomes insolvent, or generally does not or becomes unable to pay
its debts or meet its liabilities as the same bccomc due, or admits in writiHK its inability to pay its debts
generally, or declares any general moratorium on its indebtedness, or proposes a compronrise or
arrangement between it turd any class of its creditors; (ii) commits an act of bankruptcy under any
Insolvency Law, or makes an assignment of its property for the general beneﬁt of its creditors under any
insolvency Law, or makes a proposal (or ﬁles a notice of its intention to do so) under any Insolvency
Law; (iii) institutes any proceeding seeking to ndjudiurte it an insolvent, or seeking liquidation,
dissolution, windingatp, reorganization. compromise, arrangement, adjustment, protection, moratorium,
relief, stay of proceedings of creditors generally (or any class of creditors), or composition of it or its
debts or any other relief, under any insolvency Law now or hereafter in effect relating to bankruptcy,
winding—up, insolvency, reorganization, rcceivcrship, plans of arrangement or relief or protection of
debtors or at common law or in equity, or ﬁles an answer admitting the material allegations of a petition
ﬁled against it in any such proceeding; (iv) applies for the appointment of, or the taking of possession by,
a receiver or other similar ofﬁcial for it or any substantial part of its property under any insolvency Law,
or (v) threatens to do any of the foregoing, or takes any action, corporate or otherwise, to approve. cffcct,
consent to or authorize any of the actions described in Section 7.l(l) or in Section 7.10;), or otherwise
acts in furtherance thereof or fails to act in a timely and appmpriate manner in defense thereof;

(g) any petition is fried, application made or other proceeding instituted against or in
respect of any Credit Party under any insolvency Law or otherwise: (i) seeking to adjudicate such Credit
Party an insolvent; (ii) seeking a receiving order against such Credit Party under any insolvency Law;

(iii) seeking liquidation, dissolution, windingup, reorganization, compromise, arrangement, adjustment,
protection, moratorium. relief, stay of procccdings of creditors generally (or any class of creditors), or
composition of such Credit Party or its debts or any other relief under airy insolvency Law now or
hereaﬁer in effect or at common law or ill equity; or (iv) seeking the entry of an order for relief or the
aplminltncut of, or the taking of possession by, a receiver or other similar official for such Credit Party or
any substantial part of its property, and such petition, application or proceeding continues undismisscd, or
unstaycd and in effect, for a period of forty-ﬁve (45) days after the institution thereof, provided that ifan
order, decree orjndgment is granted or entered (whether or not entcred or subject to appeal) against such
Credit Party thereunder in the intu'im, such grace period shall cease to apply, and provided further that it"
Destrmpeemt - Mtllﬂlﬂl: Minerals


_ 41 .
such Credit Party ﬁles an answer admitting the material allegations of a petition ﬁled against it in arty
such proceeding. such grace period shrill cease to apply;

(ll) any other event occurs which, under the Laws or hrsolveucy Laws of any applicable
jurisdiction, has an effect equivalent to any of the events referred to in either of Sections 7.l(t) or (g);

(i) any Credit l'any fails to pay when due any amounts owing under nny one or more
agreements or documents relating to lndchtedness (other than Indebtedness under this Agreement) in an
aggregate amount exceeding $500,000 (or the then equivalent in any other currency) or any other amount
which, if unpaid, is reasonably likely to result in a Material Adverse Change, and, ifther'e is any cure ‘
period applicable to such default, such cure period lapses without the default being cured;

(j) any Credit Party becomes obligated to repay, prepay, pay, purchase or otherwise retire ‘
or acquire any indebtedness (other than lndebtrxlness under this Agreement) before its scheduled maturity
date, excluding any such obligation that is adequately funded by proceeds of expropriation or insurance,
in an aggregate amount for all such Indebtedness exceeding $500,000 (or the then equivalent in any other
currency) or any other amount, which, if nnpnirl, is reasonably likely to result in a Material Adverse
Change;

(k) one or tllorcjndgments for the payment of money in a cumulative amount in excess of
$500,000 (or its then equivalent in any other currency) in the aggregate is rendered against any one or
more of the Credit Parties and they have not (i) provided for its discharge in accordance with its terms
within forty—ﬁve (45) days from the date of entry thereof, or (ii) procured a stay of execution thereof
within forty-ﬁve (45) days from the date of entry thereof and within such period, or such longer period
during which execution of such judgment has not been stayed, appealed srrch judgment and caused the
execution thereof to he stayed (luring such appeal; provided that if enforcement or realization proceedings
are lawfully commenced in respect thereof in the interim, each grace period in clauses (i) and (ii) shall
cease to apply;

(1) any assets of any Credit Party having a fair market value in excess of $500,000 (or its
then equivalent in any other currency) in the aggregate is seized (including by way at execution,
attachment, garnishment, levy or (lislt'ainl), or any one or more Liens thereon securing Indebtedness in
excess of $500,000 (or its their equivalent in any other currency) in Llre aggregate is enforced, or such
property has heconrc subject to any charging order or equitable execution of a Governmental Authority,
or any one or more writs of execution or distress warrants exists in respect of any Credit Party or the
property of any of them, or any sheriff or other Person becomes lawfully entitled by operation of law or
otherwise to seize or distrain upon such property and in any case such seizure, enforcement, execution,
attacluuent, garnishment, distrnint, charging order or equitable execution, or other seizure or right,
continues in effect and is not released or discharged for more than thirty (30 days or such longer period
during which entitlement to the use of such property continues with stroll Credit Party, and such Credit
Party is contesting the same in good faith and by appropriate proceedings, provided that if the property is
removed from the use ofsuch Credit I’arly, or is in danger of being sold, in the interim, such grace period
shall cease lu apply;

(In) one or more linal judgments, not involving the payment of money and not otherwise
specified in Section 7.](k), has been rendered against any Credit Party, the result of which is reasonably
likely to result in a Material Adverse Effect, so long as such Credit Party has not (i) provided for its
discharge irr accordance with its terms within forty-live (45) days from the date of entry thereof, or
(ii) procured a stay of execution thereof within forty-five (45) days from the date of catty thereof. and
within such period, or such longer period during which execution of such judgment has been stayed,
appealed such judgment and caused the execution thereof to he stayed during such appeal; provided that if
tkditAgreemrnt- imam Minerals


.42.
enforcement or realization proceedings are lawfully commenced in respect thereof in the interim, eaeh
grace period specified in clauses (i) and (ii) shall cease to apply;

(n) this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any material obligation or other provision
hereof or thereofat any time for any reason terminates or ceases to be in full force and effect and a legally
valid, binding and enforceable obligation of any Crcdil Party. is declared to bi: void or vuidablc or is
repudiated, or the validity, binding effect, legality or enforceability hereof or thereof is at any time
contested by any Credit Party, or any Credit Party denies that it has any or any ﬁrrther liability under any
material obligation hereunder or thereunder or any action or proceeding is commenced to enjoin or
restrain Ila; performance or obsorvancc by any Credit Party of any material terms hereof or thereof or to
question the validity or enforceability hereof or thereof, or at any time it is unlawful or impossible for any
Credit Party to perform arty of its material obligations hereunder or thereunder;

(0) any Lien purported to he created by any Security Document shall cease to be, or shall
be asserted by any Credit Party not to be, a valid, perfected, first priority (except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Agreement or such Security Document) Lien in Collateral, except to the extent that any
such loss of perfection or priority results from the failure of the Leader to maintain possession of
certiﬁcates representing securities pledged under the Loan Documents or otherwise take any action within
its control;

(P) t1 Material Adverse Change shall occur;

(q) a Change in Control shall occur;

(r) the Borrower shall not have received before April IS, 20]] gross proceeds of at least
$8,000,000 from the private placement of its listed Equity Securities, with third party purchasers not
afﬁliated with the Lender or Cyrus Capital Partners; or

(s) it‘ City Securities l.td., a corporation owned by Sanger Rex Harbour, and Mnnenwasia
Pty Ltd, a corporation associated with Kevin 'l‘omlinson do not convert the entire Interim Bridge Loan
into Equity Securities of the Borrower on or before the earlier of (i) April [5, 2013 and (ii) the closing of
the private placement referred to in paragraph (r) above,
then, and in every such event (other than an event with respect to a Credit Party described in
Section 7rl(t), (g) or (h)), and at rrny time thereatter during the continuance of such event or airy other
such event, the Lender may by notice to the Borrower, take either or both ol'thc following actions, at the
same or different times: terminate the Commitment, and thereupon the Conunilment shall terminate
immediately, and declare the Loan then outstanding to be due and payable (provided that in the case of a
Change of Control 1.0] times the outstanding principal of the Loan shall be due and payable) in whole (or
in part, in which case any principal not so declared to be due and payable nlay thcrcancr he declared to be
due and payable), and thereupon the principal of the Loan so declared to be due and payable, together
with accrued interest thereon and all fees and other obligations of the Credit Punks accrued hereunder,
shall become due and payable immediately, withorrt presentment, demand, protest or other notice of any
kind execpt as set out earlier in this paragraph, all of which are hereby waived by the Credit Parties; and
in the case of any event with respect to a U'edit Party described in Section 7.1(t), (g) or (b), the
Commitments shall automatically terminate and the principal ofthe Loan then nntstauding, together with
accrued interest thereon and all fees and other obligations of the Credit Parties accrued hereunder strait
automatically become due and payable, without presentment, demand, protest, noting ot'prntest or other
notice of any kind, all of which are hereby \wrived by the Credit Parties. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
at any time an Event of Default is continuing the Lender shall be entitled to demand payment under any
CrchtAyccuwnl ‘ Maritime Mrth


_ 43 _
guarantee granted by any Credit Party in its l'avour and enforce the Liens created in its favour under the
Security Documents.
ARTICLE 8
GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.1 Notices. All notices and other communications provided for herein shall be in writing and shall
he delivered by hand or overnight courier service, mailed by certified or registered mail or sent by
facsimile or email in each case to the addressee as set forth on the signature ptth ht:er Any party
hereto may change its address, facsimile number or e—mail address for notices and other communications
hereunder by notice to the other parties hereto All notices and other communications given to any party
hereto in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement shall be deemed to have been given on the
date of receipt.
8.2 Alteration. None of the terms or pmvisinns of this Agreement may be changed except by a
written instrument executed by the Lender and the Borrower.
8.3 Waivers. No failure or delay by the Lender in exercising any right or power hereunder shall
operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such right or power, or any
abandonment or discontinuance of steps to enforce such it right or power, preclude any other or further
exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right or power. The rights and remedies of the Lender
hereunder me cumulative and are not exclusive of any rights or remedies that they would otherwise have.
No waiver of any provision of this Agreement or consent to any departure by a Credit l‘arly therefmm
shall in any event be cﬂ‘ective unless the same shall be permitted in writing by the Lender, and then such
waiver or consent shall he effective only in the speciﬁc instance and for the purpose for which given.
Without limiting the generality of tile foregoing, the making ofo Loan shall not be construed as a waiver
of any Default or Event of Default, regardless of whether the Lender may have had notice or knowledge
ofsneh Default or Event of Default at the time.
8.4 Expenses; Indemnity; Damage Waiver.

(a) The Borrower shall pay (i) all reasonable carer-pocket expenses incurred by the Lender,
including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of counsel for the Lender and all applicable
‘l'axes. in connection with the preparation, execution, delivery and administration of this Agreement and
the other Loan Documents (whether or not the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby shall be
cousumtmttcd), including the satisfaction of conditions set out in Section 1“, (ii) all reasonable out-of-
pocket expenses incurred by the Lender, includng the reasonable fees. charges and disbursements of
counsel for the Lender and applicable Taxes, in connection with any amendments, modiﬁcations or
waivers of the provisions hereof or of any of the other loan Documents, and (iii) all out-otlpocket
expenses incurred by the Lender, including the fees. charges and disbursements of any counsel [or the
Lender and all applicable Taxes, in connection with the assessment, enforcement or protection of their
rights in connection with this Agreement or in contraction with the Loan made hereunder, including all
such mlt—of—pocket expenses incurred during any workout, restructuring or negotiations in respect of such
Loan.

(1:) The Borrower shall indemnify the Lender. as well as each of its afﬁliates, controlling
Poisons, successors and assigns and its respective ofﬁcers, directors. employees, agents, advisers and
other representatives of each of the foregoing (the Lender and each such Person being an “ludcmuitee")
against, and lmld each lmlemnitee hamtlcss li'otn, any and all losses. claims, cost recovery actions,
damages, expenses and liabilities of whatsoever nature or kind and all reasonable out—nf-pocket expenses
and all applicable 'l‘axes (other than Excluded Taxes) to which any lndemnitee may become subject
Credit tip/mm" - Mum: Mutt-mo


_ 44 .

arising out of or' in connection with (i) the execution or delivery of the Loan Documents or any agreement
or instrument contemplated thereby, the performance by the parties thereto of their rcspwtivc obligations
thereunder, and the consummation of the 'l'r‘ansaetinns or any other transactions thereunder, (ii) any Loan
or any actual or proposed use of the proceeds therefrom. (iii) any actual or alleged presence or release of
Hazardous Materials on or from any property owned or operated by a Credit Party, or any Environmental
Liability related in any way to a Credit Party, (iv) any actual or prospective claim, investigation or
proceeding relating to any of the foregoing, whether based on contract, tort or any other theory and
regardless of whether arty Indcrnnitcc is a party thereto, (v) arty other aspect of this Agreement and the
other Loan Documents, nr (vi) the enforcement of any lndemnitee‘s rights hereunder and any related
assessment, investigation, defence, preparation of defence, litigation and enquiries, in each casc ‘
regardless of whether or not the 'l'ransactious arc consummated; provided that such indemnity shalt not, as
to arty Iudcmuitcc, bc available to the extent that such losses, claims, damages. liabilities or related
expenses are determined by a final judgment to have resulted from the gross negligence (it being
acknowledged that ordinary negligence does not necessarily constitute gross negligence) or wilful
misconduct of or material breach of llris Agreement by such Indcrnuitcc.

(c) Each Credit Party shall not assert, and haeby waives to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable Law, any claim against any tndemnitee, on any theory of liability, for special, indirect,
consequential or punitive damages (as opposed to direct or actual damages) arising out of, in connection
with, or as a result of, any Loan Document, or arty agreement or document contemplated thereby, the l
't‘r'nnsactions, any Loan or the use of the proceeds thereof.

(d) By accepting or approving anything required to be observed, performed, fulﬁlled or given
to the Lender pursuant to the Loan Documents. the larder shall not be doomed to have warranted or
represented the sufficiency, legality. effectiveness or legal effect of the some" or ofauy term, provision or
condition thereof. and such acccptancc or approval thereof shall not constitute a warranty or
representation: to anyone with respect thereto by the Lendert

(e) The relationship between the Borrower and the Lender is, and shall at all times remain,
solely that of borrower and tender. The Lender shall not under any circumstances be construed to be a
partner or joint vcutrrrcr of the Borrower or its Afﬁliates. The lrcndcr shall not under any circumstances
be dcctucd to he in a relationship of conﬁdence or trust or a ﬁduciary relationship with the Borrower or its
Afﬁliates, or to owe any ﬁduciary duty to the Borrower or its Affiliates. The Lender shall not undertake
or assume any responsibility or duty to the Borrower or its Afﬁliates to select, review, inspect, supervise,
pass judgment upon or inform the Bon'owor‘ or its Afﬁliatqs of any matter in connection with their assets
or the ﬁnancial condition of the Borrower or its Aﬁiliatrsr The Borrower and its Afﬁliates shall rely
entirely upon their own judgment with respch to such matters, and any review, inspection, supervision,
exercise of judgment or supply of infomration undertaken or assumed by the Lender in connection with
such matters shall be solely for the protection of the Lender, and neither the Borrower nor arty other
Person shall be entitled to rely thereon

(l) The Leader shall riot be responsible or liable to any Person for arty loss, damage. liability
or claim of any kind relating to injury or death to Persons or damage to property caused by the actions,
inaction or negligence of any Credit Party or its Afﬁliates, and the Borrower hereby irrdcrmriﬁcs and
holds the Lender harmless on the terms set out in Section 8.4(b) From any such loss, damage, liability or
claim.

(1;) All amounts due under this Section 8.4 shall be payable not later than three (3) Business
Days after written demand therefor".
mam Agreement - Mandate tttinarrts


_ 45 .

8.5 Successors aurt Assigns. This Ayn-uncut shall be binding upon and enure to the beneﬁt of the
Lender and its successurs and assigns. The Borrower may not assign or otherwise transfer any of its
rights or obligations trader this Agrcuneut or any other Loan Document. The Lender may assign or
syndicate arty of its rights nndcr this Agreement or any other Loan Document at its sole discretion with
notice to the Borrower. The Borrower shall not incur any increased costs under Section 2.9 as a result of
airy assignment or syndication by the Lender.

8.6 Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in any number ot‘countel‘parts, each of which
shall be deemed to beau original and such counterparts together shall be deemed to constitute one and the ‘
same instrument and notwithstanding the date of execution shall be deemed to be dated as of the date
hereof. Delivery of all executed original counterpart of a signature page of this Agreement by facsimile
or other electronically scanned method of delivery shall be as effective as delivery of a manually executed ‘
originle counterpart of this Agreement.

8.7 Governing Law. The Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
laws ot‘thc Province of Ontario and the federal laws of Canada applicable therein.

8.8 Service of Process. Iiaclr party hereto irrevocably consents to service of process in the manner
provided for notices irt Section 8.1. Nothing Ill this Agreement shall affect the right of ally party to this
Agreement to serve process in any other manner permitted by Law.

8.9 WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL. EACH I‘AR‘I'Y HERETO HEREBY WAIVES, TO TI IE
FULLEST EXTENT I’ERMI’I'I’ED BY APPLICABLE LAW, ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A
TRIAL BY .I'URY IN ANY LEGAL I’ROCEI‘JDING DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OI"
OR RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT, ANY OTHER LOAN DOCUMENT, OR THE
TRANSACTIONS CON'I'EMPIATED HEREBY ()It 'I'IIEREBY (WHETHER BASED ON
CONTRACT, TORT OR ANY OTHER THEORY). EACH PARTY HERETO (u) CBR'I'IFII‘JS THAT
NO REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR ATI'ORNIEY 0|" ANY OTHER PARTY HAS REPRESENTED,
EXPRESSLY OR OTHERWISE, 'I'IIA'I' SUCH OTHER PARTY WOULD NOT, IN TIIF. EVI‘lN'l' OF
LITIGATION, SEEK 't'O ENFORCE THE FOREGOING WAIVER AND (b) ACKNOWLEDGES
THAT IT AND THE OTHER PARTIES HERETO HAVE BEEN INDUCED TO ENTRR INTO 'I'IIIS
AGREEMEN'I' BY. AMONG OTHER THINGS, THT': MUTUAL WAIVERS AND CERTIFICATIONS
IN 11 “3 SECTION 8.9.

8.10 Uncut'urcenble Provisions. Any provision hereof which is prohibited or unenforceable strait be
ineffective to the extent of such prohibition or uncuforccability without invalidating the remaining
provisions hereof.

8.“ Survival. All covenants, agree-mums, representations and warranties made by the Borrower
herein and in the certiﬁcates or other instruments delivered in connection with or pursuant to this
Agr'eerncnt shall be considered to have been relied upon by the Lender and shall survive the execution
and delivery of this Agreement and the making of any Loan, regiu‘dless of any investigation made by the
Lender or on its behalf and notwithstanding that the Lender may have had notice or knowledge of any
Default, Event or Default or incorrect representation or warranty at the time any credit is extended
hereunder, and shall continue in full force and citcct as long as the principal of or any accrued inter'cst on
any Loan or any other amount payable under this Agreement is mrtslanding and unpaid and so long as the
Commitment has not terminated. All indemnities contained herein shall survive aml remain in full force
and effect, regardless of the consummation of the Transactions, the repayment of the Loan and all other
Obligations, the termination of the Connnilmcnt or the termination of this Agreement or any provision
hereof.
man Agrxmmt - Mar-dare Minn-II:


.46.
8.12 Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties heretu
wilh respect to the snbjecl mailer hereof and supersedes all prior proposals and agmcnlcnls, whether oral
or written, with respect to such subject matter.
[signatures rm [lie nexlfb/lowing pages]
emu-1 Agrarlmt - Mandel: Minmns


_ 51 _
IN WITNESS WHEREOF 1l1c parties hereto have duly execuIed this Agreement on [he
dare ﬁrst above wrineni
Address: FBC HOLDINGS SMIL, as Lender
By: Manacur (Luxembourg) S,A., as Manager A
By: (signed) ‘fN S EVC/wvuliw”
Name: N.SJ:‘ Chevalier and ES Rma
Title: Proxy holder and Director, respectively
Address: By: Cyrus Capital Partners, L.P., as Manager B
By: (signed) “David/4 Milicll"
Name: David A, Milich
Tillc: Authorized Signatory
Adams: MAUDORE MINERALS L‘l‘I).. as Borrower
2000 Pool Slrccz, Suite 760
Monlrcal, QC HJA 2W5
Allculion: George Fowlie
By: Wife" _
Name: George Fmvlie
'l‘ille: Depuxy Chairman and Direcun'
Signarurc Page to Credit Agrvumcm


EXHIBIT A
FORM OF l‘ROMISSORY NOTE
Mandorc Minerals Ltd.
15% SENIOR SECURED NOTE
DUE MARCH 22, 20 I6
ND. 1 March 22, 20]]
$22.000,000.00

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undasiguetl, Muudure Minerals Ltd. (herein called
the "Corrupt-aw), a corporation organized and existing under the laws nt‘Ontnrio, hereby promises to pay
to FBC Holdings Sat r.l., or assigns, the principal sum ot‘TWliN'l'Y-‘l'WO MILLION DOLLARS
($2,000,000.00) in lawful currency of Canada on March 22, 2016, together with interest thereon
calculated daily and payable quarterly in arrears on the ﬁrst day of each calendar quarter (computed on
the basis of the actual number ofdays elapsed in a 365 or 366vday year) on the unpaid balance thereof at
the rate of IS% per annum (provided tlwt, to the extent permitted by law, interest payable under this Note
shall be payable at the rate of 17% per annum while any Event of Default is continuing) commencing
with the ﬁrst day of the calendar quarter next succeeding the date hereof, until the principal hereof shall
have been paid in full, and, to the extent permitted by law on any overdue payment (including any
overdue prepayment) of principal, any overdue payment of interest and any overdue payment of any
Prepayment Premium (as such term is deﬁned in the Credit Agreement referred to below). payable
quarterly as aforesaid.

Payments of principal of, interest on and any Prepayment Premium with respect to this
Note are to be made in cleared immediately available Canadian dollar ﬁtnds to such account as the Holder
shall have designated by written notice to the Company.

This Note is a 15% senior secured note (herein called the “Note”) issued pursuant to the
Credit Agreement, dated as ot'Mal-ch 22, 20! 3 (as from time to time amended, the “Credit Agreement”),
between the Company and I’m: ltoldings $.51 r.l. and is entitled to the beneﬁts thereof and the security
therefor.

This Note is assignable and upon surrender of this Note to the Company, duly endorsed,
or accompanied by a written instrument of transfer duly executed. by the trained holder ltcreoi'ol' such
holder's attorney dilly authorized in writing, a new Note for a like principal amount will be issued to, and
in the name of, the transferee. Prior to (Inc presentment For transfer, the Company may treat the person in
whose name this Note is issued as the owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment and for all other
purposes, and the Company will not be affected by any notice to the contrary.

This Note is subject to optional prepayment, in whole or from time to time in part, at the
times and on the terms speciﬁed in the Credit Agreement, but not otherwise.

if an Event of Default, as deﬁned in the Credit Agreement, occurs and is continuing. the
principal of this Note may be declared or otherwise become due and payable in the manner, at the price
(including any applicable Prepayment Premium) and with the effect provided in the Credit Agreement.
deil Aﬁh‘rlmlll ~ Mnmnrc ltlinemlx


l
. 2.

[fatty provision of tltis Note or any agreement related hereto could Dbligalt: the Company
to make any payment of intcrest or other urttount payable to any holder in an amount or calculated at a
rate which would be illegal or could result in a receipt by such holder of interest at a criminal rate (as such
terms are construed tttldcr the Criminal Code (Canada)) then, notwithstanding such provisions, such
amount or rate shall be deemed to have been adjusted with retroactivo effect to the nutxinuun amount or
rate of interest, as the case may he, as could not be so prohibited by law or so rcsult in rt receipt by such
holder of interest at a criminal rate, such adjustment to bc ctt'ected, to the extent necessary, as follows:
(1) ﬁrstly, by reducing the amount or rate of interest required to be paid to such holder, and (2) thcrcatter,
by reducing any fees, commissions, premiums and other amounts required to be paid to such holder
which could constitute “interest” for purposes of Section 347 of the Criminal Code (Canada).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, artd utter giving cﬂ'cet to all adjustments contemplated thereby, if a holder
shall have t‘ceeivcd an amount in excess ot'the maximum permitted by that Section of the Criminal Code
(Canada), the Company shall be entitled, by notice irt writing to such holder, to obtain reimbursement
from such holder in rut autuqu equal to such excess and, pending such reimbursement, such amount shall
be deemed to be an amount payable by such holder to the Company. Any amount or rate of interest
referred to in this paragraph shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted actuarial practices
and principles as an effective annual rate of interest over the remaining term of this Note on the
assumption that any charges, l'ccs or expenses that fall within the meaning of “interest” (as deﬁned in the
Criminal Code (Cnnada)) shall, if they relate to a speciﬁc period of time, be pro-rated over that period of
lime and otherwise be prorated over the period from the date this Note was issued to the Maturity Date of
this Note and, in the event of a dispute, it certiﬁcate of a Fellow of the Canadian Institute of Actuaries
appointed by you shall be conclusive for the purposes of such determination If any court of competent
jurisdiction determines that adjustments contemplated by this paragraph are required to comply with the
Criminal Code (Canada), the holder of this Note has the option of requiring the Company to prepay this
Note on stteh dates as tltc holder may require or to extend the Final Maturity Date cl‘this Note and revise
the monthly repayment amounts so that repayment of this Note; togdhcr with interest at the rate herein
provided for, takes place over a longer period of tintc in compliance with the Criminal (Soda (Cantata).

This Note shall be governed by and construed and enforced in necordauee with the laws
of the Province of Ontario, including the federal laws of Canada applicable thereon, but excluding choice
uflaw rulcs.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Company has issuer! this Note to the holder as of the
date set ottt at the commencement hcrcot'.

MAUI) ORE MTNFlRALS LTD.
By: — _
W
Title:

Credit Ayccmmt - Mnudnn: Mutual:


EXHIBIT B
FORM OF COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE
‘10: Fur: HOLDINGS sjt n.L.
RE: Credit Agreement! dated as nl'Marclt 22. 2013 among Mnudure Minerals Ltd., as
Bnrmwcr, and II‘BC Holdings $.51 I‘.I., as Lender (as chmth from time to time, the
“Credit Agreement”)
ﬂ
Reference is made to the credit agreement dated as ol‘Marelr 22, 2013 (as cltrurged and in
01?th from time to time, the “Credit Agreement”) arming, Maudore Minerals Ltd., as Borrower, and FBC
Holdings S.é t’.i., ZIS Lender. All words used in this Compliance Certiﬁcate which are deﬁned 0r given
extended meanings in the Credit Agreement have the respective deﬁned meanings given to them in the
Credit Agreeman
This Compiinnca Certiﬁcate is given pursuant to Subsection 5tl(a) or the Credit
Agreement in rwpcct of the Fiscal Quarter/Year ending rm 7 , 20 ,
The undersigned represents, warrants and agrees:
(i) liaclr of the representations and warranties set nut in Section 3.1 of the Credit
Agrccmcrtl are true and correct on and as of the date hereof except to the extent
that any rcpmentntion and warranty is stated to be tirade as nfa particular time.
(ii) The conditions set out in Section 4.l of the Credit Agreement have been satisﬁed
(or waived by the Lender).
(iii) Nu Default or Event ochl'aull has occurred and is cantinuing on the date hereof.
DATED this day of , 201 .
MAU'DORE MINERALS L'I'D., as Borrower
By: 7
Name:
Title:
(MttAgwmn~MnutlureMinrmit


SCHEDULE A
SECURITY DOCUMENTS

(a) General security agreement between each Credit Party from time to time party thereto and the
Lender constituting a ﬁrst-priority security interest (subject to l’mnitlcd Liens) over all present
and ﬁiture personal property of such Credit Party including all Equity Interests and bank accounts
in which such Credit Party has any right. title or interest.

(b) Deed of hypothcc between each Credit Party from time to time party [hereto and the Lender
constituting a ﬁrst-priority security interest (subject to Permitted Liens) over the speciﬁc mining
rights agreed upon by Lender and Borrower, is these are identiﬁed at Schedule F, in addition to
the universality of all present and future personal property of such Credit t'znty including all
Equity Interests and bank accounts in which such Credit Party has any right, title or interest

(0) Assignment ofinsuranccs maintained by each Credit l’nnyi

(d) No later than April 15, 2013, Blocked Account Agreement with the bank maintaining the Interest
Escrow Account permitting the Lender only to withdraw any xunount therefrom or give any
orders For payment drawn thereon and Blocked Account Agreement with each depository
institution brink maintaining any other depOSit accounts of the Borrower permitting the Borrower
only to withdraw any amount therefrom or give any payment orders for payment drawn thorch
until the Lender issues an activation notice to the depository institution, alter which only the
Lender shall be entitled to withdraw any amount therefrom or give any orders for payment drawn
thereon.

COLLA'I‘ERAL PERFECTED BY PHYSICAL POSSESSION AND CONTROL
in addition to the property referred to above:

(a) 0n the acquisition of‘ MAP Quebec, (i) certiﬁcates evidencing the entire issued share capital in
NAP Quebec, newmpunicd by duly executed stock n-nnsfers in blank and (ii) promissory note(s)
evidencing all indebtedness owing by NAt’ Quebec in its affiliates immediately before it is
acquired by the Borrower, accompanied by authorized endorsemenl(s) in blank.

(b) Within ten (I0) days following the acquisition of any Subsidiary, certiﬁcates evidencing the
entire issued shine capital in each Subsidinry, uceompanied by duly executed stock transfers in
blank.

mun Aymnmt - Mluﬂﬂm Mingmk


SCHEDULE [1
MATERIAL CONTRACTS

a Loan Agreement dated December l2. 2012 among City Securities Ltd, Mnnenwasin Pty Ltd. and
lite Borrnwer

I Promissory Note dated December 12, 2012 issued by the Borrower in ﬂavour of City Securities
Ltd.

- Promissory Note dated December 12, 20|2 issued by the Bon'ower itt favour of Moncmvasin l’ty
Ltd.

- Deed at“ Hypmhee dated December 12, 2012 among the Borrower, City Securities Ltd. and
Mnneutvasitt l'ty Ltd.

I General Security Agreement dated December 12, 2012 among City Securities Ltd, Monemvasia
Pty Ltd. and the Borrower

0 Loan Agreement dated December 17, 20l2 between City Securities Md. and the Borrower

0 Promissory Note dated December 17, 2012 issued by the Borrower to City Securities I .td,

I Deed of l Iypotheu darted Dceernbcr I7, 2012 between the Borrower and City Securities Ltd

0 General Security Ageement dated December 17, 2012 between City Securities Ltd and the
Borrower

- Agreement dated May I, 1977 between Mines Lac Mattagami Limitee and Seeiete dc
Development rte In Baie James

- Option Agreement dated June I, 2001 between Maude Luke Exploration: Limited and Newment
Canada Limited

0 Agreement dated August IS, 20!“ between Exploration Maude Lake Limitee and Souietc dc
Development de la Buie James

0 Purchase and Sale Ageemenl dated September 2t), 2005 between the Borrower and Gamma
Corporation and Option Agreement dated August 15, 1993 between Cameco Corporation and
Bryan Osborne

0 Purchase nud Sale Agreement (hth December 4, 2012 between the Borrower and Nomnt
Resources Ltd.

- Agreement to provide ﬁnancial advisory dated August 28, 2012 between the Borrower and
Morrison Park Advisors Inn, as amended by letter dated December 28, 2012

('redit Amunnt - ltlttutkllc Mimi-1'5


SCHEDULE C
POST-CLOSING REQUIREMENTS
POST CLOSING REQUIREMENT DATE BY WHICH TO BE MET
(.‘mdu Aglmlmm - Mun-1m: Mmcmh


SCHEDULE D
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
The Borrower has no subsidiaries as al [111; dale of {his Agreement, but immediately fallowing the closing
of the h'alisnctinns contemplated by [his Agreement will acquire 100% of the shares of NAP Quebec
Mines Ltd.. which will lhcrcallcr be a \vlmHy—mvncd subsidiary ofthe Borrower.
(3mm Amman » "mm: Minna!»


SCHEDULE F.
LOCATIONS
0 The principal office of the Borrower is locnlcll al 2000, nu; Peel, Suite 620, Monlrénl, Québcc,
[13A 2W5.
- The rcgislcrcd ofﬁce nf Ihc Borrower is located at 199 Buy SL, Suilc 4000, Toronto, Ontario,
MSI, lA‘).
I The mailing address of llIc Borrower is located an IOIA, Avenue l’rincipalc, Suite 200, Rouyn-
Naranda, Qnébec, J‘)X lil’l.
o The Mining Properties are located approximately 15 kilometers northwest of the town of chcl- ‘
sur—Quévillon (Abilihi-Témiscamingnc legion). Province of Québeu, in Ihc Registration Division
oI'Abilibi. \
CmiilAgxsmenl- ukulele Mnmnls


SCHEDULE l“
COMPTOIS PROPERTY
The Mining Properties an: localcd approximately 15 kilometers northwest of the lawn nf Label-sur-
Quévillun (Ahilihi»‘l‘émiscuminguc region), Province of Québcc, in the Registraliun Division of Abitibi,
and comprised of the following claims:

PROPERTY SNRC 'l'O‘VNSHlP TITLE
Comluis 321-03 FRASER CDC 2068959
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068960
(Icmtois 32W] FRASER CDC 206896l
Comluis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068962
Cnmtois 321703 FRASER CDC 2068963
Comtuis 32P03 FRASER CDC 2068964
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068965
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068966
Cnmtois JZFOS FRASER CDC 2068967
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068968
Connois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068969
Connois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068970
Comlois 3ZF03 FRASER CDC 206397]
Comtois 32F"?! FRASER CDC 2068972
Connois 32F03 FRASER CDC 206807]
Comtois 321-03 FRASER CDC 2068074
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068975
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068976
Comm'm 32FO3 FRASER CDC 2068977
Cummis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2068978
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 206920]
Commix 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069202
Comlois 321703 C(JM'l‘OIS CDC 2069203
Conilois 321703 COM'l‘OIS CDC 2069204
(Iomtois 32 FOB COMTOIS CDC 2069205
Comluis 321703 COM'I‘OIS CDC 2069206
Cnmtnis 32003 COMTOIS CDC 2069207
Comtois 32F03 COMTO IS CDC 2069215
Commis 32F03 COM’I‘OIS CDC 2069216
Cmnmis Sill-‘03 COMTOIS CDC 20692 I 7
Commis 321703 COM‘IUIS CDC 2069218
Commis 321703 COM‘l‘OIS CDC 2069219
Cmnmis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069220
Cumlois 32F03 (IOM‘I "01$ CDC 206922] ‘
Cnmmis 32003 COMTOIS CDC 2069222
Cnmwis 321‘03 COMTOIS CDC 2069223
Comlois 32F03 COM‘I'OIS CDC 2069224

Clﬂm Aymmcm- Mandate Milan!)


PROPERTY SNRC TOWN SHIP TITLE
Colntois 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069225
Comtois 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069226
Conltois 321:0} COMTOIS CDC 2069227
Comlo'u 321703 COMTOIS CDC 2069228
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069229
Colnluis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069230
Commis 321-‘03 COMTOIS CDC 206923|
Comwis 32.1703 FRASER CDC 2069441
Conllois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069442
Cnmlnis 321-03 FRASER CDC 2069443
Cnmtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069444
Comiois 321‘03 FRASER CDC 2069445
Cmnmis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069446
Cumluis 32F0] FRASER CDC 2069447
Comtnis 32F03 FRASER CDC 20694411
Conltois 32PM FRASER CDC 2069449
Connois 321903 FRASER CDC 20694 50
Connois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069451
(Inmtnis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069452
Cumluis 321703 FRASER CDC 2069453
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069454
Comtnis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069455
Comluis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069456
Colmois 321-03 FRASER CDC 2069457
Cnmtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069458
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069459
CD‘mluis 32 F03 FRASER CDC 2069460
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 206946|
Cmmuis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069462
Cumlois 321:0] FRASER CDC 206.94 63
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069464
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2069465
Comlois 321‘03 FRASER CDC 20694 66
Comlois 321-03 FRASER CDC 20694 67
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2069474
Comlois 32l1‘03 CDM'IOIS CDC 2069475
Commis 32F03 FRASER (IDC 2071971
Cnmlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071972
Counois 321’03 FRASER CDC 2071973
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071974
COImois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071975
Connois 32F03 FRASER CDC 207 I 976
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071977
Cumlois 321‘03 FRASER CDC 2071978 ‘
Cnmtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071979
Commis 321703 FRASER CDC 2071980
Cumlois 321:0} FRASER CDC 2071981

(mu Agmmm - MAME": Minna]:


PROPERTY SN RC TOWNSHIP TIT] .17.
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071932
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071983
Coulluis 32 F0] FRASER CDC 2071984
Commis 321703 FRASER CDC 2071985
Comtuis 32F03 FRASER CDC 20719116
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071987 ‘
Cumluis 321703 FRASER CDC 2071938
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071989
Cumloi: 32F03 FRASER CDC 207N190 ‘
Comluis 32F03 1" RASth CDC 2071991
VComtnis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071992 1
Connois 32F03 F RASBR CDC 2071993
Comlois 32F 03 FRASER CDC 2071994
(Inmtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2071995
Cmnlois 3 21:03 FRASER CDC 2071995
Cnmtois 321-03 FRASER CDC 2071997
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 20720 | 0
Cnlntois 321703 1" RASIL'R CDC 2072088
Coullois 32F03 FRASER CDC 20720159
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072090
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072091
Culmois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072092
Commis 32F03 FRASER  2072093
Comluis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072094
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072095
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072096
Commis 321703 FRASER CDC 2072097
Commie 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072098
Comtois 321—‘03 FRASER (3 DC 2072099
(Inmmis 321703 FRASER CDC 2072100
Comlois 3 21703 FRASER CDC 2072101
Conntnis 321-03 FRASER CDC 2072102
Comlois 32170.1 FRASER CDC 2072103 1
Com‘ois 32170.1 1" RASER CDC 2072104
(101111015 321-03 FRASER CDC 2072105
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072106
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072107
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072108
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072109
Comlois 321433 FRASER CDC 2072110
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072' I l
Commis 321703 FRASER CDC 2072| 12
Comlois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072113
(Inmmis 32170.7 FRASER CDC 2072114
Comlois 321‘03 FRASER CDC 2072I I5
Coullnis 321-03 FRASER CDC 2072116
Comtois 321703 FRASI ER CDC 2072117

leil Ayeemem . Mnmom Minerals


PROPERTY SN RC TOWNSHIP 'l'l'l'LE
Commie: 32F03 FRASER CDC 20721 18
Ccmlois 32F()3 FRASER  20721 1 9
Conltois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072120
Comkuis 321703 FRASER CDC 2072121
Cmntnis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072122
Comtuis 32F03 FRASER Cr )C 2072123
Cm "1015 3 2F03 FRASER CDC 2072124
Comm is 3 217113 FRASER CDC 2072125
(101111015 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072126
Commis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2072127
Connois 32F03 FRASER CL 363371 1 (A)
Cumluis 321-‘03 FRASER ()1. 3633712 (A)
(Inmtois 32F03 FRASER CL 3633713 (A)
Comlois 321103 FRASER CL 3633714 (A)
Cmmois 32F03 FRASER CL 3633721 (A)
Colntois 321703 FRASER CL 3633722 (A)
Col-111015 32F03 FRASER Cl. 3633723 (A)
Comlois 32F03 FRASER C1. 3633731 (A)
Comtois 32FO3 FRASER CL 3633732 (A)
Comtois 321703 FRASER C1. 3633 83 1 (A)
Comlois 321-03 FRASER Cl . 363 3 832 (A)
Comtnis 32F03 FRASER CL 3633701 (A)
Ccmluis 321703 FRASER C1. 363 3 702 (A)
Connois 321'" 03 FRASER CL 363 3703 (A)
(Inmtois 321703 FRASER CL 3633704 (A)
156
Comlois 321-‘03 QUEV'HJDN CL 5142603
Commis 321703 QUEVILLON CL $142604
Comluis 321:0} QUEVILLON C1. 5142608
Commis 32F03 QUEVII ,1 .ON CL 5142609
Commis 321703 QUIWILLUN CL 5142610
Comlois 321‘03 QUEVILLON C1. 5142613
Cumluis 32F03 QUEVILLON Cl. 5142614
Cnmtnis 321703 Qtﬂ'ﬂVlLLON CL 5142615
Cnmtois 321703 QUEVILLON C1, 5142616
Comtois 32F03 QUEVILI {ON CL 5142621
Commis 32170.1 QUIEVILLON CL 5142622
Comtois 321-03 QUEV'ILIDN (31. 5142623
Cnmtois 32F03 QUEVH/LON CL 5 142624
Comlois 321:03 QUEVLLLON C1 . 5 1112629
Comlois 32F03 QUEVILLON Cl 1 5142630
Cnmmis 32F03 QUEVIIJ AON CL 5142631
Comluis 321103 QUEVU_LON C1. 5142632
Comlois 321-‘03 QUEVILLON CL 5142633
(Inmtnis 32F03 QUEVILLON CL 5142638
Cumlois 321103 QUEVILLON C1. 5142639

mm Aymsz - Mnndnn: Mimi:


1
PROPERTY SNRC T( )WNSII ll‘ TITLE
Conllois 321413 QUBVILLON ()1. 5142640
Connois 32F03 QUEVUJDN (31. 5142641
Colmois 321703 Q1 1 1 5V 1 LLON CL 5 M2642
Cmmois 321-03 QUEVIIJ .ON CI . 5142650
Commit 321703 (IOMTOIS CL 5 I 42662
Commis 321'03 COMTOIS CI. 5142663
Cnmtois 321703 COMTO] 8 CL 5142664
27
Comtois 321703 COMTOIS CL 5 I4 I 805
Cummis 32F03 COMTOIS Cl. 5141806
Comm is 32F03 COMT( ) IS CL 5141807
Comwis 32 F0] COM'l'OIS C1, 514 I 308
Cmmois 32F03 QUEVII J ION CL 5141809
Comtois 321701 COM’I‘OIS CL 521 I l | l
Comlois 32F 03 COMTOIS C1. 521 11 12
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5211113
(iomtnis 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5211114
Comic-E 321:0] COM'I‘OIS C1. 52 I 1 1 l5
Comtois 321-03 COMTOIS Cl. 521 1 I 16
l l
Comtois 32F03 CDC 2304464
Colntois 321703 CDC 2304465
Comlois 32 F03 CDC 2304466
Comlois 32F03 CDC 2304467
Oommis 32F03 CDC 2304463
Comtois 321703 CDC 2304469
Comlois 32F03 CDC 2304470
Comm is 32F03 CDC 23 04471
Cnmluis 321703 CDC 23 044 72
Comlois 32F03 CDC 2304473
Commis 32F03 CDC 2304474
(Inmtois 321703 CDC 2304475
Culmuis 321303 CDC 23 04 476
Commis 32F03 CDC 23 04477
Comlois 121703 CDC 23 04478
Comlois 32503 CDC 2304479
(Inmlois 32170.1 CDC 23044210
Cumlois 321303 CDC 230441“
18
Cumlois 321:03 COM’I‘OIS CDC 2 120434
Colutois 32FO3 COMTOIS CDC 2120435
(.‘mnlois 32F03 (IOM'I'OIS CDC 2 120436
Comlois 32 F03 COMTOIS CDC 2120437
Cmnlois 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2120438
('JnhlAyNulml - Mat-dare Minna“


PROPERTY SNRC TOW-NSF"? TITLE
Comluis 32170.1 COM’I'OIS CDC 2120439
Comluis 321703 COMTOIS CDC 2120440
Cnmmis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2120441
Cumlois 321703 COM'I‘OlS CDC 2120442
Cnmmis 32103 COMTOIS CDC 2120443
Comluis 321703 COM'I‘OIS CDC 2 120/144
Cnmtois 321-03 COMTOIS CDC 2120445
Colnluis 321703 COM'I'OIS CDC 2 1204/16
Commis 321‘03 COMTOIS CDC 2120447
Commis 321’03 COMTOIS CDC 2120441!
Comlois 321703 COM'I'OIS CDC 2120449
Comis 321-‘03 COMTOIS CDC 2120450
Commie: 32F03 COM’I‘OIS CDC 2120451
(101111013 321‘03 COMTOIS CDC 2 121.1452
(Iommis 32F03 COMTOIS CDC 2120453
20
Commis 321-03 __ CDC 2192330
Cnmtois 32F03 _ CDC 219233 1
Comteis 321:03 _ CDC 2192332
Cnmtois 321-‘03 __ CDC 2192333
Comlois 321703 ' CDC 2192334
Cumlois 321103 ~ CDC 2192335
Commis 32FO3 _ CDC 2192336
Comlois 321703 _ CDC 2192337
Commis 321703 _ CDC 2192338
Comtois 32PM _ CDC 2192339
Cnmtois 32FO3 _ CDC 2192340
Comlois 321703 _ CDC 2192341
Commis 32103 H CDC 2192342
(Iomtnis 32F03 _ CDC 2192343
Comluis 32F03 _ CDC 21923114
Comtois 32103 n CDC 2192345
Commis 321113 __ CDC 2192346
Commis 32F03 _ CDC 2192347
111
Comlois 321703 QUEVILLON CL 5279104
Cnmmis 321413 QUEV'TJON C1. 5279105
Comlois 321703 QUBVILLON CL 5279106
Comlois 32F03 QUEVIIJDN C1. 5279107
Cnmtois 32F03 QUEV11.LON Cl. 5279108
Commis 321703 QUIEVILLON CL 5279109
Conﬂois 321-113 QUEVILLON C1. 5279110
(Inmtois 32F03 QUEV1I,1,()N CL 527911 |
Cumwis 32F03 QUEVILLON CL 52791 12
Connois 321-‘03 QUEVILLON Cl . 5279113

man Agremml - Maud-m Minerals


1
PROPERTY SNRC TOWNSHIP TITLE

Comtnis 321-113 QUEVIT ,1 ,ON CL 5279114
Comlois 32F03 QUTﬁVlLLON CL 5279115
Comlois 321703 QUEVlLLON CI, 52791 16
Cnmtois 321703 QUTWILLON CL 5279117
Comluis 321703 QUEVILLON C1. 52791 18
Cmntnis 32F03 QUEV" LON CL 52791 1‘)
Colnlois 5121703 QUEVJLLON CI . 5279180
Cmnmis 32F03 QUEVTLLON CL 5279181
Cummis 321703 QUEVILLON CL 52791152
Cumluis 32F03 QUEVJLLON CI. 5279183 1
Cmutnis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2138579
Commis T121703 FRASER CDC 2 I 38580
Connois 321-03 FRASER CDC 2138581
(Inmmis 32F03 FRASER CDC 2138582
Comluis 321‘03 FRASER CDC 2138583
Cnmtois 32F03 CRAMOIJ'ET CDC 2138584
Commis 321703 CRAMOLET CDC 21311585
Comlois 32170] CRAMOLE’I‘ CDC 2138536
Comicis 321-03 CRAMOLET CDC 2138587
Cnmtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2138636
Camtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2138637
Colulois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2138638
Cnmtois 32F03 FRASER CDC 2138639
Commis 321703 FRASER CDC 2138640
Conltois 32F03 QUEVILION Cl . 5279339
Cmmoix 32F03 QUEVILLO'N CL 5279340
Commis 32FO3 QUEVIIAI ,()N CL 5279341
Cumluis 321703 QUEVILLON C1: 5279343
Comlois 32F03 QUEVTLLON Cl, 5279344
39

Conuois 32F03 FRASER CL 5163471
Connois 321703 FRASER CL 5163472
Cannot: 321703 FRASER CL 5163473
Cumlois 32F03 FRASER CL 5163474
Cnmtnis 32F03 FRASER CL 5163475
Cumlo‘s 321413 FRASER C11 516.7476
Cmmois 32F03 FRASER CL 5163477
Comtois 32F03 FRASER CI, 5163478
Connois 321-03 COMTOIS (IL 5163484
Cmntois 321703 COMTOIS CL 5163485
Comm'm 321703 COMTOIS CL 5163486
Cmmois 32MB COMTOIS C1. 5163487
Comtois 32F0] C()M'I'()IS CL 5163483
Comlois 32H)! COM‘FOIS C1. 51631189
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS Cl. 5163490
Commie 321703 COM’I‘OIS CL 5163491

Cmm Agmmnx - “mam: Min:me


I’ROI’ERTV SNRC TOWNSHIP TITLE

16

Comtois 32F03 CDC 2353493
Culnlois 321703 CDC 2353494
Cmmnis 321:0? CDC 2353495
Cumlois 32F03 CDC 2353496
Cmntois 321-‘03 CDC 2353497 ‘
Comlois 321703 CDC 2353498
Cmntnis 321-03 CDC 2353499
(Tommi: 321-03 CDC 2353500
Cumlois 321703 CDC 2353502
Commis 321‘03 CDC 2353503
Comtth 32F03 CDC 2353504
Comtois 321-‘03 CDC 2353505
Commis 32F03 CDC 2353507
(201111015 321703 CDC 235.1508
Comtnis 32F03 CDC 2353509
Commis 32F03 CDC 2353510
Cmmois 32F03 CDC 23535”
Comlois 321703 CDC 2353512
Commis 32F03 CDC 2353513
Comto'L: 321703 CDC 2353514
Comtois 32F03 CDC 2353516
Commie 321-‘03 CDC 2353517
Comlois 32F03 CDC 2353518
Comluis 321703 CDC 23535 [9
Comlois 32l"03 CDC 2353 520
Commis 32F03 CDC 2353521
Cumwis 32F03 CDC 2353522
Commis 32|103 CDC 2353523
28

Commis 321-113 COMTOIS CI. 5081419
Commis 321-03 COMTOIS CI. 5081420
(Iomtois 32F03 COM’l'OIS CL 508 I421
Comm is 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5031422
Cmnmis 32F03 COM‘I‘UIS CI. 5081423
Cumluis 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5081424
Commis 321413 COMTOIS CI. 5081425
Comluis 321703 COM‘l'OIS CL 5081426
Commis 321-03 COMTOIS 236348!
Colntais 321-113 COMTOIS 23 63482
Comluis 321703 COMTOIS CL 5223901
Comte is 32! ‘03 COMTOIS CL 5223902
Cmnmis 32F03 (IOM'I’OIS CL 5223903
(301111013 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5223904
Comlais 32I’03 COMTOIS CL 5229487

ﬁcdix Amen—m » Mame Mumls


PROPERTY SN RC TOWNSHIP TITLE
Comlois 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5229488
Comlois 321703 FRASER CL 5229489
Commis 321-1)} FRASER CL 5229490
Commis 321703 COMTOIS CL 5229491
Commis 32W} COMTOIS Cl. 5229492
Comtois 321703 _ CDC 2184775
Comtois 32503 CDC 211M776
Commis 32F03 _ CDC 2184777
Coullois 32I‘03 CDC 211M778
Conllois 321-‘03 CDC 2184779
Commix 321703 _ CDC 2184780
Cumluis 321:0] h CDC 2184781
Comtois 32F03 _ CDC 2184782
(301211013 32F03 _ CDC 2 [84783
29
Cumlois 321:0] A CDC 2| 84771
Cumlois 32ml] k CDC 211M772
Commis 32FO3 __ (le2 2184773
Cumlois 32F03 _ CDC 2184774
Cumlois JZFOS COMFOIS CL 5029365
Comtnis 32F03 COMTOIS C L 5029366
Comluis 321703 COM'lUIS CL 5029367
Conltois 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5029368
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5169650
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5169651
Cumlois 321703 COM‘I'OIS CL 5169652
Commis 321-113 COMTOIS C1. 5169653
(Imnmis 321703 FRASER CL 5229493
Cumlois 321703 FRASER CL $229494
Comtnis 32F03 FRASER Cl 4 5229495
Commie; 321703 FRASER CL 5229496
Cululois 321:0] FRASER CI. 5229880
Cumlois 32H)! FRASER Cl. 5229881
Commis 32F03 FRASER CL 5229882
Comlois 321703 FRASER CL 5229883
Conltois 32F03 FRASER Cl . 52298114
21
Comtois 32F03 COMTOIS CL 513575]
Cumluis 32MB COMTOIS C1. 5 |35752
Cuullois 32F03 COMTOIS CI. 5 |35753
Commis 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5135754
COmlOiS 32H)?! C()M'1'OlS CL 5135755
Conmnis 321-‘03 COMTOIS Cl. 5135756
Commis 32PM (IOM’I'OIS CL 5135757
Comlois 321’03 COM'I'OIS CL 5135758

(1mm Agccmem- mum anuls


PROPERTY SNRC TOWNSHIP TITLE

Comlois 321703 COM'I‘OIS CL 5135759

Cumlois 321:0] COM'I'OIS CL 5 135 760

Comtois 32F03 COMTOIS CL 5 135761

Cutnluis 321:0] COM'1'01S CL 5135762

Comtnis 32F03 COMTOlS Cl, 5135763

Cotnlois 32F03 COM'I‘Ois CL 5135764

Cnmmis 32F03 COMTOIS (II . 5135765

Cumluis 32F03 COM'I‘OIS CL 5135766

Commis 321-03 COMTOIS Cl 4 5135767

Commis 32F03 COMIOIS (21, 51357611

Cumluis 321703 COMTOIS CL 5135770

Cnuitois 32F03 COMTOIS C1. 5135771

Commie 321703 COMTOIS CL 513 5772

Cmnlois 321:0} COM'I‘OIS CL 5 |JS773

(Inmtois 32F03 COMTOIS (.‘1. 5135774

Cumtois 32F03 C(JM’I‘OIS CL 5135775

Cotntois 32103 COM’I‘OIS C1. 5135776

Comtois 32103 COMI‘OIS C1. 5135777

Comtois 321703 COMTOIS CL S 13 5 778

Comlois 321'03 COM’l‘OlS CL 5 I 35779

28

Total: 411
Note (A) — The Borrower holds 95% interesl in these claims and Société de De’veluppemeut de la Baic
James holds a 5% non-contributive intemt that will be converted into a 2% NSR royalty iu the event of
commercial production (of which 1% can be bought back lbl'$250,000)1 In accordance with the Opliou
Agreement dated June 1, 2011 between Maude Lake Iﬁxplcrntian Limited and Newmoul Canada Limited
(“Newmont”), at such time 1'15 the Borrower incth $1,000,000 in expenditures on these 15 claims, ‘
Newmonl shall have 120 days to exercise a one-time exclusive option to buy back a 51% interest in the
15 claims by spending $750,000 in explomlion expenditures within (me year or remain with its 1.45% ‘
NSR royalty The Borrower surpassctl $1,000,000 in expenditures in February 2013.
L‘kdtl Agcclllcnl - Mnuxitne Minerals


SCHEDULE (i
ROYALTIES ‘
l
The folluwing 15 claims are subject lo a 1.5% ncl smelter rclnrn royally lo Ncwmonl Mining Corporation
(“Ncwnlonf”) and are 95% owned hy [he Bormwclx The lemuining 5% nonwontributory intermt owned ‘
by Sociélé dc Dévcluppcmcnl do In Buiu James will be cunvwlcd line a 2% NSR royally in the event of
commercial praduclion (of which 1% can be bought bnck for $250,000). In acconlzmce \vill1 (In: Option
Agreement dated June l, 20! I hcuvccn Manda Lake Exploration Limited and Ncwmnnt Canada Limited,
at such lime as the Burrower incurs $1,000,000 in expenditures on Ihese 15 claims. Newmunl shall have
l20 days to exercise a one-time exclusive optinn to buy hack 1) 51% imerest in the IS claims by spending
$750,000 in exploraliun expendilnns within one year at remain willi ils 1.45% NSR royallyV The
Borrower surlnuscd $|,000,000 in expenditures in Fobrualy 20l3.
Claim Nnmbcr
I 363370!
2 3633702
3 3633703
4 3633704
5 363371 I
6 3633712
7 3633713
8 3633714
9 363372|
[0 3633722
1 l 3633723
12 363373|
l3 3633732
14 363383]
l5 3633832
'l'hu following 6] claims an: subject to n “3% net prnﬁt interest royalty to Bryan Osborne:
Claim legimiNo. Clﬂi‘“ Claim No.
1 5029365 4' 5142623
2 5029366 42 5142629
3 5029367 43 5 I42630
4 5029368 44 s 142663
5 5031419 45 5142664
5 5081420 ’15 5 “53484
7 50111421 47 51034115
8 5081422 48 5l63486
9 5081423 ’19 5163487
'0 50111424 50 5163488
11 5011425 51 51634119
[.1th Again-ml - Mnudun: Mimmls


Claim Claim No. Cllim ClaimNa
'2 5081426 52 5163490
13 5135751 53 5163491
14 5135752 54 5211111
'5 5135753 55 5211112
16 5135754 56 5211113
'7 5135756 57 5211114
IS 5135757 58 5211115
19 5I35758 5" 5211116
20 5135759 60 52294117
2! 5135760 61 5229488
22 5l3576l 62 5229491
23 5135762 63 5229492
24 5135763
25 5135764
26 5135765
27 5135766
28 5135767
29 5135768
30 5l41805
31 5|4l806
32 51411107
33 5142603
34 5142608
35 $142609
3(- 5142613 ‘
37 51426l4
38 5142615
39 5142621
40 5142622

Clean Agnmml - Manama Mmm1s


\
SCHEDULE Ii
MINING TAX CREDITS
0 Quebec Tax Credik in the nmnunt of SKI/15,6417 on or bcfnrc December 3 I, 20”
I Quebec Mining Duty in the amount of $2 I .639 on or befol’a December 3 l, 2013
thlAyeemunl ‘ Mnuﬂmv Mina-us


SCHEDULE l
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS
None.
deilltyrrmlnl ‘ Mnudmc Mmmu

