
KIMBERLEY DIAMONDS LTD
ACN 150 737 563
NOTICE OF EXTRAORDINARY GENERAL MEETING
-and-
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
-and-
PROXY FORM
10.00am (Sydney time)
27 September 2016
Boardroom Pty Limited 
Level 12, 225 George Street 
SYDNEY   NSW   2000
TIME: 
 
DATE: 
 
PLACE:
This Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting and the Explanatory  Memorandum should be 
read in its entirety.  If Shareholders are in doubt as to how they should vote, they should seek 
advice from their accountant, solicitor or other professional advisor.
1
NOTICE OF EXTRAORDINARY GENERAL MEETING
Notice is hereby given that an extraordinary general meeting of Kimberley Diamonds Ltd (the Company or KDL) will be held 
at  Boardroom  Pty  Limited,  Level  12,  225  George  Street,  Sydney  NSW  2000  at  10.00am  (Sydney  time)  on  Tuesday  27 
September 2016.  
 
The Explanatory Memorandum and Proxy Form attached to this Notice are intended to be read in conjunction with and form 
part of this Notice. Terms and abbreviations used in this Notice are defined in the Glossary attached as Annexure A to the 
Explanatory Memorandum. 
 
 
BUSINESS 
 
 
Resolution 1                       Approval for the issue of up to an additional 50 million Shares  
 
To consider, and if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
 
That, for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.1 and for all other purposes, approval is given for the issue by the Company of up to 
50 million Shares on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum accompanying this Notice. 
 
Further details in respect of Resolution 1 are set out in the Explanatory Memorandum accompanying this Notice. 
 
Voting exclusion statement: The Company will disregard any votes cast on Resolution 1 by:
(a)  a person who may participate in the proposed issue; and 
(b)  any  person  who  might  obtain  a  benefit,  except  a  benefit  solely  in  the  capacity  of  a  holder  of  Shares,  if  this
resolution is passed,
and any Associate of those persons. 
 
However, the Company need not disregard a vote on Resolution 1 if it is cast by:
(a)  a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, if the vote is cast in accordance with the directions on the
Proxy Form; or
(b)  the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the
Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
Resolution 2                      Approval for amendments to draw down facility  
 
To consider, and if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an ordinary resolution: 
 
That, for the purpose of Listing Rule 10.1, Listing Rule 10.11 and for all other purposes, approval is given for the 
amendments to the terms of draw down facility provided by DDA Trading BVBA (DDA Trading) to Lerala Diamond Mines 
Limited (Lerala) under the terms of the diamond marketing and sales agreement entered into by the Company, Lerala and 
DDA on 26 February 2016 and approved by shareholders on 27 April 2016, further details of which are set out in the 
Explanatory Memorandum accompanying this Notice. 
 
Further details in respect of Resolution 2 are set out in the Explanatory Memorandum accompanying this Notice. 
 
Voting exclusion statement: The Company will disregard any votes cast on Resolution 2 by DDA Trading or if applicable, 
any of its nominees under the arrangements above, Liang Xie, and the Associates of those parties. However, the Company 
need not disregard a vote on Resolution 2 if it is cast by:
2
(a)  a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, if the vote is cast in accordance with the directions on the
Proxy Form; or
(b)  the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the
Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
PROXIES, ATTORNEYS AND CORPORATE REPRESENTATIVES 
 
Shareholders  are  entitled  to  appoint  up  to  two  proxies  to  act  generally  at  the  Meeting  on  their  behalf,  and  to  vote  in 
accordance with their directions on the Proxy Form.  A proxy need not be a Shareholder.  
 
Where two proxies are appointed, each proxy can be appointed to represent a specified proportion or number of the votes of 
the Shareholder.  If no number or proportion of votes is specified, each proxy may exercise half of the Shareholder’s votes.   
 
If you appoint a proxy, the Company encourages you to direct your proxy how to vote on each Resolution by marking the 
appropriate boxes on the Proxy Form. 
 
Where  permitted,  the  Chairman  of  the  Meeting  intends  to  vote  undirected  proxies  in  favour  of  each  Resolution. 
Accordingly, if you want to vote against any of the items of business, you should direct your proxy how to vote in 
respect of that resolution.
A  corporation  which  is  a  Shareholder,  or  which  has  been  appointed  a  proxy,  may  appoint  an  individual  to  act  as  a 
representative  to  vote  at  the  Meeting.    The  appointment  must  comply  with  section  250D  of  the  Corporations  Act.  The 
representative should bring to the Meeting evidence of his or her appointment unless it has previously been provided to the 
Share Registry. 
 
Completed  Proxy  Forms  (together  with  any  authority  under  which  the  Proxy  Form  was  signed,  or  a  certified  copy  of  the 
authority)  must  be  returned  to  our  Share  Registry,  Boardroom  Pty  Limited  by  10.00  am  (Sydney  time)  on  25  September 
2016. Boardroom’s contact details are as follows:
Post
GPO Box 3993 Sydney NSW 2001 Australia
In person
Level 12, 225 George Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000
Telephone
+61 2 9290 9600
Facsimile
+61 2 9290 9655
Voting Exclusion 
 
Where a voting exclusion applies, the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person 
who is entitled to vote in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form or it is cast by the person chairing the Meeting as 
proxy for a person who is entitled to vote in accordance with a direction on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides. 
 
Enquiries 
 
All  enquiries  in  relation  to  the  Meeting  or  the  Resolutions  to  be  voted  on  should  be  directed  to  the  Company  Secretary 
(telephone +61 2 8243 7500). 
 
ENTITLEMENT TO ATTEND AND VOTE AT THE EXTRAORDINARY GENERAL MEETING 
 
All Shareholders may attend the Meeting.  
 
The  Board  has  determined  pursuant  to  regulation  7.11.37  of  the  Corporations  Regulations  2001  (Cth)  that  the  persons 
eligible to vote at the Meeting are those  who are registered as  Shareholders at 7:00pm (Sydney  time) on 25  September 
2016.
3
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
Laila Green 
Company Secretary 
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd  
9 August 2016
4
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
This Explanatory Memorandum has been prepared for the information of Shareholders of the Company in connection with 
the business to be conducted at the extraordinary general meeting of the Company to be held at Boardroom Pty Limited, 
Level 12, 225 George Street, Sydney on Tuesday, 27 September 2016 at 10.00am (Sydney time).  
 
This Explanatory Memorandum should be read in conjunction with and forms part of the accompanying Notice. The purpose 
of this Explanatory Memorandum is to provide information to Shareholders to assist them in deciding whether or not to pass 
the Resolutions in the Notice.  
 
A Proxy Form is located at the end of the Explanatory Memorandum. 
 
Important dates and times
Record time/date to determine shareholders eligible to 
vote
7:00pm Sydney time on 25 September 2016
Last time/date for receipt of valid proxies
10:00 am Sydney time on 25 September 2016
Date and time of Meeting
10:00 am Sydney time on 27 September 2016
Nature of resolutions 
 
All of the resolutions are ordinary resolutions, meaning that they can be passed by a simple majority of votes cast by the 
shareholders entitled to vote (i.e. over 50%). 
 
 
 
Resolution 1
Approval for the issue of up to an additional 50 million Shares
Resolution 1 seeks the approval for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.1 and all other purposes, the issue of up to an additional 
50 million Shares to professional and sophisticated investors.
Background
KDL is considering undertaking a placement of up to 50 million Shares and is seeking Shareholder approval for this possible 
placement.
Listing Rule 7.1
Listing Rule 7.1 prohibits the Company from issuing or agreeing to issue more than 15% of its Equity Securities in any 12 
month period without the approval of Shareholders (unless one of the exceptions in Listing Rule 7.2 applies).
Currently, the Company’s remaining capacity to issue shares under Listing Rule 7.1 is 24,148,069 Shares and the Company 
has  no  capacity  to  issue  Shares  under  Listing  Rule  7.1A.  If  Resolution  1  is  passed,  the  issue  of  Shares  the  subject  of 
Resolution 1 will be approved for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.1, and the Company will be able to issue additional Equity 
Securities without the  Shares the subject of Resolution 1 counting towards the 15% threshold for the purposes of Listing 
Rule 7.1.
Technical information required by Listing Rule 7.3
The following information is provided in compliance with Listing Rule 7.3.
(a)  Listing Rule 7.3.1: Maximum number of securities the Company is to issue (if known) or the formula for calculating
the number of securities the Company is to issue:
5
Up to 50 million Shares.
(b)  Listing Rule 7.3.2: The date by which the Company will issue the securities:
The Company will issue the Shares not later than 3 months following the date of this General Meeting.
(c)  Listing Rule 7.3.3: The issue price of the securities:
A minimum price of at least 85% of volume weighted average price (VWAP) of Shares, calculated over the last 5 
days on which sales in Shares were recorded before the day on which this issue is made.
(d)  Listing Rule 7.3.4: The names of the allottees (if known) or the basis on which the allottees will be identified or
selected:
Shares will be issued to professional or sophisticated investors.
(e)  Listing Rule 7.3.5: The terms of the securities:
The Shares will rank equally in all respects with all other Shares on issue.
(f)  Listing Rule 7.3.6: The intended use of the funds raised:
Funds will be used for the operation of the Lerala Diamond Mine in Botswana and working capital.
(g)  Listing Rule 7.3.7: The issue date or a statement that the issue will occur progressively:
The issue date will be a date or dates not later than 3 months following the General Meeting and the Company 
may issue the Shares progressively.
(h)  Listing Rule 7.3.8: Voting exclusion statement:
A voting exclusion statement is included in the Notice accompanying this Explanatory Memorandum.
Directors’ Recommendation
The Board recommends that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 1.
Resolution 2
Approval for amendments to draw down facility
Resolution  2  seeks  the  approval  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.1,  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  all  other  purposes,  for 
amendments  to  the  terms  of  the  draw  down  facility  provided  by  DDA  Trading  BVBA  (DDA  Trading)  to  Lerala  Diamond 
Mines Limited (Lerala) under the terms of the diamond marketing and sales agreement entered into by the Company, Lerala 
and on 26 February 2016 (Sales Agreement) and approved by shareholders on 27 April 2016.
Background
The Company and its wholly owned Botswana subsidiary, Lerala, entered into a sales and marketing agreement with DDA 
Trading (a Belgian incorporated party) in connection with the auction of diamonds to be produced by Lerala Diamond Mine 
in  Botswana  on  26  February  2016  (amended  in  June  2016) (the  Sales  Agreement).  DDA  Trading  was  owned  by  KDL’s 
former  subsidiary,  Kimberley  Diamond  Company  Pty  Ltd,  until  June  2015,  when  it  was  sold  to  an  unrelated  third  party. 
Alexandre Alexander (KDL’s Chairman) and Laila Green (KDL’s CFO and Company Secretary) both remained directors of 
DDA Trading post the sale at the request of the new owner.
The relevant current terms of the Sales Agreement for the purposes of approving an extension of the term of the draw down 
facility are as follows:
6
(a)  Current terms relating to sales of diamonds (NOT CHANGING): the Sales Agreement provides that Lerala will 
appoint  DDA  Trading  to  provide  services  to  Lerala  as  exclusive  sales  and  marketing  agent  for  the  diamonds 
produced by Lerala Diamond Mine in Botswana for a period of 5 years (Term) (the Term was previously amended 
from 3 years to 5 years by agreement between the parties in June 2016) and will be paid commission of 1.75% on 
diamonds  sold,  plus  reasonable  expenses.  The  rate  of  commission  is  subject  to  annual  review  and  may  be 
adjusted with agreement by all parties. After expiry of the Term, the Sales Agreement will continue to operate but 
will be terminable on 3 months’ notice given by Lerala. The Sales Agreement may also be terminated by Lerala 
(following a 30 day cure period) in the event that DDA Trading materially breaches the Sales Agreement; and
(b)  Current  terms  relating  to  draw  down  facility  (SOME  TERMS  ARE  CHANGING  –  SEE  BELOW  SECTION 
“WHAT IS CHANGING?” FOR DETAILS): the Sales Agreement currently provides that from 1 April 2016 to 31 
August 2016, DDA Trading will make available to Lerala a working capital loan facility of up to USD$2.8 million in 
aggregate, to be provided and repaid in monthly tranches (DDA Loan). The DDA Loan is currently required to be 
repaid by 30 September 2016 and incurs simple interest of 10% per annum on the outstanding amount from time 
to  time  (DDA  Interest).  It  is  secured  by  collateral  of  diamonds  produced  by  Lerala  (or  the  proceeds  of  sale 
thereof), with the right, title and interest of such diamonds (or proceeds thereof) to be transferred to DDA until such 
time  as  the  relevant  portion  of  the  loan  which  those  diamonds  secure  is  repaid  (DDA  Security).  Insolvency  of 
Lerala or its holding company or a failure to repay the DDA Loan (and DDA Interest) when due will result in an 
event  of  default  by  Lerala,  in  which  case  DDA  Trading  will  have  the  right  to  exercise  its  rights  under  the  DDA 
Security to recover amounts owing to it. Lerala is permitted to on-lend the advances made under the DDA Loan to 
the Company.
WHAT IS CHANGING?
It is proposed to make the following changes to the Sales Agreement in respect of the DDA Loan:
(a)  it is proposed to change the term of the DDA Loan so that it can be drawn down until 31 December 2016. It is 
proposed  that  in  each  of  September,  October,  November  and  December  2016,  Lerala  can  draw  down  up  to 
USD$2.8 million (unless a higher amount is agreed between the parties), provided that it repays the amount owing 
from the previous month each subsequent month, such that USD$2.8 million is the total outstanding at any time 
(or such higher amount as agreed between the parties). The parties intend for repayments to be made through 
monthly sales of diamonds, or as otherwise agreed between the parties. If Lerala requests, DDA may agree (in its 
discretion) for Lerala to roll the outstanding amount due in one month (or any part of it) over to the next month but 
if that occurs, Lerala can only draw down further amounts up to a total debt of USD$2.8 million (unless a higher 
amount  is  agreed  between  the  parties).  The  final  repayment  is  due  31  January  2017,  unless  extended  by  the 
parties; and
(b)  it is proposed that DDA may elect to have the outstanding loan amount owed to it by Lerala as at 30 September 
2016 (or a part thereof, up to a maximum of USD$2.8 million) repaid by a conversion of its debt into KDL Shares, 
at a 10 day VWAP, calculated over the last 10 days on which sales in KDL Shares were recorded before the day 
on which the request to issue is made. DDA may convert such amount of its debt as at 30 September 2016 as it 
may elect, up to a maximum of the lesser of the following (Maximum Amount):
a.  USD2.8 million; or
b.
such  number  of  Shares  which  would  result  in  DDA  and  its  associates  (or  its  nominee(s)  and  their 
associates,  if  some  or  all  of  the  shares  are  issued  to  a  nominee/s)  holding  up  to  19.95%  of  the  total 
issued share capital of KDL after the issue of the Shares.
The request to issue may be made at any time from 30 September 2016 to 26 October 2016, in respect of the 
amount owing as at 30 September and irrespective of whether the amount has been rolled over into October.
No other terms of the DDA Loan are being changed. As at the date of this Notice, the proposed changes have not yet been 
executed, and will only be executed on receipt of Shareholder approval.
7
Why are we seeking approval for this change?
The Sales Agreement was approved by Shareholders on 27 April 2016, along with other transactions entered into with DDA 
Trading. Shareholder approval is being sought again now at the request of the ASX, who consider that an extension of the 
term of the DDA Loan requires shareholder approval under Listing Rule 10.1.
We are also obtaining approval under Listing Rule 10.11 for the ability for DDA to convert the outstanding loan amount as at 
30 September 2016 (which will be up to the Maximum Amount) to Shares.
Listing Rule 10.1
When the Sales Agreement was first approved by Shareholders on 27 April 2016, DDA Trading reasonably believed that it 
may  become  a  related  party  of  KDL  in  the  future  and  on  this  basis  is  deemed  to  be  a  related  party  in  accordance  with 
section 228(6) of the Corporations Act (and accordingly for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.1). At that time, DDA Trading 
was in discussions with a number of parties, including related parties of KDL, for the purposes of such parties investing in 
DDA  Trading  or  providing  debt  funding  to  DDA  Trading.  An  investment  was  made  subsequent  to  the  27  April  2016 
Shareholder meeting by Liang Xie, the spouse of Director Alexandre Alexander. Ms Xie now controls DDA.
As a result of the above investment, and given DDA is controlled by a related party of KDL, the Board of KDL considers that 
DDA is a related party for the purposes of section 228 of the Corporations Act (and accordingly for the purposes of Listing 
Rule 10.1), and accordingly, shareholder approval is being sought under Listing Rule 10.1 for Resolution 2.
ASX  Listing  Rule  10.1  provides  that  an  entity  (or  any  of  its  subsidiaries),  must  not  acquire  a  substantial  asset  from,  or 
dispose  of  a  substantial  asset  to,  a  related  party  or  substantial  holder  or  an  associate  of  a  related  party  or  a  substantial 
holder without shareholder approval.
For the purposes of Listing Rule 10.1, a “substantial asset” is an asset valued at greater than 5% of the equity interests of a 
company as set out in the latest accounts given to the ASX under the Listing Rules. Based on the Company’s 31 December 
2015 Half Yearly Report, the Company’s equity interests at that time were $16,756,000; 5% of this amount is $873,800.
It is the DDA Security which is a “substantial asset” and requires approval under Listing Rule 10.1. The value debt secured 
will be up to USD$2.8 million (or a higher amount agreed between the parties), meaning that the value of the DDA Security 
will  be  up  to  USD$2.8  million  (or  such  higher  amount  agreed  between  the  parties).  The  ASX  deems  the  granting  of  a 
security interest over an asset to be a disposal of that asset. As such, the granting of the DDA Security in favour of DDA 
Trading will be deemed under Listing Rule 10.1 to be a disposal of a substantial asset as the value of the debt to be secured 
by the DDA Security is greater than 5% of the equity interests of the Company as set out in its last accounts given to the 
ASX.
Based on the above, the DDA Security constitutes disposal of a “substantial asset” and requires shareholder approval under 
Listing Rule 10.1.
Independent Expert’s Report
In accordance with Listing Rule 10.10, accompanying this Notice is a letter from BDO, annexing their Independent Expert’s 
Report prepared for the 27 April 2016 Shareholders meeting. This letter assesses whether the amendments the subject of 
Resolution 2 are fair and reasonable to the non-associated Shareholders and determines that the conclusions set out in the 
Independent  Expert’s  Report  continue  to  apply,  taking  into  account  the  effect  of  both  the  extension  and  the  other 
amendments to the DDA Loan. The report concludes that the amendments to the DDA Loan the subject of Resolution 
2 are both fair and reasonable to the non-associated Shareholders.
Please refer to the Independent Expert’s Report at Annexure B of this Notice for further details. This assessment is designed 
to assist all Shareholders in reaching their voting decision. It is recommended that all Shareholders read the Independent 
Expert’s  Report  in  full.    If  the  transaction  was  considered  a  control  transaction  for  the  purposes  of  s611  item  7  of  the 
Corporations Act (i.e. if the conversion resulted in DDA owning more than 20% of KDL), a separate assessment would be 
required, however the proposed amendments do not allow DDA to hold over 20% of KDL so this will not occur.
8
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
In addition to Listing Rule 10.1, for a public company, or an entity that the public company controls (.i.e. Lerala), to give a 
financial benefit to a related party of the public company, the public company must:
(a)  obtain  the  approval  of  the  public  company’s  shareholders  in  the  manner  set  out  in  sections  217  to  227  of  the
Corporations Act; and
(b)  give the financial benefit within 15 months following such approval,
unless the giving of the financial benefit falls within an exception set out in sections 210 to 216 of the Corporations Act.
While  the  amendments  to  the  DDA  Loan  results  in  the  giving  of  a  financial  benefit  to  a  related  party  through  the  DDA 
Security and the DDA Interest, the Directors have determined that the amendments to the DDA Loan are on arm’s length 
terms.  Accordingly,  the  arm’s  length  exception  set  out  in  section  210  of  the  Corporations  Act  applies  and  Shareholder 
approval is not being sought under Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act for the amendments to the DDA Loan.
ASX Listing Rule 10.11
ASX Listing Rule 10.11 requires shareholder approval to be obtained where an entity issues, or agrees to issue, securities to 
a related party or a person whose relationship with the entity or a related party is, in the ASX’s opinion, such that approval 
should be obtained unless an exception in the Listing Rules applies. Such exception does not apply in these circumstances. 
Accordingly,  an  agreement  for  DDA  to  elect,  at  its  discretion,  to  convert  up  to  USD$2.8  million  to  Shares  requires 
Shareholder approval in accordance with ASX Listing Rule 10.11.
Further Information required for Shareholders
Pursuant to and in accordance with the requirements of Listing Rule 10.13, the following information is being provided in 
relation to the possible conversion:
(a)  Listing Rule 10.13.1: The name of the person.
The Shares will be issued to DDA Trading or its nominee(s).
(b)  Listing Rule 10.13.2: The maximum number of securities to be issued (if known) or the formula for calculating the
number of securities to be issued to the person.
The maximum number of securities in KDL to be issued are the number of Shares which are equal to the lesser of:
a.  USD$2.8 million on the date of conversion, using the issue price set out in (e) below; or
b.
the maximum number of Shares which would result in  DDA and  its associates (or its nominee(s)  and 
their associates, if some or all of the shares are issued to a nominee/s) holding up to 19.95% of the total 
issued share capital of KDL after the issue of the Shares.
9
By way of example only, the following table shows possible scenarios which could occur:
Volume Weighted
Average Price (example
Number of shares issued assuming 
amount converted is AUD$1 million
Number of shares issued assuming amount 
converted is AUD$3.5 million (example only
only)
(example only)
and please note that some amounts may 
exceed 19.95% of the Company’s issued 
share capital and would be capped at an
amount equal to the holder and their
associates holding 19.95%)
$0.05
$0.10
$0.15
20,000,000
10,000,000
6,666,667
70,000,000
35,000,000
23,333,333
(c)  Listing Rule 10.13.3: The date by which the entity will issue the securities, which must not be more than 1 month
after the date of the meeting.
If conversion is elected by DDA, the Shares will be granted to DDA Trading or its nominee(s) no later than 1 month 
after the date of the Meeting.
(d)  Listing Rule 10.13.4: If the person is not a director, a statement of the relationship between the person and the
director that requires the approval to be obtained.
The related party is DDA Trading, who is a related party pursuant to section 228(4) of the Corporations Act as it is 
controlled by Liang Xie, the spouse of Director Alexandre Alexander.
(e)  Listing Rule 10.13.5: The issue price of the securities and a statement of the terms of issue.
The Shares will be ordinary, fully paid Shares in the capital of the Company and will have an issue price equal to 
the 10 day VWAP, being the VWAP calculated over the last 10 days on which sales in KDL Shares were recorded 
before the day on which the request to issue is made.
(f)  Listing Rule 10.13.6: A voting exclusion statement.
A voting exclusion statement is included in the Notice accompanying this Explanatory Memorandum.
(g)  Listing Rule 10.13.6A: The intended use of the funds raised.
No funds will be raised by the issue as the issue would be for a repayment of existing debt.
Approval  pursuant  to  Listing  Rule  7.1  is  not  required  in  order  to  issue  the  Shares  on  conversion  to  DDA  Trading  or  its 
nominees(s) as approval is being obtained under Listing Rule 10.11. Accordingly, the issue of Shares on conversion to DDA 
Trading or its nominee(s) will not be included in the 15% calculation of the Company’s annual placement capacity pursuant 
to Listing Rule 7.1.
Directors’ Recommendation  
 
The Board (other than Alexandre Alexander) recommends that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 2. While Mr 
Alexander does not have an interest in the outcome of Resolution 2, as his spouse does have an interest, he makes no 
recommendation.
10
ANNEXURE A
Glossary
In this Explanatory Memorandum the following terms, abbreviations and acronyms have the following meaning:
$
ASIC
Associate
ASX
Board
means Australian Dollars.
means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
has the same meaning it has in the Corporations Act.
means  ASX  Limited  (ACN  008  624  691)  and  the  market  operated  by  it,  as  the 
context requires.
means the board of Directors of the Company.
Business Day
means a day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday in Sydney.
Chair or Chairman
means the person appointed to chair the Meeting.
Company or Kimberley
means Kimberley Diamonds Ltd (ACN 150 737 563).
Corporations Act
means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
DDA Interest
DDA Loan
DDA Security
DDA Trading
Director
means  simple  interest  of  10%  per  annum  on  the  outstanding  amount  of  the  DDA 
Loan from time to time.
means  the  working  capital  loan  facility  of  up  to  USD$2.8  million  in  aggregate  (or 
such higher amount as is agreed between the parties), to be provided and repaid in 
monthly tranches under the terms of the Sales Agreement.
means collateral of diamonds produced by Lerala (or the proceeds of sale thereof), 
with  the  right,  title  and  interest  of  such  diamonds  (or  proceeds  thereof)  to  be 
transferred  to  DDA  until  such  time  as  the  relevant  portion  of  the  loan  which  those 
diamonds secure is repaid under the terms of the Sales Agreement.
means DDA Trading BVBA, a Belgian incorporated company.
means a director of the Company.
Equity Securities
has the same meaning given to "equity securities" in the Listing Rules.
Explanatory Memorandum
means  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  that  accompanies  and  forms  part  of  this 
Notice.
Lerala
means Lerala Diamond Mines Limited, the Company’s Botswana subsidiary.
Lerala Diamond Mine
means the Lerala Diamond Mine in Botswana.
Meeting
Notice
Proxy Form
Related Party
Resolution
means the extraordinary general meeting of Shareholders convened by the Notice.
means  the  notice  of  the  extraordinary  general  meeting,  which  accompanies  this 
Explanatory Memorandum and of which this Explanatory Memorandum forms part.
means the proxy form which accompanies this Notice.
has the same meaning as "related party" in the Listing Rules.
means a resolution in this Notice.
11
Sales Agreement
Share
Shareholder
Trading Day
means  the  agreement  for  the  sales  and  marketing  of  diamonds  from  the  Lerala 
Diamond Mine, entered into between the Company, Lerala and DDA Trading on 26 
February 2016.
means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
means the registered holder of a Share.
means a day determined by ASX to be a trading day in accordance with the Listing 
Rules.
Volume Weighted Average Price.
VWAP 
 
 
 
In the Notice and the Explanatory Memorandum, words importing the singular include the plural and vice versa.
12
ANNEXURE B
Independent Expert’s Report
13
Tel: +61 2 9251 4100 
Fax: +61 2 9240 9821 
www.bdo.com.au
Level 11, 1 Margaret St  
Sydney NSW 2000 
  
Australia
PART 1 - SUPPLEMENTARY INDEPENDENT EXPERT'S REPORT 
 
The Directors 
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd 
Level 39, Australia Square Tower 
264-278 George Street 
SYDNEY NSW 2000
8 August 2016
Dear Directors 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY INDEPENDENT EXPERT'S REPORT
Introduction
On 26 February 2016, Kimberley Diamonds Ltd (KDL or the Company) announced that KDL and its wholly 
owned subsidiary, Lerala Diamond Mines Limited (Lerala), have entered into a sales and marketing 
agreement (Sales Agreement) and an offtake agreement (Offtake Agreement) with DDA Trading BVBA 
(DDA) (Transactions).
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd (BDOCF, us or we) was engaged by the Directors of KDL to 
prepare an independent expert’s report, the purpose of which was to provide an opinion as to whether 
the Transactions were fair and reasonable to the non-associated shareholders of KDL (Non-associated 
Shareholders) in accordance with Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (the Act) and 
Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) Listing Rule 10.1 Approval required for certain acquisitions or 
disposals (LR 10.1). Our opinion, as set out in our Independent Expert’s Report, was that the terms of 
the Transactions were fair and reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders.
Our independent expert’s report dated 16 March 2016 (Report or IER) accompanied the Notice of 
Extraordinary General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum dated 23 March 2016 sent to KDL 
shareholders. On 27 April 2016, KDL shareholders approved Resolution 2 of the Notice of Extraordinary 
General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum in relation to the Transactions.
Lerala and KDL now propose to amend the terms of the US$2.8 million working capital facility with DDA 
under the Sales Agreement (Proposed Amendments).
The Directors of KDL have engaged us to prepare a supplementary independent expert’s report 
(Supplementary IER) to provide further analysis and discussion of this material new information 
relevant to KDL shareholders and to accompany the Notice of General Meeting and Explanatory 
Memorandum to be issued to the KDL shareholders (Transaction Document). This Supplementary IER 
should be read in conjunction with the statements made in the IER. We recommend that the 
shareholders read the Transaction Document in relation to the Proposed Amendments to obtain a full 
understanding of the changes.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd  ABN 70 050 038 170  AFS Licence No. 247 420 is a member of a national association of independent entities 
 
which are all members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd 
and BDO Australia Ltd are members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of 
independent member firms. Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of 
financial services licensees.
Proposed amendments to the Sales Agreement
The Proposed Amendments as follows:
1.
Extension of the final draw down of the working capital facility as follows:
•
•
•
The final draw down of the loan facility under clause 5 is extended from 31 August 2016 to 
31 December 2016 (unless further extended); 
The final repayment date is extended from 30 September 2016 to 31 January 2017 (unless 
further extended); 
In each of September 2016, October 2016, November 2016 and December 2016 (and any 
further period agreed between the parties), Lerala can draw down up to USD2.8 million (or a 
higher amount if agreed by the parties), provided that the preceding month’s draw down is 
repaid or, if requested by Lerala, rolled over into the next month (if permitted by DDA, at its 
discretion).
The ASX have required KDL to obtain shareholder approval for the change under LR 10.1 on the 
basis that in the past Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting, the documents specifically set out 
the exact months in which funds could be drawn down and the exact amounts which could be 
drawn down each month. An approval under Chapter 2E of the Act is not required.
2.  An additional clause to the Sales Agreement is proposed to be added providing the ability for DDA 
to convert (as repayment) part or all of the outstanding loan as at 30 September 2016 as follows:
“Subject to receipt of KDL shareholder approval, DDA may elect (in its discretion) to convert part or all of the 
amount outstanding at 30 September 2016 to KDL shares, to be issued to DDA or its nominees, up to a 
maximum amount of the lesser of the following:
i. USD$2.8 million; or
ii. an amount equal to the number of KDL shares such that DDA and its associates (or, if KDL shares are 
issued to its nominees, its nominees and their associates) will have up to a maximum total equity interest 
in KDL of 19.95%,
with the conversion to be calculated at a 10 day volume weighted average price (VWAP), calculated over 
the last 10 days on which sales in KDL Shares were recorded before the day on which the request to issue 
is made.
The request to issue may be made at any time from 30 September 2016 to 26 October 2016, in respect of the 
amount owing as at 30 September and irrespective of whether the amount has been rolled over into October. 
For the avoidance of doubt, if DDA agrees to roll some or all of the amount owing as at 30 September 2016 
into October, it may later elect to convert some or all of that rolled amount into KDL shares in accordance with 
this clause, any time until 26 October 2016.” KDL is seeking an approval under the ASX Listing Rule 
10.11 Approval required for an issue of securities (Listing Rule 10.11) for the above addition. 
Although the Company is not required to obtain an approval under Listing Rule 10.1, we have been 
engaged to opine on the above as we had previously formed our opinion in the IER in relation to 
fairness by comparing the Transactions as a whole.
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
2
Resultant changes to IER
Given that the majority of the terms are the same as that previously discussed in our IER, we have 
undertaken our review on the impact of the changes on our assessment and conclusion. We have 
considered the impact of the Proposed Amendments as follows:
1.  Extension of the final draw down of the working capital facility
Following the above proposed changes, we have updated page 2 of the IER and set out in 
appendix A the amended terms in tracked changes together with this letter.
Given that the timing of the advances does not have any bearing on the fairness assessment, 
the changes do not have any impact on our opinion.
2.  Additional clause to the Sales Agreement for the ability for DDA to convert (as repayment) the
outstanding loan as at 30 September 2016
We have formed our opinion in the IER in relation to fairness by comparing the Transactions as a 
whole. As such, we took into consideration the Proposed Amendments and noted in relation to the 
fairness of the conversion, Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) Regulatory 
Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111), which requires the expert to compare:
•
•
The value of the financial benefit to be provided by KDL to DDA (that is, the value of KDL 
shares), with 
The value of the consideration being provided to Lerala and/or KDL, that is, the release of the 
debt obligations of up to US$2.8 million.
In considering the above, we note that the terms of the conversion may give rise to the following:
•  Conversion would occur at market rate (that is, 10 day VWAP of KDL shares) which is
•
•
representative of the portfolio value of the interest that DDA is entitled to. 
KDL would be relieved from seeking any funding (if required) to repay the loan and debt 
obligations such as the accumulative interest commitments; and 
KDL would not have to incur potential costs (if any) to fund the repayment of the loan on call 
if the election to convert is exercised.
Based on the above, we have assessed that the conversion of the DDA debt to equity would not 
worsen the financial position of KDL and should not have the impact of reducing the price of a KDL 
share by any more than if the DDA debt was repaid from cash.
A separate assessment may be required prior to conversion if the conversion option was elected if 
the transaction is considered a control transaction under s611 item 7 of the Corporations Act 2001 
(Cth) (i.e. if the conversion resulted in DDA owning more than 20% of KDL).
On the whole, we consider that the Proposed Amendments would not alter our conclusion that the 
Transactions are fair and reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders.
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
3
This letter should be read in conjunction with the IER that sets out in full, the purpose, scope, basis of 
evaluation, limitations, information relied upon, analysis and our findings.
Yours faithfully
BDO CORPORATE FINANCE (EAST COAST) PTY LTD
Dan Taylor
Director
David McCourt
Director
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
4
Appendix A
Overview of the DDA Loan terms
Set out in the table below is an overview of the DDA Loan terms.
Table 1: Overview of the DDA Loan terms
Key terms
Details
Facility
•
DDA agrees to advance to Lerala the following amounts (although there are other conditions
applicable) on receipt of notice from Lerala:
-
-
-
US$0.84 million during the period 1 April 2016 to 30 April 2016.
US$1.26 million during the period 1 May 2016 to 31 May 2016.
US$2.45 million during the period 1 June 2016 to 30 June 2016, subject to full repayment of
the earlier two advances.
-
US$1.75 million during the period 1 July 2016 to 31 July 2016, subject to full repayment of
the advance in June 2016; and
-
up to US$2.80 million (or such higher amount agreed between the parties), in each month
during the period 1 August 2016 to 31 December 2016, subject to full repayment of the
advances in the preceding month (or roll over into the next month, but if this is agreed to
by DDA and occurs, the total outstanding must not exceed USD$2.80 million unless a higher
amount is agreed by the parties).
The facility can only be drawn down in a different time period if agreed by the parties.
If Lerala requires further loans, it may request from DDA (at DDA’s sole discretion) excess funds
to the above agreed amounts provided it has sufficient security to secure the additional
advance(s).
First and second advances are to be repaid within the period of two to three months ending 30
June 2016.
Third advance is to be repaid within a maximum period of two months to 31 July 2016.
Fourth advance is to be repaid within a maximum period of two months to 31 August 2016.
Fifth advance is to be repaid within a maximum period of two months to 30 September 2016,
unless rolled over (if requested by Lerala and agreed to by DDA) or converted into KDL shares at
the election of DDA.
Further advances in each of September 2016, October 2016, November 2016 and December 2016
are to each be repaid in the following month, unless rolled over (if requested by Lerala and
agreed to by DDA).
The amount owing each month can be rolled over into the next month if it is not repaid.
However, the total amount owing must be repaid on or before 31 January 2017, unless extended
or agreed otherwise by the parties in writing.
Interest will accrue on amount outstanding from time to time, to be computed on a daily basis on
a year of 365 days as simple interest until the DDA Loan has been repaid in full, at an interest rate
of 10% per annum.
• 
•
•
• 
• 
•
•
•
•
Term
DDA Interest
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
5
Table 1: Overview of the DDA Loan terms
Key terms
Details
DDA Security
•
•
Lerala grants to DDA a security interest by way of a deposit of the secured diamonds (and any
proceeds thereof) to DDA to secure due and punctual payment of each advance. DDA will hold
the right, title and interest in the secured diamonds until the secured diamonds are sold and the
each advance is repaid in full.
Secured diamonds are defined in the agreement as diamonds provided as collateral by Lerala to
DDA and are given a value as follows:
-
DDA values the rough diamonds in accordance with its usual practices, which must be
reasonable and consistent with current diamond market practices; and
-
the rough diamonds are then attributed a value of 75% of the valuation for the purposes of
forming the value of the secured diamonds.
•
Lerala must send secured diamonds progressively to DDA's office in Antwerp until the value of
the secured diamonds held by DDA is equal to the following amounts:
-
-
-
-
-
-
in April 2016, value of the first advance less US$500,000;
in May 2016, value of the second advance less US$500,000;
in June 2016, value of the third advance;
in July 2016, value of the fourth advance;
in August 2016, the value of the fifth advance; and
in each of September 2016, October 2016, November 2016 and December 2016, secured
diamonds to the amount equal to the amount of the requested advance that month.
•
•
Events of
Default
DDA is not obliged to provide any advance at any time until it holds a sufficient value of secured
diamonds in accordance with the terms above.
If:
-
-
Lerala or KDL suffer from an insolvency event; or
Lerala fails to repay DDA the amount of any of the advances in accordance with terms
above,
then an event of default will be deemed to have occurred and the outstanding loan is immediately due
and payable to DDA. 
•
Any sale of the secured diamonds must be undertaken by DDA in good faith, on an arms-length
•
•
•
basis and consistent with normal commercial practices.
DDA has the right to sell the secured diamonds and pay its fees and expenses first and foremost,
then any outstanding amount owing and any surplus to or at the direction of Lerala.
If DDA wishes to exercise its right above, it must provide Lerala with written notice that it has
exercised this right.
DDA will advance the DDA Loan when the following conditions precedent are satisfied:
-  mining has commenced at the Lerala Diamond Mine on or before 31 March 2016, or at an
agreed date;
-
-
-
processing has commenced on or before 15 April 2016, or at an agreed date;
the Directors provide DDA a statement in each notice that Lerala is solvent and a going
concern; and 
the secured diamonds in respect of each advance are received by DDA.
Conditions
precedent
Source: Diamond and Marketing Sales Agreement
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
6
Appendix B - QUALIFICATIONS, DECLARATIONS AND CONSENTS
1.1.  Qualifications
BDOCF is the licensed corporate finance arm of BDO East Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and 
Business Advisers. BDOCF provides advice in relation to all aspects of valuations and has extensive 
experience in the valuation of corporate entities and provision of expert’s reports.
Mr Dan Taylor, B.Com and CA, is a director of BDOCF. Mr Taylor is also a partner of BDO East Coast 
Partnership. Mr Taylor has been responsible for the preparation of this IER.
Mr Taylor has over 20 years’ experience in Corporate Finance. He has undertaken numerous specialist 
Corporate Finance activities including company valuations, due diligence investigations, preparation and 
review of business feasibility studies, preparation of independent expert's reports, preparation of 
information memoranda and other corporate investigations. Accordingly, Mr Taylor is considered to have 
the appropriate experience and professional qualifications to provide the advice offered.
Mr David McCourt, BBus, CA, is a director of BDOCF. Mr McCourt is also a partner of BDO East Coast 
Partnership.
Mr McCourt is the director responsible for the review of this IER. Mr McCourt has over 16 years experience in 
a number of specialist corporate advisory activities including company valuations, financial modelling, 
preparation and review of business feasibility studies, accounting, advising on mergers and acquisitions and 
advising on independent expert reports. Accordingly, Mr McCourt is considered to have the appropriate 
experience and professional qualifications to provide the advice offered.
1.2.  Limitations
This Supplementary IER has been prepared at the request of the Directors for the sole benefit of the 
Directors and Non-associated Shareholders to assist them in their decision to approve or reject the 
Proposed Amendments. This Supplementary IER is to accompany the Transaction Document to be sent to 
Non-associated Shareholders to consider the Proposed Amendments and was not prepared for any other 
purpose.
Accordingly, this Supplementary IER and the information contained herein may not be relied upon by 
anyone other than the Directors and Non-associated Shareholders without our written consent. We accept 
no responsibility to any person other than the Directors and Non-associated Shareholders in relation to this 
Supplementary IER.
This Supplementary IER should not be used for any other purpose and we do not accept any responsibility 
for its use outside this purpose. Except in accordance with the stated purpose, no extract, quote or copy of 
our Supplementary IER, in whole or in part, should be reproduced without our written consent, as to the 
form and context in which it may appear.
We have consented to the inclusion of the Supplementary IER with the Transaction Document. Apart from 
this Supplementary IER, we are not responsible for the contents of the Transaction Document or any other 
document associated with the Proposed Amendments. We acknowledge that this Supplementary IER may be 
lodged with regulatory authorities.
1.3.
Independence
We are not aware of any matter or circumstance that would preclude us from preparing this Supplementary 
IER on the grounds of independence either under regulatory or professional requirements. In particular, we 
have had regard to the provisions of applicable pronouncements and other guidance statements relating to 
professional independence issued by Australian professional accounting bodies and ASIC.
Prior to accepting this engagement, we considered our independence in regard to KDL with reference to 
RG 112.
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
7
In addition to providing the IER dated 16 March 2016 in connection with the Transactions, BDOCF and BDO 
East Coast Partnership have provided a range of services to KDL including acting as the independent 
external auditor (for the half year ended 31 December 2015) and conducting limited scope financial and tax 
due diligence procedures in relation to its proposed acquisition of all the shares in Gem Diamonds Australia 
Holdings Pty Ltd as the 100% owner of Kimberley Diamond NL in 2013. In addition, BDO East Coast 
Partnership’s tax practice was engaged to undertake income and payroll tax compliance work as well as 
advice on the tax consequences of undertaking the Transactions. The advice provided did not give any 
recommendations in relation to the Transactions or the Proposed Amendments and is not considered to be 
strategic of operational planning work in relation to RG 112.
It is our opinion that the above mentioned existing and historical relationships do not impact on our ability 
to provide an independent and unbiased report in the context of the Proposed Amendments. In our opinion 
we are independent of KDL.
We are not involved in advising on, negotiating, setting, or otherwise acting in any capacity for KDL in 
relation to the Proposed Amendments. Further, BDOCF has not held and, at the date of this IER, does not 
hold any shareholding in, or other relationship with KDL or DDA that could be regarded as capable of 
affecting its ability to provide an unbiased opinion in relation to the Proposed Amendments.
We will receive a fee of up to $5,500, plus Goods and Services Tax for the preparation of this 
Supplementary IER. We will not receive any fee contingent upon the outcome of the Proposed Amendments, 
and accordingly, does not have any pecuniary or other interests that could reasonably be regarded as being 
capable of affecting its ability to give an unbiased opinion in relation to the Proposed Amendments.
Two drafts of this Supplementary IER were provided to the Directors and their advisors for review of factual 
accuracy. Certain changes were made to the Supplementary IER as a result of the circulation of the draft 
Supplementary IERs. However, no changes were made to the methodology, conclusions, or 
recommendations made to the Shareholders as a result of issuing the draft Supplementary IERs.
1.4.  Disclaimer
This Supplementary IER has been prepared at the request of the Directors and was not prepared for any 
purpose other than that stated in this Supplementary IER. This Supplementary IER has been prepared for 
the sole benefit of the Directors and Shareholders. Accordingly, this Supplementary IER and the information 
contained herein may not be relied upon by anyone other than the Directors and Shareholders without our 
written consent. We accept no responsibility to any person other than the Directors and Shareholders in 
relation to this Supplementary IER.
The statements and opinions contained in this Supplementary IER are given in good faith and are based 
upon our consideration and assessment of information provided by the Board, executives and management 
of all the entities.
C:\NRPortbl\Corporate_Advisory\DTAYLOR\266428_1.docx
8
Tel: +61 2 9251 4100 
Fax: +61 2 9240 9821 
www.bdo.com.au
Level 11, 1 Margaret St 
SYDNEY NSW 2000 
Australia
PART 2 – FINANCIAL SERVICES GUIDE
This Financial Services Guide is issued in relation to a 
supplementary independent expert’s report 
(Supplementary IER) prepared by BDO Corporate Finance 
(East Coast) Pty Ltd (ABN 70 050 038 170) (BDOCF) at the 
request of the directors (Directors) of Kimberley Diamonds 
Ltd (KDL or the Company).
Engagement
The Supplementary IER is intended to accompany the 
Notice of General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum 
(Transaction Document) that is to be provided by the 
Directors of KDL to assist the shareholders of KDL (KDL 
Shareholders) in their further understanding of the 
proposed changes to the related party transactions 
(Proposed Amendments).
Financial Services Guide
BDOCF holds an Australian Financial Services Licence 
(License No: 247420) (Licence). As a result of our 
Supplementary IER being provided to you BDOCF is required 
to issue to you, as a retail client, a Financial Services Guide 
(FSG). The FSG includes information on the use of general 
financial product advice and is issued so as to comply with 
our obligations as holder of an Australian Financial Services 
Licence.
Financial services BDOCF is licensed to provide
The Licence authorises BDOCF to provide reports for the 
purposes of acting for and on behalf of clients in relation to 
proposed or actual mergers, acquisitions, takeovers, 
corporate restructures or share issues, to carry on a 
financial services business to provide general financial 
product advice for securities and certain derivatives 
(limited to old law securities, options contracts and 
warrants) to retail and wholesale clients.
BDOCF provides financial product advice by virtue of an 
engagement to issue the Supplementary IER in connection 
with the issue of securities of another person.
Our Supplementary IER includes a description of the 
circumstances of our engagement and identifies the party 
who has engaged us. You have not engaged us directly but 
will be provided with a copy of our Supplementary IER (as a 
retail client) because of your connection with the matters 
on which our Supplementary IER has been issued.
Our Supplementary IER is provided on our own behalf as an 
Australian Financial Services Licensee authorised to provide 
the financial product advice contained in the 
Supplementary IER.
General financial product advice
Our Supplementary IER provides general financial product 
advice only, and does not provide personal financial 
product advice, because it has been prepared without 
taking into account your particular personal circumstances 
or objectives (either financial or otherwise), your financial 
position or your needs.
Some individuals may place a different emphasis on various 
aspects of potential investments.
An individual’s decision in relation to voting on the 
Proposed Amendments described in the Transaction 
Document may be influenced by their particular 
circumstances and, therefore, individuals should seek 
independent advice.
Benefits that BDOCF may receive
BDOCF will receive a fee based on the time spent in the 
preparation of the Supplementary IER in the amount of 
approximately $5,500 (plus GST and disbursements). BDOCF
will not receive any fee contingent upon the outcome of 
the Proposed Amendments, and accordingly, does not have 
any pecuniary or other interests that could reasonably be 
regarded as being capable of affecting its ability to give an 
unbiased opinion in relation to the Proposed Amendments.
Remuneration or other benefits received by our 
employees
All our employees receive a salary. Employees may be 
eligible for bonuses based on overall productivity and 
contribution to the operation of BDOCF or related entities 
but any bonuses are not directly connected with any 
assignment and in particular are not directly related to the 
engagement for which our Supplementary IER was 
provided.
Referrals
BDOCF does not pay commissions or provide any other 
benefits to any parties or person for referring customers to 
us in connection with the reports that BDOCF is licensed to 
provide.
Associations and relationships
BDOCF is the licensed corporate finance arm of BDO East 
Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and Business 
Advisers. The directors of BDOCF may also be partners in 
BDO East Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and 
Business Advisers.
BDO East Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and 
Business Advisers are comprised of a number of related 
entities that provide audit, accounting, tax and financial 
advisory services to a wide range of clients.
BDOCF’s contact details are as set out on our letterhead.
BDOCF is unaware of any matter or circumstance that 
would preclude it from preparing the Supplementary IER on 
the grounds of independence under regulatory or 
professional requirements. In particular, BDOCF has had 
regard to the provisions of applicable pronouncements and 
other guidance statements relating to professional 
independence issued by Australian professional accounting 
bodies and Australian Securities and Investments 
Commission (ASIC).
Complaints resolution
As the holder of an Australian Financial Services Licence, 
we are required to have a system for handling complaints 
from persons to whom we provide financial product advice. 
All complaints must be in writing, addressed to 
The Complaints Officer, BDO Corporate Finance (East 
Coast) Pty Ltd, Level 11, 1 Margaret Street, Sydney NSW 
2000.
On receipt of a written complaint we will record the 
complaint, acknowledge receipt of the complaint and seek 
to resolve the complaint as soon as practical. If we cannot 
reach a satisfactory resolution, you can raise your concerns 
with the Financial Ombudsman Service Limited (FOS). FOS 
is an independent body established to provide advice and 
assistance in helping resolve complaints relating to the 
financial services industry. BDOCF is a member of FOS. FOS 
may be contacted directly via the details set out below. 
 
Financial Ombudsman Service Limited 
GPO Box 3 
Melbourne VIC 3001 
Toll free:  1300 78 08 08 
Email:
info@fos.org.au
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd  ABN 70 050 038 170  AFS Licence No. 247 420 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all 
members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are 
members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a 
scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
INDEPENDENT EXPERT’S REPORT
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd

In relation to agreements entered into
with a related party

16 March 2016


Tel: +61 2 9251 4100 
Fax: +61 2 9240 9821 
www.bdo.com.au
Level 11, 1 Margaret St 
SYDNEY NSW 2000 
Australia
This Financial Services Guide is issued in relation to an independent expert’s report (Report or IER) prepared by BDO Corporate 
Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd (ABN 70 050 038 170) (BDOCF) at the request of the directors (Directors) of Kimberley Diamonds Ltd 
(KDL or the Company).
Engagement
The IER is intended to accompany the Notice of 
Extraordinary General Meeting and Explanatory 
Memorandum (Transaction Document) that is to be 
provided by the Directors of KDL to assist the shareholders 
of KDL (KDL Shareholders) in determining whether to 
approve the proposed related party transactions (Proposed 
Transactions).
Financial Services Guide
BDOCF holds an Australian Financial Services Licence 
(License No: 247420) (Licence). As a result of our IER being 
provided to you BDOCF is required to issue to you, as a 
retail client, a Financial Services Guide (FSG). The FSG 
includes information on the use of general financial product 
advice and is issued so as to comply with our obligations as 
holder of an Australian Financial Services Licence.
Financial services BDOCF is licensed to provide
The Licence authorises BDOCF to provide reports for the 
purposes of acting for and on behalf of clients in relation to 
proposed or actual mergers, acquisitions, takeovers, 
corporate restructures or share issues, to carry on a 
financial services business to provide general financial 
product advice for securities and certain derivatives 
(limited to old law securities, options contracts and 
warrants) to retail and wholesale clients.
BDOCF provides financial product advice by virtue of an 
engagement to issue the IER in connection with the issue of 
securities of another person.
Our IER includes a description of the circumstances of our 
engagement and identifies the party who has engaged us. 
You have not engaged us directly but will be provided with 
a copy of our IER (as a retail client) because of your 
connection with the matters on which our IER has been 
issued.
Our IER is provided on our own behalf as an Australian 
Financial Services Licensee authorised to provide the 
financial product advice contained in the IER.
General financial product advice
Our IER provides general financial product advice only, and 
does not provide personal financial product advice, 
because it has been prepared without taking into account 
your particular personal circumstances or objectives (either 
financial or otherwise), your financial position or your 
needs.
Some individuals may place a different emphasis on various 
aspects of potential investments.
An individual’s decision in relation to voting on the 
Proposed Transactions described in the Transaction 
Document may be influenced by their particular 
circumstances and, therefore, individuals should seek 
independent advice.
Benefits that BDOCF may receive
BDOCF will receive a fee based on the time spent in the 
preparation of the IER in the amount of approximately 
$35,000 (plus GST and disbursements). BDOCF will not 
receive any fee contingent upon the outcome of the 
Proposed Transactions, and accordingly, does not have any 
pecuniary or other interests that could reasonably be
regarded as being capable of affecting its ability to give an 
unbiased opinion in relation to the Proposed Transactions.
Remuneration or other benefits received by our 
employees
All our employees receive a salary. Employees may be 
eligible for bonuses based on overall productivity and 
contribution to the operation of BDOCF or related entities 
but any bonuses are not directly connected with any 
assignment and in particular are not directly related to the 
engagement for which our IER was provided.
Referrals
BDOCF does not pay commissions or provide any other 
benefits to any parties or person for referring customers to 
us in connection with the reports that BDOCF is licensed to 
provide.
Associations and relationships
BDOCF is the licensed corporate finance arm of BDO East 
Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and Business 
Advisers. The directors of BDOCF may also be partners in 
BDO East Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and 
Business Advisers.
BDO East Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and 
Business Advisers are comprised of a number of related 
entities that provide audit, accounting, tax and financial 
advisory services to a wide range of clients.
BDOCF’s contact details are as set out on our letterhead.
BDOCF is unaware of any matter or circumstance that 
would preclude it from preparing the IER on the grounds of 
independence under regulatory or professional 
requirements. In particular, BDOCF has had regard to the 
provisions of applicable pronouncements and other 
guidance statements relating to professional independence 
issued by Australian professional accounting bodies and 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC).
Complaints resolution
As the holder of an Australian Financial Services Licence, 
we are required to have a system for handling complaints 
from persons to whom we provide financial product advice. 
All complaints must be in writing, addressed to 
The Complaints Officer, BDO Corporate Finance (East 
Coast) Pty Ltd, Level 11, 1 Margaret Street, Sydney NSW 
2000.
On receipt of a written complaint we will record the 
complaint, acknowledge receipt of the complaint and seek 
to resolve the complaint as soon as practical. If we cannot 
reach a satisfactory resolution, you can raise your concerns 
with the Financial Ombudsman Service Limited (FOS). FOS 
is an independent body established to provide advice and 
assistance in helping resolve complaints relating to the 
financial services industry. BDOCF is a member of FOS. FOS 
may be contacted directly via the details set out below.
Financial Ombudsman Service Limited 
GPO Box 3 
Melbourne VIC 3001 
Toll free:  1300 78 08 08
Email:
info@fos.org.au
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd ABN 70 050 038 170 AFS Licence No. 247 420 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all 
members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are 
members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a 
scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
Tel: +61 2 9251 4100 
Fax: +61 2 9240 9821 
www.bdo.com.au
Level 11, 1 Margaret St 
SYDNEY NSW 2000 
Australia
The Directors
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd
Level 39, Australia Square Tower
264-278 George Street
SYDNEY NSW 2000
16 March 2016
Dear Directors
INDEPENDENT EXPERT’S REPORT IN RELATION TO THE AGREEMENTS ENTERED INTO WITH A RELATED PARTY
Introduction
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd (ABN 70 050 038 170) (BDOCF, we, us or our) has been engaged by the 
Directors (Directors) of Kimberley Diamonds Ltd (KDL or the Company) to prepare an independent expert’s report 
(Report or IER), setting out our opinion as to whether the related party transactions with DDA Trading BVBA (DDA) 
are fair and reasonable to the non-associated shareholders of KDL (Non-associated Shareholders).
Proposed Transactions
KDL has announced that its wholly owned subsidiary, Lerala Diamond Mines Limited (Lerala), has entered into the 
following agreements with DDA:
•
Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement – The key terms of the agreement are as follows:
–
–
–
–
Lerala will appoint DDA as exclusive sales and marketing agent for the diamonds produced by Lerala 
Diamond Mine for a period of three years (with an option to renew for a further two years) and will 
be paid commission of 1.75% on diamonds sold, plus reasonable expenses (DDA Commission)
For the first six months of the Sales and Marketing Agreement, DDA will provide Lerala with a 
working capital loan facility of up to US$2.8 million (DDA Loan), secured by collateral of diamonds 
produced by Lerala, with the right, title and interest of such diamonds to be transferred to DDA until 
such time as the relevant portion of the loan which those diamonds secure is repaid (DDA Security)
Lerala to pay 10% interest per annum to DDA on any amounts outstanding under the DDA Loan 
(DDA Interest)
KDL will issue to DDA 5,000,000 options with an exercise price of $0.20 per option (DDA Options) as 
consideration for DDA agreeing to provide the DDA Loan and that Lerala may on-lend the advances to 
KDL.
•  Offtake Agreement - The key terms of the agreement are as follows:
–
–
–
Lerala will enter into an offtake agreement with DDA for the supply to DDA of US$5 million worth of 
diamonds at a discount of 10% to an agreed valuation (DDA Offtake)
The first shipment is scheduled to occur in December 2016, however any shipments which occur 
after December 2016 will be subject to Lerala having satisfied its obligations under another offtake 
agreement entered prior to this DDA Offtake
The parties agree that DDA will produce a valuation report for each shipment of rough diamonds and 
if Lerala disagree with the valuation report, it can elect that DDA sells the rough diamonds. DDA will 
then withhold 10% of the purchase price paid for the diamonds instead of the 10% discounted price 
of the valuation.
Together the Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement and the Offtake Agreement are referred to as the Proposed 
Transactions. The diamonds for sale under the Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement are not included as part of 
the diamonds for sale under the Offtake Agreement.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd ABN 70 050 038 170 AFS Licence No. 247 420 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all 
members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are 
members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a 
scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
Although there are other conditions applicable, the key condition precedent for the Proposed Transactions is the 
approval from the shareholders of KDL (KDL Shareholders).
The Directors have indicated that DDA may become a related party to KDL at a point in time within six months of 
the Proposed Transactions.
Resolution 2 of the Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum (Transaction 
Document) seeks KDL Shareholders’ approval pursuant to Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (the Act), 
Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) Listing Rule 10.1 Approval required for certain acquisitions or disposals 
(Listing Rule 10.1) and ASX Listing Rule 10.11 Approval required for an issue of securities (Listing Rule 10.11).
Purpose of Report
On the basis that DDA may become a related party to KDL, the DDA Security and DDA Offtake are considered 
disposals of substantial assets to a related party under Listing Rule 10.1. Accordingly, we have been appointed by 
the Directors to prepare an IER setting out our opinion as to whether the Proposed Transactions are fair and 
reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders in accordance with Chapter 2E of the Act and ASX Listing Rule 10.1.
Given the Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement and Offtake Agreement are interdependent, we have had 
regard to the Proposed Transactions as a whole in forming our opinion.
This Report is to accompany the Transaction Document required to be provided to the Non-associated Shareholders 
entitled to vote on the Proposed Transactions and is prepared to assist the Non-associated Shareholders in their 
considerations of whether or not to approve the Proposed Transactions.
Summary of opinion
We have considered the terms of the Proposed Transactions as outlined in the body of this Report and have 
concluded that the Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders.
A summary of our analysis in forming the above opinion is provided below.
Fairness assessment
In undertaking our fairness opinion we have had regard to Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) 
Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111).
Paragraphs 52 to 63 of RG 111 provide guidance on related party transactions. This regulatory guide suggests that 
when analysing related party transactions, the expert should focus on the substance of the related party 
transaction rather than the legal mechanism. Where a related party transaction is made up of several separate 
components, the overall effect of the related party transaction should be considered.
The expert should undertake a separate test of the fairness and the advantages and disadvantages for the 
Non-associated Shareholders.
Further, RG 111.58 states that where the proposed transaction consists of an asset acquisition by the entity, it is 
‘fair’ if the value of the financial benefit being offered by the entity to the related party is equal to or less than 
the value of the assets being acquired.
We have concluded the Proposed Transactions, as a whole, are fair to the Non-associated Shareholders with 
the following considerations:
•  We have assessed the DDA Commission as fair given that De Beers as one of the largest supplier of rough
diamonds in the world, sets out the terms of its own supply agreement with its purchasers at a fee of 1.5% 
on total purchases for planned supply services and some of its services are similar to that of marketing 
and sales services to be provided by DDA. Therefore, we have assessed the fee of 1.75% on gross revenue 
and auxiliary expenses to be provided DDA to be less than or equal to the value of the commercial market 
terms and rates observed.
•
In considering the fairness of the DDA Interest, we have had regard to the cost of alternative funding 
sources. We have assessed the value of the DDA Interest to be equal to or less than the value of costs of 
funding arising from various debt and equity instruments based on the credit risk profile of KDL and/or 
Lerala.
•  We have assessed the granting of DDA Security as fair on the basis that the potential proceeds from the
sale of the secured diamonds will potentially be equal to or less than the value of the outstanding liability
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
iv
•
•
which will be owing to DDA in the event of a default. If DDA was to realise the market value of the 
secured diamonds as at the time of the sale, it will only receive a maximum amount equal to the total 
outstanding liability.
In considering the fairness of the DDA Options, we have had regard to DDA Options as additional costs of 
funding required by DDA to provide working capital facilities to Lerala. We have assessed the total costs 
of funding (i.e. DDA Options plus DDA Interest) to be fair as it falls within the range of the costs of 
funding for similar credit risk profile issuance.
Based on the historical terms achieved by KDL, we note the value of the terms of the Offtake Agreement 
to be better than the historical terms achieved by KDL and is therefore, fair to the Non-associated 
Shareholders.
Based on the assessments above, the Proposed Transactions as a whole is fair to the Non-associated Shareholders.
Reasonableness assessment
In accordance with RG 111 an offer is reasonable if it is fair. On this basis, the Proposed Transactions are 
reasonable for KDL Shareholders.
Set out below is a summary of other factors we have considered in our reasonableness assessment.
Table 1: Summary of factors considered in the reasonableness assessment
Advantages
Secured offtake
Liquidity
The Proposed Transactions provide KDL with a guaranteed offtake of the output of the Lerala Diamond 
Mine.
Trading in KDL shares has been illiquid. If the Proposed Transactions are approved and implemented and 
that KDL becomes fully operational, this provides the KDL Shareholders with an opportunity to realise 
value for their shares which otherwise may be limited.
Provision of funding 
certainty
If the Proposed Transactions are approved and implemented along with a successful rights issue to raise 
$4.0 million, KDL has stated that they will have access to sufficient cash to complete the commissioning 
of the Lerala Diamond Mine and to produce diamonds. This certainty of funding may have the impact of 
increasing the KDL share price and remove the going concern qualification in the KDL accounts as well 
as reducing the exposure to risks and uncertainties inherent in the continuing operation of KDL.
No alternative 
transactions
Disadvantages
Transaction costs
The Directors of KDL have considered a range of strategic options for the Company including both 
additional debt and equity, which has included preliminary discussions with other potential capital 
providers. However, the Directors have advised that there are no other sources of funding for KDL at the 
date of this Report.
As part of the Proposed Transactions, KDL has advised it will incur transaction costs of approximately 
$55,000. We note that the majority of these transaction costs will have been incurred prior to the EGM 
and are not dependent upon the outcome of the meeting.
Reduced level of 
diamonds available 
to other customers
The terms of the Proposed Transactions limit the amount of diamonds (if any) that are able to be sold to 
other purchasers other than DDA. There is a possibility that sales prices to other parties (recognising 
that these sale prices are not interdependent upon the provision of funding or guaranteed offtake 
volumes) may be higher than those able to be achieved from DDA.
Ability to raise 
additional funding
The granting of the DDA Security may limit the ability for KDL to raise additional finance to enable it to 
increase expenditure on the Lerala Diamond Mine. Given the discussion at section 6.1.4 below, this is 
not considered a material disadvantage.
Other factors
If the proposal does 
not proceed
If the Proposed Transactions were not approved and implemented, there would continue to be a going 
concern issue for KDL. This would have an impact on the share price of KDL and the ability of the entity 
to continue operations.
Independent 
Directors 
recommendations 
and intentions
In the absence of a superior proposal and subject to the Independent Expert concluding that the 
Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable, the Independent Directors have unanimously 
recommended that Non-associated Shareholders vote in favour of the Proposed Transactions in the 
absence of any other competing offer.
Source: BDOCF analysis
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
v
Other matters
Shareholders’ individual circumstances
Our analysis has been undertaken, and our conclusions are expressed at an aggregate level. Accordingly, we have 
not considered the effect of the Proposed Transactions on the particular circumstances of individual 
KDL Shareholders. Some individual KDL Shareholders may place a different emphasis on various aspects of the 
Proposed Transactions from that adopted in this IER. Accordingly, individual KDL Shareholders may reach different 
conclusions as to whether or not the Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable in their individual 
circumstances.
The decision of an individual KDL Shareholder in relation to the Proposed Transactions may be influenced by their 
particular circumstances and accordingly KDL Shareholders are advised to seek their own independent advice.
Approval or rejection of the Proposed Transactions is a matter for individual KDL Shareholders based on their 
expectations as to the expected value and future prospects and market conditions together with their particular 
circumstances, including risk profile, liquidity preference, portfolio strategy and tax position. KDL Shareholders 
should carefully consider the Transaction Document. KDL Shareholders who are in doubt as to the action they 
should take in relation to the Proposed Transactions should consult their professional adviser. Capitalised terms 
used in this Report have the meanings set out in the glossary.
Current market conditions
Our opinion is based on economic, market and other conditions prevailing at the date of this IER. Such conditions 
can change significantly over relatively short periods of time.
Changes in those conditions may result in any valuation or other opinion becoming quickly outdated and in need of 
revision. We reserve the right to revise any valuation or other opinion, in light of material information existing at 
the valuation date that subsequently becomes known to us.
Sources of information
Appendix 2 to the IER sets out details of information referred to and relied upon by us during the course of 
preparing this IER and forming our opinion.
The statements and opinions contained in this IER are given in good faith and are based upon our consideration and 
assessment of information provided by KDL.
Under the terms of our engagement, KDL agreed to indemnify the partners, directors and staff (as appropriate) of 
BDO East Coast Partnership and BDOCF and their associated entities, against any claim, liability, loss or expense, 
costs or damage, arising out of reliance on any information or documentation provided by KDL which is false or 
misleading or omits any material particulars, or arising from failure to supply relevant information.
Limitations
This IER has been prepared at the request of the Directors for the sole benefit of the Directors and Non-associated 
Shareholders to assist them in their decision to approve or reject the Proposed Transactions. This IER is to 
accompany the Transaction Document to be sent to Non-associated Shareholders to consider the 
Proposed Transactions and was not prepared for any other purpose.
Accordingly, this IER and the information contained herein may not be relied upon by anyone other than the 
Directors and Non-associated Shareholders without our written consent. We accept no responsibility to any person 
other than the Directors and Non-associated Shareholders in relation to this IER.
This IER should not be used for any other purpose and we do not accept any responsibility for its use outside this 
purpose. Except in accordance with the stated purpose, no extract, quote or copy of our IER, in whole or in part, 
should be reproduced without our written consent, as to the form and context in which it may appear.
We have consented to the inclusion of the IER with the Transaction Document. Apart from this IER, we are not 
responsible for the contents of the Transaction Document or any other document associated with the 
Proposed Transactions. We acknowledge that this IER may be lodged with regulatory authorities.
Summary
This summary should be read in conjunction with the attached IER that sets out in full, the purpose, scope, basis 
of evaluation, limitations, information relied upon, analysis and our findings.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
vi
Currency
Unless otherwise stated, amounts are reported in Australian dollars.
Glossary
A glossary of terms used throughout this IER is set out in Appendix 1.
Financial Services Guide
BDOCF holds an Australian Financial Services Licence which authorises us to provide reports for the purposes of 
acting for and on behalf of clients in relation to proposed or actual mergers, acquisitions, takeovers, corporate 
restructures or share issues. A financial services guide is attached to this IER.
Yours faithfully
BDO CORPORATE FINANCE (EAST COAST) PTY LTD
Dan Taylor
Director
David McCourt
Director
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
vii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND .............................................................................................................. 1 
 
1.
Purpose ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1. 
Overview of DDA ........................................................................................................................... 1 
1.2. 
Proposed Transactions ..................................................................................................................... 1 
1.3. 
Conditions precedent ...................................................................................................................... 4 
1.4. 
Considerations if the Proposed Transactions are approved and implemented ..................................................... 4 
1.5. 
SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS .................................................................................................................. 5 
2.
 
Scope ........................................................................................................................................ 5 
2.1. 
Summary of Regulatory Requirements .................................................................................................. 5 
2.2. 
Basis of Assessment ........................................................................................................................ 6 
2.3. 
Special Value ............................................................................................................................... 7 
2.4. 
Reliance on Information ................................................................................................................... 8 
2.5. 
Limitations .................................................................................................................................. 8 
2.6. 
Assumptions ................................................................................................................................. 9 
2.7. 
3.
PROFILE OF KDL ........................................................................................................................... 10 
 
Overview ................................................................................................................................... 10 
3.1. 
Company structure ........................................................................................................................ 11 
3.2. 
Business operations ....................................................................................................................... 11 
3.3. 
Location .................................................................................................................................... 13 
3.4. 
Historical Financial Information ......................................................................................................... 14 
3.5. 
Going concern ............................................................................................................................. 17 
3.6. 
Other matters.............................................................................................................................. 17 
3.7. 
Capital Structure and Ownership........................................................................................................ 17 
3.8. 
Share price analysis ....................................................................................................................... 18 
3.9. 
4.
INDUSTRY ................................................................................................................................... 21 
 
Overview ................................................................................................................................... 21 
4.1. 
Key drivers ................................................................................................................................. 23 
4.2. 
Key markets to KDL ....................................................................................................................... 24 
4.3. 
Current performance ..................................................................................................................... 25 
4.4. 
Industry outlook ........................................................................................................................... 26 
4.5. 
5.
FAIRNESS ASSESSMENT .................................................................................................................... 27 
 
General considerations ................................................................................................................... 27 
5.1. 
Fairness of the DDA Commission ........................................................................................................ 28 
5.2. 
Fairness of the DDA Interest ............................................................................................................. 29 
5.3. 
Fairness of granting DDA Security ....................................................................................................... 33 
5.4. 
Fairness of DDA Options .................................................................................................................. 34 
5.5. 
Fairness of DDA Offtake Agreement .................................................................................................... 35 
5.6. 
Overall fairness conclusion............................................................................................................... 35 
5.7. 
6.
REASONABLENESS ASSESSMENT .......................................................................................................... 36 
 
Advantages ................................................................................................................................. 36 
6.1. 
Disadvantages .............................................................................................................................. 36 
6.2. 
Other factors............................................................................................................................... 37 
6.3. 
QUALIFICATIONS, DECLARATIONS AND CONSENTS .................................................................................... 38 
7.
 
Qualifications .............................................................................................................................. 38 
7.1. 
Independence .............................................................................................................................. 38 
7.2. 
7.3. 
Disclaimer .................................................................................................................................. 39 
APPENDIX 1: GLOSSARY ............................................................................................................................ 40 
APPENDIX 2: SOURCES OF INFORMATION ........................................................................................................ 41 
APPENDIX 3: VALUATION METHODS - BUSINESSES AND ASSETS ............................................................................... 42 
APPENDIX 4 : VALUATION METHODS - DERIVATIVES ............................................................................................ 44
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
viii
1.
PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND
1.1.  Purpose
We have been appointed by the Directors to prepare an IER setting out our opinion as to whether the 
Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders.
This IER is to accompany the Transaction Document required to be provided to KDL Shareholders. It has 
been prepared to assist and enable the Non-associated Shareholders assess the merits of the Proposed 
Transactions and to decide whether to approve the Proposed Transactions.
A summary of the background to the terms of the Proposed Transactions are set out below.
1.2.  Overview of DDA
DDA, a Belgian incorporated party, is a diamond auction house which specialises in the sales and marketing 
of rough diamonds for the international diamond trade. DDA is currently not a related party to KDL however 
is considered to be a related party under section 228(6) of the Act as it has reasonable grounds to believe 
that it is likely to become a related party in the future.
1.3.  Proposed Transactions
The key elements of the Proposed Transactions are as follows:
1.3.1.
Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement
Overview of the marketing and sales terms
Set out in the table below an overview of the key marketing and sales terms.
Table 2: Overview of the key marketing and sales terms
Key terms
Details
Parties
Term
•
•
DDA Commission  •
•
•
•
•
Sale location
Exclusivity
Lerala will appoint DDA as exclusive sales and marketing agent for the diamonds produced by 
the Lerala Diamond Mine.
A period of 3 years (with an option to renew for a further 2 years) and no more than 
10 auctions and/or tenders of diamonds per calendar year.
For the services, Lerala will pay DDA a fee of 1.75% on gross revenue received by Lerala for 
the sale of each parcel of rough diamonds plus all expenses relating to shipping between 
Lerala and DDA offices, taxes, out-of-pocket and other expenses reasonably incurred by DDA 
in the marketing and sale of the diamonds and provision of services.
The DDA Commission shall not be less than US$30,000 regardless of the sales value for each
auction.
Lerala will sort the produced rough diamonds for marketing and sale and deliver to DDA’s
office in Antwerp.
Lerala’s mining licence for its Lerala Diamond Mine in Botswana restricts its sale of diamonds
in Botswana. Lerala has obtained an exemption from the Botswana Government to this
requirement for the period from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 (which it may apply to
extend). During this time, diamonds may be marketed and sold from DDA’s office in Antwerp.
After expiry of this exemption, DDA may be required to market and sell the diamonds from
Lerala’s office in Gaborone, Botswana.
Lerala may sell the rough diamonds to other parties only if such arrangements are notified to
DDA and/or with consent from DDA. Lerala had notified DDA that it has entered into an
offtake agreement with Restwell Investments Pty Ltd (Restwell) for the sale of US$6 million
of rough diamonds prior to entering into the Diamond and Marketing Sales Agreement.
The first shipment to DDA is scheduled to occur in December 2016, however any shipments
which occur after December 2016 will be subject to Lerala having satisfied its obligations
under Restwell offtake agreement entered prior to this DDA Offtake.
Source: Diamond and Marketing Sales Agreement
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
1
Overview of the DDA Loan terms
Set out in the table below an overview of the DDA Loan terms.
Table 3: Overview of the DDA Loan terms
Key terms
Details
Facility
•
DDA agrees to advance to Lerala the following amounts (although there are other conditions
Term
DDA Interest
DDA Security
applicable) on receipt of notice from Lerala:
-
- 
-
-
-
US$0.84 million during the period 1 April 2016 to 30 April 2016.
US$1.26 million during the period 1 May 2016 to 31 May 2016.
US$2.45 million during the period 1 June 2016 to 30 June 2016, subject to full
repayment of the earlier two advances.
US$1.75 million during the period 1 July 2016 to 31 July 2016, subject to full repayment
of the advance in June 2016; and
US$2.80 million, during the period 1 August 2016 to 31 August 2016, subject to full
repayment of the advance in July 2016.
The facility is only available within the periods indicated above and cannot be drawn down in
a different time period.
If Lerala requires further loans, it may request from DDA (at DDA’s sole discretion) excess
funds to the above agreed amounts provided it has sufficient security to secure the
additional advance(s).
First and second advances are to be repaid within the period of two to three months ending
30 June 2016.
Third advance is to be repaid within a maximum period of two months to 31 July 2016.
Fourth advance is to be repaid within a maximum period of two months to 31 August 2016.
Fifth advance is to be repaid within a maximum period of two months to 30 September 2016.
Interest will accrue on amount outstanding from time to time, to be computed on a daily
basis on a year of 365 days as simple interest until the DDA Loan has been repaid in full,
at an interest rate of 10% per annum.
Lerala grants to DDA a security interest by way of a deposit of the secured diamonds (and any
proceeds thereof) to DDA to secure due and punctual payment of each advance. DDA will
hold the right, title and interest in the secured diamonds until the secured diamonds are sold
and the each advance is repaid in full.
Secured diamonds are defined in the agreement as diamonds provided as collateral by Lerala
to DDA and are given a value as follows: 
-
DDA values the rough diamonds in accordance with its usual practices, which must be
reasonable and consistent with current diamond market practices; and
-
the rough diamonds are then attributed a value of 75% of the valuation for the purposes
of forming the value of the secured diamonds.
Lerala must send secured diamonds progressively to DDA's office in Antwerp until the value of
the secured diamonds held by DDA is equal to the following amounts:  
-
in April 2016, value of the first advance less US$500,000;
-
- 
-
-
in May 2016, value of the second advance less US$500,000;
in June 2016, value of the third advance;
in July 2016, value of the fourth advance; and
in August 2016, the value of the fifth advance.
DDA is not obliged to provide any advance at any time until it holds a sufficient value of
secured diamonds in accordance with the terms above.
•
•
•
• 
• 
• 
•
•
•
•
•
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
2
Table 3: Overview of the DDA Loan terms
Key terms
Details
Events of 
Default
Conditions 
precedent
•
•
•
•
•
If: 
-
-
Lerala or KDL suffer from an insolvency event; or
Lerala fails to repay DDA the amount of any of the advances in accordance with terms
above,
then an event of default will be deemed to have occurred and the outstanding loan is
immediately due and payable to DDA.
Any sale of the secured diamonds must be undertaken by DDA in good faith, on an
arms-length basis and consistent with normal commercial practices.
DDA has the right to sell the secured diamonds and pay its fees and expenses first and
foremost, then any outstanding amount owing and any surplus to or at the direction of
Lerala.
If DDA wishes to exercise its right above, it must provide Lerala with written notice that it
has exercised this right.
DDA will advance the DDA Loan when the following conditions precedent are satisfied:
-  mining has commenced at the Lerala Diamond Mine on or before 31 March 2016, or at
an agreed date;
-
-
-
processing has commenced on or before 15 April 2016, or at an agreed date;
the Directors provide DDA a statement in each notice that Lerala is solvent and a going
concern; and 
the secured diamonds in respect of each advance are received by DDA.
Source: Diamond and Marketing Sales Agreement
Overview of the DDA Options
As consideration for DDA agreeing to provide the DDA Loan to Lerala, and for the agreement by DDA that 
Lerala may on-lend the funds to KDL, KDL agrees to issue the Options to DDA or its nominee(s), subject to 
KDL Shareholders’ approval.
Set out in the table below an overview of the key terms of the DDA Options in the Diamond and Marketing 
Sales Agreement.
Table 4: Overview of the key terms of the DDA Options
Key terms
Details
Number of 
Options 
Exercise price
Term
Right
Transferability
•
• 
• 
•
•
5,000,000 Options
$0.20 per Option
Three years from the date of issue
Each Option gives DDA (or its nominee(s)) a right to subscribe (in cash) for one fully paid
ordinary share in KDL
The DDA Options are not transferable
Source: Diamond and Marketing Sales Agreement
1.3.2.
Offtake Agreement
Set out in the table below an overview of the key terms in the Offtake Agreement.
Table 5: Overview of the key terms of the Offtake Agreement
Key terms
Details
Quantity
•
DDA shall buy from Lerala rough diamonds produced by the Lerala Diamond Mine without any
deletion or addition to the total value of at least US$5.0 million.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
3
Table 5: Overview of the key terms of the Offtake Agreement
Key terms
Details
Price
Delivery
Shortfall
• 
•
•
•
•
Price will be determined based on DDA’s valuation of the rough diamonds less 10%.
If Lerala does not agree with DDA’s valuation, it can elect to require DDA to sell the rough
diamonds as agent of Lerala, and DDA will withhold 10% of the price actually received in lieu
of valuation less the 10% price discount.
The rough diamonds are to be shipped to DDA in Antwerp by 31 March 2017 or such later date
until the total quantity to be produced has been provided in full.
Lerala expects to commence mining sometime in April 2016 with the first diamond sales
expected in June 2016. If there is any delay and Lerala has not commenced selling rough
diamonds by August 2016, the parties will discuss amendments to timing.
Lerala has obtained approval from the Botswana Government to sell its diamonds outside of
Botswana from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017. If this approval is revoked, a required
Botswana Government Approval is not obtained, or the total quantity is not delivered on or
prior to 31 March 2017, the parties agree that either:
a)   DDA may, in its discretion, take actions to allow sale of the rough diamonds to take
place in Botswana or any such other conditions imposed by the Botswana Government;
or
b)   if (a) is not elected by DDA, then the Offtake Agreement will terminate immediately
and the quantity (in whole or in part) outstanding will not be sold to DDA.
Source: Offtake Agreement
1.4.  Conditions precedent
The Proposed Transactions are subject to various conditions. Although there are other conditions 
applicable, the key condition precedent is the approval of the Proposed Transactions by KDL Shareholders.
1.5.  Considerations if the Proposed Transactions are approved and implemented
If the Proposed Transactions are approved by the Non-associated Shareholders and implemented by KDL: 
•
The DDA Loan will help to allow Lerala to put the Lerala Diamond Mine in production and along with 
the proceeds of a rights issue, is expected to provide sufficient funds for the mine to operate in its 
early months until such time as it becomes cash flow positive.
Ability to produce rough diamonds and sell in Antwerp, where higher rough diamond trades are 
expected, within the timeframe allowed by the Botswana Government.
Lerala will provide DDA Security over rough diamonds in accordance to the value of the DDA Loan to 
DDA.
A small dilution to KDL Shareholders will occur as a result of the issue of DDA Options on exercise.
•
•
•
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
4
2.
SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS
2.1.  Scope
The scope of the procedures we undertook in forming our opinion on whether the Proposed Transactions are 
fair and reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders has been limited to those procedures we believe are 
required in order to form our opinion. Our procedures did not include verification work nor constitute an 
audit or assurance engagement in accordance with Australian Auditing and Assurance Standards.
The assessment of whether the Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable to the Non-associated 
Shareholders involved determining the fair market value of various securities, assets and liabilities.
For the purposes of our opinion, the term “fair market value” is defined as the price that would be 
negotiated in an open and unrestricted market between a knowledgeable, willing, but not anxious 
purchaser and a knowledgeable, willing, but not anxious vendor, acting at arm’s length.
2.2.  Summary of Regulatory Requirements
The Directors have engaged us to prepare a Report in relation to the Proposed Transactions to satisfy the 
requirements of: 
• 
•
Chapter 2E of the Act.
Listing Rule 10.1.
The regulatory requirements relevant to this IER are summarised below.
2.2.1.
Chapter 2E
Section 208 of Chapter 2E of the Act states that for a public company or an entity that the public company 
controls (i.e. Lerala), to give a financial benefit to a related party of the public company, the public 
company must:
a)
b)
obtain the approval of the public company’s shareholders in the manner set out in sections 217 to 227 
of the Act; and
give the financial benefit within 15 months following such approval,
unless the giving of the financial benefit falls within an exception set out in sections 210 to 216 of the Act.
ASIC Regulatory Guide 76 (RG 76) sets out ASIC's approach to related party benefits and states that it may 
be necessary for entities to include a valuation from an independent expert with a notice of meeting for 
member approval under Chapter 2E where:
a)
b)
c)
the financial benefit is difficult to value;
the transaction is significant from the point of view of the entity (RG 76.112); or
the non-interested directors do not have the expertise or resources to provide independent advice to 
members about the value of the financial benefit.
Each of the DDA Commission, the DDA Security, the DDA Offtake and the DDA Options constitute the giving 
of a financial benefit. Accordingly, Non-associated Shareholder approval is required to be sought for the 
Proposed Transactions in accordance with Chapter 2E of the Act.
We note that RG 111.63 provides that an expert needs only conduct one analysis of whether the transaction 
is fair and reasonable, even if the report has been prepared for a reason other than the transaction being a 
related party transaction.
2.2.2.
Listing Rule 10.1
Listing Rule 10.1 provides that an entity (or any of its subsidiaries), must not acquire a substantial asset 
from, or dispose of a substantial asset to, a related party or substantial holder or an associate of a related 
party or a substantial holder without shareholders’ approval.
The Directors have indicated that DDA may become a related party to KDL at a point of time within six 
months of the Proposed Transactions. Therefore, DDA is a related party of KDL for the purposes of 
section 228(6) of the Act, and accordingly for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.1.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
5
A “substantial asset” is an asset valued at greater than 5% of the equity interests of a company as set out in 
the latest accounts given to the ASX. Based on the Company’s 2015 Annual Report, the Company’s equity 
interest is $1.46 million as at 30 June 2015. 5% of this amount is $73,000. As the DDA Security and the 
DDA Offtake have been valued in excess of this amount, they are considered “substantial assets” and 
require Non-associated Shareholder approval under Listing Rule 10.1. The value of the DDA Security and the 
DDA Offtake are provided as follows:
a)  DDA Security: value of debt secured will be up to approximately US$2.8 million
b)  DDA Offtake: US$5 million.
Accordingly, the Directors have requested us to prepare a Report, stating whether the Proposed 
Transactions are fair and reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders.
2.3.  Basis of Assessment
In determining whether the Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable to the Non-associated 
Shareholders we have had regard to: 
• 
•
Regulatory Guide 112 Independence of experts (RG 112).
RG 111 Content of expert reports
In particular, RG 111 establishes guidelines in respect of independent expert reports under the Act.
RG 111 establishes two distinct criteria for an expert analysing a related party transaction. The tests are: 
• 
•
Is the offer ‘fair’?
Is it ‘reasonable’?
That is, the terms fair and reasonable are regarded as separate elements and are not regarded as a 
compound phrase.
Fair
In undertaking our fairness opinion we have had regard to RG 111.
RG 111.58 states that where the proposed transaction consists of an asset acquisition by the entity, it is 
‘fair’ if the value of the financial benefit being offered by the entity to the related party is equal to or less 
than the value of the assets being acquired.
We have formed our opinion in relation to fairness by comparing the Proposed Transactions as a whole as 
detailed below. 
•  We have assessed the fairness of the terms of the Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement with
consideration to the following:
–
–
–
–
Compared the terms of the DDA Commission against publicly available reference market terms to 
ensure that they are fair to the Non-associated Shareholders and no net financial benefits are 
accrued to DDA.
Compared the DDA Interest to alternative funding sources to ensure that the terms are fair to the 
Non-associated Shareholders and no net financial benefits are accrued to DDA.
Compared the proceeds of the sale of the assets under the DDA Security and the value of liability 
owing to DDA in the event of a default.
Compared the terms of the DDA Options against the risks undertaken by DDA as a whole for providing 
the DDA Loan to ensure that they are fair to the Non-associated Shareholders and no net financial 
benefits are accrued to DDA.
•  We have assessed the fairness of the terms of the Offtake Agreement against historical terms achieved
by KDL to ensure that they are fair to the Non-associated Shareholders and no net financial benefits 
are accrued to DDA.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
6
Reasonable
In accordance with paragraph 12 of RG 111, an offer is ‘reasonable’ if it is ‘fair’. An offer could be 
considered ‘reasonable’ if there are valid reasons to approve it notwithstanding that it may not be regarded 
as ‘fair’.
In considering whether the Proposed Transactions are reasonable to the Non-associated Shareholders, 
we have considered a number of factors including: 
•
The implications to KDL and the Non-associated Shareholders if the Proposed Transactions are not 
approved.
• 
•
•
Advantages and disadvantages associated with the Proposed Transactions as required by RG 111.
Costs and risks associated with the Proposed Transactions that may affect the Non-associated 
Shareholders.
The likelihood of alternative transactions.
General requirements in relation to the IER
In preparing the IER, ASIC requires the independent expert when deciding on the form of analysis for a 
report, to bear in mind that the main purpose of the report is to adequately deal with the concerns that 
could reasonably be anticipated of those persons affected by the Proposed Transactions. In preparing the 
IER we considered the necessary legal requirements and guidance of the Act, ASIC Regulatory Guides and 
commercial practice.
The IER also includes the following information and disclosures: 
•
Particulars of any relationship, pecuniary or otherwise, whether existing presently or at any time 
within the last two years, between BDO East Coast Partnership or BDOCF and any of the parties to the 
Proposed Transactions.
•
The nature of any fee or pecuniary interest or benefit, whether direct or indirect, that we have 
received or will or may receive for or in connection with the preparation of the IER.
•  We have been appointed as independent expert for the purposes of providing an IER for the
Transaction Document.
•
•
That we have relied on information provided by the board of Directors of KDL (Board) and 
management of KDL and that we have not carried out any form of audit or independent verification of 
the information provided.
That we have received representations from the Board in relation to the completeness and accuracy of 
the information provided to us for the purpose of our IER.
Prior to accepting this engagement, we considered our independence in regard to KDL with reference to 
RG 112.
BDOCF and BDO East Coast Partnership have provided a range of services to KDL including acting as the 
independent external auditor (for the half year ended 31 December 2015) and conducting limited scope 
financial and tax due diligence procedures in relation to its proposed acquisition of all the shares in 
Gem Diamonds Australia Holdings Pty Ltd as the 100% owner of Kimberley Diamond NL in 2013. In addition, 
BDO East Coast Partnership’s tax practice was engaged to undertake income and payroll tax compliance 
work as well as advice on the tax consequences of undertaking the Proposed Transactions. The advice 
provided did not give any recommendations in relation to the Proposed Transactions and is not considered 
to be strategic of operational planning work in relation to RG 112.
It is our opinion that the above mentioned existing and historical relationships do not impact on our ability 
to provide an independent and unbiased report in the context of the Proposed Transactions. In our opinion 
we are independent of KDL.
2.4.  Special Value
We have not considered special value in forming our opinion. Special value is the amount that a potential 
acquirer may be prepared to pay for a business in excess of the fair market value. This premium represents 
the value to the particular potential acquirer of potential economies of scale, reduction in competition,
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
7
other synergies and cost savings arising from the acquisition under consideration not available to likely 
purchasers generally. Special value is not normally considered in the assessment of fair market value as it 
relates to the individual circumstances of special purchasers.
2.5.  Reliance on Information
This IER is based upon financial and other information provided by the Board and management of KDL. 
We have considered and relied upon this information. Unless there are indications to the contrary, we have 
assumed that the information provided was reliable, complete and not misleading, and material facts were 
not withheld. The information provided was evaluated through analysis, inquiry and review for the purpose 
of forming an opinion as to whether the Proposed Transactions are fair and reasonable to the 
Non-associated Shareholders.
We do not warrant that our inquiries have identified or verified all of the matters which an audit, extensive 
examination or “due diligence” investigation might disclose. In any event, an opinion as to whether a 
corporate transaction is fair and reasonable is in the nature of an overall opinion rather than an audit or 
detailed investigation.
It is understood that the accounting information provided to us was prepared in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles.
Where we relied on the views and judgement of management the information was evaluated through 
analysis, inquiry and review to the extent practical. However, such information is often not capable of 
direct external verification or validation.
Under the terms of our engagement, KDL has agreed to indemnify BDOCF and BDO East Coast Partnership, 
and their partners, directors, employees, officers and agents (as applicable) against any claim, liability, 
loss or expense, costs or damage, arising out of reliance on any information or documentation provided, 
which is false or misleading or omits any material particulars, or arising from failure to supply relevant 
documentation or information.
2.6.  Limitations
We acknowledge that this IER may be lodged by the Board with regulatory and statutory bodies and will be 
included in the Transaction Document to be sent to the KDL Shareholders. The Board acknowledges that our 
IER has been prepared solely for the purposes noted in the Transaction Document and accordingly we 
disclaim any responsibility from reliance on the IER in regard to its use for any other purpose. Except in 
accordance with the stated purposes, no extract, quote or copy of the IER, in whole or in part, should be 
reproduced without our prior written consent, as to the form and context in which it may appear.
It was not our role to undertake, and we have not undertaken any commercial, technical, financial, legal, 
taxation or other due diligence, other similar investigative activities in respect of KDL. We understand that 
the Board has been advised by legal, accounting, tax and other appropriate advisors in relation to such 
matters as necessary. We provide no warranty or guarantee as to the existence, extent, adequacy, 
effectiveness and/or completeness of any due diligence or other similar investigative activities by the Board 
or their advisors.
We note that the IER does not deal with the individual investment circumstances of KDL Shareholders and 
no opinion has been provided in relation to same. Some individual KDL Shareholders may place a different 
emphasis on various aspects of the Proposed Transactions from that adopted in our IER. Accordingly, 
individuals may reach different conclusions on whether or not the Proposed Transactions are fair and 
reasonable. An individual KDL Shareholder’s decision in relation to the Proposed Transactions may be 
influenced by their particular circumstances and, therefore, Non-associated Shareholders are advised to 
seek their own independent advice.
Apart from the IER, we are not responsible for the contents of the Transaction Document or any other 
document. We have provided consent for inclusion of the IER in the Transaction Document. Our consent and 
the Transaction Document acknowledge that we have not been involved with the issue of the 
Transaction Document and that we accept no responsibility for the Transaction Document apart from the 
IER.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
8
2.7.  Assumptions
In forming our opinion, we have made certain assumptions and outline these in our IER including: 
• 
•
Assumptions outlined in the fairness sections.
That matters such as title to all relevant assets, compliance with laws and regulations and contracts in 
place are in good standing, and will remain so, and that there are no material legal proceedings, other 
than as publicly disclosed.
•
• 
•
• 
•
Information sent out in relation to the Proposed Transactions to KDL Shareholders or any regulatory or 
statutory body is complete, accurate and fairly presented in all material respects.
Publicly available information relied on by us is accurate, complete and not misleading.
If the Proposed Transactions are implemented, that it will be implemented in accordance with the 
stated terms.
The legal mechanisms to implement the Proposed Transactions are correct and effective.
There are no undue changes to the terms and conditions of the Proposed Transactions or complex 
issues unknown to us.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
9
3.
PROFILE OF KDL
3.1.  Overview
KDL is an Australian mineral resources exploration company that specialises in diamond mining and owns a 
number of exploration rights and assets globally.
KDL was originally incorporated as Goodrich Resources Ltd in May 2011 with headquarters in Sydney, 
Australia. It focussed on gold and copper-gold tenements in New South Wales and the Northern Territory. 
The Company was listed on ASX on 22 February 2012 following a $3.5 million initial public offering.
Chronological order of key events of KDL is illustrated below:
Table 6: Chronological events
Source: KDL management, 2013, 2014 and 2015 KDL Annual Reports
On 4 February 2013, the Company announced the acquisition of Kimberley Diamond Company NL (KDC), 
operator of the Ellendale Diamond Mine, from Gem Diamonds Limited. On 26 April 2013, the Company was 
renamed KDL.
On 22 July 2013, KDL announced it had entered into an agreement with eDiamond International Limited to 
acquire 100% of the shares in eDiamond Belgium BVBA (eDiamond) (now DDA). The acquisition of eDiamond 
gave KDL the ability to immediately conduct future sales through an already established proprietary office 
in Antwerp, Belgium.
In February 2014, KDL announced it had completed the acquisition of Mantle Diamonds Limited, including 
Mantle’s wholly owned subsidiary Lerala, owner of Lerala Diamond Mines in Botswana, Africa, which was on 
care and maintenance at the time of acquisition.
On 1 July 2015, Kimberley Diamonds resolved to place its subsidiary, KDC into voluntary administration. 
KDL cited the negative impact on revenue due to lower diamond prices, as well as to lower recovered 
grades and lower size distributions. The Company specifically referred to prices achieved in the week 
leading up to 1 July 2015 at an auction in Antwerp were significantly lower than those forecasted. As a 
result, KDC was unable to continue trading solvently and was placed into external administration.
In KDL’s 2015 Annual Report, the Company confirmed that the Lerala Diamond Mine has become KDL’s new 
operational focus, and will become KDL’s key source of revenue once mining recommences.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
10
3.2.  Company structure
An overview of KDL’s company structure is illustrated below:
Table 7: Company structure
Source: KDL management
3.3.  Business operations
3.3.1.
Lerala Diamond Mine
The Lerala Diamond Mine is located in North-East Botswana. It comprises a cluster of five diamondiferous 
kimberlite pipes totalling 6.66 hectares in size, together with a processing and recovery facility with a 
nominal capacity of 200 tonnes per hour. The mine was on care and maintenance at the time of acquisition, 
and KDL intends to bring the mine back into production in 2016.
Lerala Diamond Mine has a 15 year fully permitted mining license covering an area of 21.86 square 
kilometres. The tables below provide details of the indicated and inferred resources at the Lerala Mine.
Table 8: Mineral Resources Summary as at 31 December 2015
Zone
K2 
K3 
K4 
K5 
K6 
ROM Stockpiles 
Total Indicated Lerala 
 
K2 
K3 
K3 marginal breccia 
K4 
K5 
K6 
DB tailings 
Low grade stockpile 
Total Inferred Lerala 
Total Lerala
Resource 
Class
Indicated
Inferred
Tonnage 
(Mt) 
6.3 
4.6 
1.8 
2.3
0.1 
15.0 
 
0.9 
1.5 
1.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.4 
0.4 
0.1 
5.1 
20.1
Grade  
(cpht) 
20.5 
30.4 
31.0 
25.7
No Indicated Resource
22.5 
25.6 
 
13.8 
28.6 
9.9 
32.2 
46.1 
28.3 
5.5 
8.9 
20.2 
24.2
Carats 
(m cts) 
1.29 
1.40 
0.55 
0.59
0.02 
3.85 
 
0.13 
0.41 
0.12 
0.09 
0.11 
0.12 
0.02 
0.01 
1.01 
4.86
Source: ASX Announcement “Mineral Resource and Ore Reserve Statement – revised”, 11 January 2016
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
Value 
(USD/ct) 
$61 
$79 
$79 
$79
$79 
$73 
 
$61 
$79 
$79 
$79 
$79 
$79 
$40 
$79 
$76 
$74
11
Table 9: Ore Reserve Summary as at 31 December 2015
Zone
K2 
K3 
K4 
K5 
K6 
Probable Reserves Lerala
Resource 
Class
Probable
Tonnage 
(Mt) 
3.0 
4.8 
1.5 
2.4
Grade  
(cpht) 
23.8 
28.2 
26.6 
22.7
Carats 
(k cts) 
0.71 
1.36 
0.40 
0.53
Value 
(USD/ct) 
$61 
$79 
$79 
$79
11.7
25.8
3.01
$75
No Probable Reserve
Source: ASX Announcement “Mineral Resource and Ore Reserve Statement – revised”, 11 January 2016
During the financial year ended 30 June 2015 (FY15), the Company focussed on re-commissioning the Lerala 
Diamond Mine by progressing on the environmental approvals process, modelling technical recovery 
process, re-design the processing plant and tendering for potential mining contractors.
The Company in its August 2015 announcement states that Lerala Diamond Mine is expected to produce an 
average of 357,000 carats of diamonds per year over a mine life of 7 years and that there is also 
opportunity to extend the mine life.
On 29 October 2015, the Company announced that it had all regulatory approvals required to proceed with 
the re-opening of the Lerala Diamond Mine. In July 2015, a South African engineering company, Consulmet, 
was appointed to undertake the design work and modifications to the plant. The Board approved the 
expenditure of $14.6 million on upfront capital items to re-commission the plant. The Company obtained 
debt funding for the capital expenditure from a third party lender, Zhejiang Huitong Auction Co Ltd 
(Zhejiang).
In its 31 December 2015 quarterly report, the Company announced that due to delays regarding the 
construction of a tailings dam, the plant recommissioning has been rescheduled and is currently anticipated 
to commence in April 2016 (subject to funding).
In February 2016, KDL announced that Lerala had entered into a diamond sales agreement with Restwell.
Under the terms of the agreement, Restwell agreed to acquire US$6.0 million worth of diamonds produced
at the Lerala Diamond Mine after production commences. Restwell has agreed to pre-pay US$1.0 million in
February 2016 to Lerala. The US$1.0 million is repayable by the supply of diamonds from Lerala to Restwell
under the terms of the sales agreement.
3.3.2.
Ellendale Diamond Mine and Smoke Creek Project
The Ellendale Diamond Mine and Smoke Creek Project were owned by KDC, a former subsidiary of KDL.
On 1 July 2015, KDC and its subsidiaries were placed into voluntary administration by their directors, and
operations were suspended at Ellendale. On 5 August 2015, the creditors of KDC voted to place KDC into
liquidation, rejecting a Deed of Company Arrangement proposal put forward by KDL, which was a secured
creditor of KDC.
3.3.3.
Tilwane Project
Lerala, a wholly-owned subsidiary of KDL, is party to a farm-in and joint venture agreement with
Tilwane Services Pty Limited, a Botswana based exploration company. The joint venture agreement is in
respect of two tenements located in North-Eastern Botswana. Soil geochemistry sampling and high
resolution ground magnetic surveys have been undertaken at the tenements, along with other activities to
determine high priority sites for percussion drilling in order to detect the possibility of kimberlitic
intrusives. A drilling program has been designed and is expected to be undertaken during FY16.
3.3.4.
Lomero Project
In October 2014, the Company announced that it had been awarded the investigation permit covering the
gold-rich Lomero massive sulphide deposit, located within the Iberian Pyrite Belt in southern Spain.
During FY15, KDL conducted surveys and data assessments, and engaged consultants to undertake new
resource estimation.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
12
The company stated that the acquisition of the Lomero project is an important part of KDL’s copper-gold
strategy, which envisages the spin out of a new company focussed on copper-gold. The Company is awaiting
improved market conditions to further explore the envisaged spin out.
3.3.5.
Other tenements
Mantle Diamonds Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of KDL, holds interests in joint arrangements in
diamond projects in Canada (Tenby and Commonwealth exploration projects) through its own wholly owned
subsidiary Tenby Resources Inc. The licences are managed by Diavik Diamond Mines under joint
arrangement agreements currently free carry during the ongoing exploration phase.
KDL also holds interest in Yeoval copper-gold project in Dubbo, New South Wales.
3.4.  Location
The map below illustrates the location of KDL’s primary assets in Botswana, the Lerala Diamond Mine, as
well as the Tilwane Project:
Table 10: Mine locations
Source: KDL ASX Announcements, http://www.worldofcultures.org/africa/Botswana/c_botswana.htm
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
13
3.5.  Historical Financial Information
3.5.1.
Financial Performance
The historical audited income statements of KDL are set out in the table below.
Table 11: Statements of financial performance of KDL
$’000 unless stated otherwise
Revenue
Cost of sales
Gross Profit
Royalties and selling costs
Administration expenses
Share options expenses
Impairment of exploration assets 
(Provision)/Release of Mine 
Rehabilitation Provision 
Finance costs
Gain on acquisition of business 
Other operating 
income/(expenses) 
Profit/(Loss) before income tax 
Income tax expense 
Profit/(Loss) after income tax 
Other comprehensive 
income/(loss) for the period, net 
of tax 
Total comprehensive 
income/(loss) for the period
Key performance indicators
Revenue growth
EBT margin 
Source: 2013, 2014 and 2015 annual reports 
Note 1: n/a - not available
FY13 
Audited 
48,306
(37,444)
10,862
(3,007)
(6,409)
(1,435)
(831)
2,648
(533)
1,539
(552)
2,282 
-
2,282 
-
2,282
n/a
4.7%
FY14 
Audited 
77,559
(77,613)
(54)
(5,156)
(10,939)
(1,050)
(147)
-
(1,069)
-
(813)
(19,228) 
(13)
(19,241) 
(245)
FY15 
Audited 
63,891
(70,887)
(6,996)
(4,503)
(9,368)
28
-
3,829
(413)
-
-
(17,423) 
(40)
(17,463) 
1,894
(19,486)
(15,569)
60.6%
(24.8%)
(17.6%)
(27.3%)
In relation to the Company’s income statements, we note the following: 
•
Revenue was volatile from FY13 to FY15, with a 60.6% increase in FY14 followed by a 17.6% decrease 
in FY15. The Ellendale Mine was the only source of revenue for the Company over the above observed 
periods to FY15. We note that KDC was placed into voluntary administration on 1 July 2015 and 
therefore, revenue from this source is unlikely to continue to FY16.
•
• 
•
The Profit after income tax achieved in FY13 is significantly driven by the Release of Mine 
Rehabilitation Provision and Gain on acquisition of business. With the removal of these two 
extraordinary items, the Company’s profit from underlying earnings was negative ($1.9m).
Royalties and selling costs and administration expenses moved broadly in line with revenue each year.
The Company’s profit after income tax was negative in FY14 and FY15. In May 2014, the Company 
announced that it had been unsuccessful in securing a price increase in relation to the offtake 
agreement with Laurelton Diamonds. This price increase was required to sustain the continued 
economic development of part of the Ellendale Mine. Additionally, mining at part of the 
Ellendale Mine was suspended in June 2013 due to a rock slip. These events contributed to the 
negative result in FY14. FY15 results were primarily driven by lower than expected revenues achieved 
from the sale of diamonds from the Ellendale Mine. The 2015 Annual Report cited a 27% drop in 
diamonds prices achieved at auction. This was also cited as the primary reason for placing KDC into 
voluntary administration.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
14
3.5.2.
Historical Statements of Financial Position
The audited statements of financial position of KDL as at 30 June 2013, 30 June 2014 and 30 June 2015 are 
set out below:
Table 12: Statements of financial position  
$’000 unless stated otherwise 
CURRENT ASSETS
30-Jun-13
30-Jun-14
30-Jun-15
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
Inventories
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Trade and other receivables
Property, plant and equipment
Exploration and evaluation assets
TOTAL ASSETS 
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Interest bearing loans and borrowings
Income tax payable
Provisions
NON-CURRENT LIABILITIES
Interest bearing loans and borrowings
Provisions
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
EQUITY 
Issue capital
Reserves
Retained earnings/(accumulated losses)
Parent interests 
Non-controlling interest
TOTAL EQUITY
Key performance indicators
Gearing ratio (Total debt / Total assets)
Number of shares
Net assets per share
Source: 2014 and 2015 annual reports
8,830
16,334
18,279
43,443
543
18,269
1,666
20,478 
63,921
10,636
11,034
-
2,197
23,867
-
27,371
27,371 
51,238 
 
9,972
923
1,813
12,708 
(25)
12,683
17%
13,417
2,731
15,100
31,248
65
31,777
2,999
34,841 
66,089
16,274
1,080
7
2,102
19,463
283
29,508
29,791 
49,254 
 
35,862
4,871
(23,856)
16,877 
(42)
16,835
2%
4,959
4,928
8,907
18,794
52
27,728
3,253
31,033 
49,827
15,698
688
(3)
1,543
17,926
5,040
25,401
30,441 
48,367 
 
36,086
6,737
(41,319)
1,504 
(44)
1,460
11%
74,614,742
104,203,915
105,740,349
0.17
0.16
0.01
We note the following in relation to the Company’s balance sheet information: 
•
Cash and cash equivalents fell sharply as at 30 June 2015 largely due to higher costs of operations 
compared to cash inflows from sales of diamonds, payments for re-commissioning of Lerala Diamond 
Mine and repayment of loans.
•
•
Inventory as at 30 June 2015 were made up of Stores stock, Ore Stockpiles and Diamond Inventory of 
approximately $2.1 million, $2.2 million and $4.7 million respectively.
The Non-current provisions largely comprise mine rehabilitation provision. Mine rehabilitation 
provision was originally acquired through a business combination in FY13. The provision was recognised 
as the group has an obligation for the rehabilitation of its mining areas. The provision was calculated 
based on the total estimated rehabilitation costs over a period of 12 years. The balance of the 
provision rose as at 30 June 2014 primarily due to the unwinding of the discount and re-estimation of 
the provision. As at 30 June 2015, the balance fell due to the re-estimation of the provision.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
15
•
Interest bearing debt – Tabled below is a summary of the terms on KDL’s interest bearing loans.
Table 13: Interest bearing  debt 
$’000 unless stated otherwise 
Current 
Insurance premium funding
Other
Loan
Non-Current 
Loan from Zhejiang
Total
Source: 2015 annual report
2015
591
-
97
5,040
5,728
2014
775
80
225
283
1,363
Notes
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
This is in relation to an agreement was entered into with the insurer on 7 May 2015. Funding is for a 
period of 10 months with a flat fixed interest rate of 2.33% per annum.
This is in relation to a repayment agreement between Zodiac Resources Pty Ltd and the Office of State 
Revenue in Western Australia. The agreement was entered into on 31 December 2013 for a period of 
12 months at an interest rate of 11.5% per annum.
Loan entered into in September 2011, with debt expected to be fully repaid in August 2015. Interest rate 
of 8.82% per annum.
On 30 June 2015, the Company entered into a loan agreement with Zhejiang, a third party lender. 
The key terms of the loan agreement were:
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
Principal amount of $10.0 million
KDL will pay interest of 5% per annum
Loan to be repaid in full after 2 years
Zhejiang may elect for $3 million of the loan to be repaid in KDL shares at a 20% discount to the 
volume weighted average price of KDL’s shares for the 20 business days prior to conversion
The loan is secured by a security interested over KDL’s shares in Mantle Diamonds Limited (UK).
The first $5.0 million under the terms of the loan agreement was received on 30 June 2015.
On 31 July 2015, KDL announced it had received a further AUD$3.2 million under the terms of the loan 
agreement with Zhejiang.
On 27 August 2015, KDL announced it had received the balance of the loan funds from Zhejiang, with a 
total of AUD$10 million received.
In an Investor Presentation released on 31 August 2015, the Company advised it required a further 
$4.9 million to fund capital expenditure to bring the Lerala Diamond Mine project into production, plus 
additional funds for working capital.
In October 2015, the Company announced that Zhejiang had agreed to provide a further $3.0 million in 
debt finance, under the same terms of the loan agreement previously entered into.
In January 2016, the Company announced that Zhejiang had agreed to convert $1.5 million of its current 
$12 million debt to 15 million KDL shares at a share price of $0.10 per share. The debt as of January 2016 
stood at $12 million as only $2.05 million of the additional $3 million of debt financing agreed in 
October 2016 had been extended to the Company. The remaining funds were scheduled to be advanced 
in February 2016. Under the terms of the loan agreement, Zhejiang may elect for up to a further 
$1.5 million of the loan to be repaid in KDL shares, subject to shareholders’ approval, if required.
•
Net assets per share fell by 91% as at 30 June 2015 due to the significant losses in FY15.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
16
3.6.  Going concern
The 2015 Annual Report highlighted the need for the Company to raise further additional funds via equity 
raisings or borrowing facilities in order to fund the future capital expenditure (primarily in relation to the 
Lerala Diamond Mine) and working capital requirements.
The 2015 Annual Report further stated that should the group not achieve the funding outcomes set out 
above, there is significant uncertainty whether the group will continue as a going concern and therefore 
whether it will realise its assets and extinguish its liabilities in the normal course of business and at the 
amounts stated in the financial report.
3.7.  Other matters
We note that ASIC had on 16 September 2015 commenced proceedings against KDL’s chairman, 
Mr Alexandre Alexander, relating to prior statements which were allegedly false and misleading. Although 
KDL has Directors and Officers Insurance, KDL does not have securities litigation insurance cover for the 
Company, and accordingly, any action against KDL will need to be funded by the Company, which has cash 
flow implications.
We also note that KDL placed its former subsidiary, KDC into voluntary administration in July 2015. 
Creditors voted to place it in liquidation and the liquidators are currently undertaking their investigations 
and there is a possibility that litigation may arise out of this.
Other than the above, the Company is not aware of other litigation matters currently underway, threatened 
or pending.
3.8.  Capital Structure and Ownership
As at 19 February 2016, KDL had the following securities on issue:
Table 14: KDL securities on issue 
Security
Total  Details
Fully paid Ordinary Shares
120,740,349
105,740,349 fully paid ordinary shares
Senior Executive Incentive 
Scheme
Source: KDL management
15,000,000 fully paid ordinary shares subject to voluntary escrow until 
29 January 2017
-  KDL does not have any rights or options over equity on issue to Directors
and other key management personnel as at 19 February 2016.
The top 10 shareholders as at 19 February 2016 had the following holdings:
Table 15: Top 10 shareholders
Rank
Shareholder
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Zhejiang
Country Rosy Limited
Hanking Australia Pty Ltd
Pacific Road Capital Mgnt GP
Mrs Ling Wei Dong
Summit Equities Limited
Mr Alex Alexander
ABN AMRO Clearing Sydney
Edenbridge Investments Pty Ltd
10
International Conveyors (Asia)
Subtotal 
Other Shareholders
Total securities outstanding
Source: KDL management
Securities 
Outstanding 
12,000,000
9,606,929
9,054,400
8,146,481
7,415,211
6,933,334
5,085,000
4,059,745
3,403,118
3,300,000
69,004,218 
51,736,131 
120,740,349
% ownership
9.94
7.96
7.50
6.75
6.14
5.74
4.21
3.36
2.82
2.73
57.15 
42.85 
100
The top 10 shareholders own a total equity interest of approximately 57% in the Company.
In January 2016, the Company announced that Zhejiang had agreed to convert $1.5 million of its current 
$12 million debt to 15 million KDL shares at a share price of $0.10 per share. Of which, 12 KDL million 
shares are held by Zhejiang and remaining 3 KDL million shares are held by nominees.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
17
3.9.  Share price analysis
The table below summarises trades over the last 12 months up until 19 February 2016, being the latest 
practicable date prior to the issue of this Report.
Table 16: Volume Weighted Average Share Price of Daily Trades
High
Low
VWAP
Total Volume 
Traded
Annualised Turnover 
(Note 1)
($)
($)
($)
('000s)
As at 19 Feb 2016
0.10
0.10
0.10
20
5 days to 19 Feb 2016
0.10
0.10
0.10
26
1 month to 19 Feb 2016
0.10
0.08
0.09
719
3 months to 19 Feb 2016
0.13
0.06
0.08
5,278
6 months to 19 Feb 2016
0.13
0.06
0.08
8,477
12 months to 19 Feb 2016
0.24
0.06
0.09
20,860
(%)
4.2%
1.1%
7.1%
19.7%
15.6%
19.6%
Sources:  Capital IQ; BDOCF analysis
Note 1:
Annualised turnover is calculated as period turnover divided by trading days in the period, multiplied by trading days in the 
year.
Legend:   VWAP denotes volume weighted average share price.
KDL shares traded between $0.06 per share and $0.24 per share.
We note the following with respect to KDL shares during the 12 months up until 19 February 2016, being the 
latest practicable date prior to the issue of this Report: 
• 
•
On eight separate days over the period analysed, the daily volume traded was greater than 
500,000 shares. These spikes in volume are charted below. Whilst on some days announcements to the 
ASX were made (which provides possible reasons for the unusual trading activity), reasons for the 
unusual trading activity were not always traceable to any particular event.
•
•
Volume weighted average prices (VWAP) are observed to have been relatively consistent across the 
selected time periods, falling within a range of $0.08 to $0.10 per share.
Trading in KDL shares has been relatively illiquid with only 19.6% of shares traded over the 12 months 
to 19 February 2016, and 70 out of 255 days where no trading occurred at all.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
18
Table 17: Daily Closing Share Prices and Volumes from 19 February 2015 to 19 February 2016
Sources:  Capital IQ; BDOCF analysis
KDL shares trading demonstrate higher volatility compared to the ASX All Ordinaries over the trading period 
to 19 February 2016. Factors which may have had an impact on trading in KDL shares are detailed below:
Table 18: KDL ASX Announcements
Note
Date 
range(s)
Announcement Details
A
B
C
D
E
F
18 Mar 15 to 
25 Mar 2015
No announcements released between 18 March 2015 and 
25 March 2015. Prior to those dates, the Company announced 
its FY15 half-yearly results on 13 March 2015. In particular, 
the Company reported its half-year FY15 operating loss was 
approximately $9.3 million compared to half-year FY14 
operating loss of approximately $6.9 million.
19 May 15 to 
22 May 15
No announcements released on or around 20 May 2015. 
On 26 May 2015, KDL announced strong production results at 
Ellendale Diamond Mine.
2 Jun 15 to 
19 Jun 15
Kimberley Diamonds released an announcement on 2 June 
2015. The company announced that its wholly owned 
Botswana subsidiary, Lerala Diamond Mines Limited has 
successfully earned a 50% interest in its Botswana joint 
venture over the initial 12 months of the joint venture.
22 Jun 15 to 
25 Jun 15
The Company announced the commission of resource 
estimation for its Lomero gold-silver copper-zinc project in 
Southern Spain on 22 June 2015.
29 Jul 15 to 
31 Jul 15
The Company announced on 31 July 2015 that it had received 
a further AUD$3.2 million in loan funds from Zhejiang 
Huitong Auction Co Ltd.
13 Sep 15 to 
16 Sep 15
On 16 September 2015, ASIC announced that former Kimberly 
Diamonds chief and chairman, Alexandre Alexander, was 
charged for allegedly issuing false information to the market.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
Share price
movement over
date range %
Volume 
(million)
-16.3%
0.6835
6.6%
0.7173
146%
4.3848
11.5%
0.4775
11.7%
0.0642
-32.2%
0.5486
19
Table 18: KDL ASX Announcements
Note
Date 
range(s)
G
11 Dec 15
H
14 Jan 16
Announcement Details
No announcements released on or around December 2015. 
The latest announcement for 2015 was in November 2015 
where the Company provided an update on recent activities, 
in particular, the on-site civil construction work at its Lerala 
Mine in Botswana remained on schedule on 30 November 
2015.
No announcements released on or around 14 January 2016. 
However, the Company released issued a mineral resource 
and ore reserve statement on 7 January 2016, followed by a 
revised statement on 11 January 2016.
I
4 Feb 16 to 
9 Feb 16
The Company announced its Botswana subsidiary, Lerala 
Diamond Mines Limited has entered into a diamond sales 
agreement with a third party, Restwell Investments Pty Ltd.
Source: ASX announcements
Share price
movement over
date range %
Volume 
(million)
7.3%
1.1597
-25.0%
0.0126
25.0%
0.2020
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
20
4.
INDUSTRY
4.1.  Overview
KDL owns the Lerala Diamond Mine in Botswana, Africa spanning an area of 21.86 km².
The global diamond mining industry (Industry) comprises mining, sorting and sale of rough diamonds. 
Diamonds can either be used for industrial and manufacturing purposes due to their strength and durability 
(rough diamond), or they are exported as a gem-cut product (polished diamond) used for jewellery 
manufacturing.
According to the World Diamond Council, approximately 30% of the diamonds mined are gem-grade whilst 
the remaining 70% are used for other purposes. The industrial diamonds are the smallest, lowest value 
stones and mostly diamonds for industrial use are now synthetically made. The gem-grade diamonds 
generate the most value, it represents approximately 95% of the value of production.
Set out below an illustration of the main producers of diamonds:
Table 19: Production of top diamond mining companies from 2008 to 2015
'
)
s
0
0
0
(
 
s
t
a
r
a
c
 
,
e
m
u
l
o
V
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
0
2008
2009
De beers
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Alrosa
Dominion
Rio tinto
Petra
BHP
Source: www.diamonds.net; data published by ALROSA, De Beers and Anglo American, Rio Tinto, BHP Billiton and
Dominion Diamond Corp and Petra Diamonds. Dominion bought its majority stake in the Ekati mine from BHP 
Billiton in April 2013 and BDO analysis
In 2015, ALROSA and De Beers made up 73% of total diamonds produced by the main producers. As a result 
of the higher volume production compared to their peers, ALROSA and De Beers have a substantial market 
share and are able influence the market through their supply.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
21
Illustrated in the chart below is the production by top five diamonds producing countries in the last 10 years 
to 2014.
Table 20: Production by top five diamond producing countries in the last 10 years to 2014
s
t
a
r
a
c
 
s
0
0
0
'
 
,
e
m
u
l
o
V
160,000
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
0
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Russia Federation
Botswana
Democratic Republic of Congo
Canada
Australia
Source: https://kimberleyprocessstatistics.org, BDO analysis
The total volume produced by the top five diamond producing countries has declined substantially since 
2009 primarily from reduced supply in Democratic Republic of Congo and Botswana.
Illustrated below the top 10 diamond producing countries by volume and value:
Table 21: Top 10 producing countries by volume and value in 2014
'
)
s
0
0
0
(
 
s
t
a
r
a
c
 
,
e
m
u
l
o
V
45,000
 40,000
 35,000
 30,000
 25,000
 20,000
 15,000
 10,000
 5,000
-
Source: https://kimberleyprocessstatistics.org, BDO analysis
Volume ('000s cts)
Value (US$m)
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
s
n
o
i
l
l
i
'
m
$
S
U
 
,
e
u
l
a
V
4,000
 3,500
 3,000
 2,500
 2,000
 1,500
 1,000
 500
 -
22
Russia is the largest diamond producing country by volume and value, followed closely by Botswana. 
In 2014, Botswana produced US$3.6 billion of diamonds.
The diamond supply chain is quite extensive and involves a range inputs at each stage. Uncontracted rough 
diamonds are typically auctioned at the main hubs in Antwerp, Israel and Dubai to the middle market that 
dominate diamond financing who then distribute them to retailers to sell to the public.
Table 22: Value chain
Exploration
and
production
Rough-
diamond
sorting and 
valuation
Middle Market
Rough-
diamond sales
Cutting and
polishing
Polished-
diamond sales
Jewellery
manufacturing
Retail sales
Miners
Other rough-
diamond 
traders
Cutters and
polishers
(independent)
Polished-
diamond 
traders
(independent)
Jewellery
manufacturers 
(independent)
Retailers
(Independent)
Long-term contract holders
Source: The Global Diamond Report 2014 by Bain & Company, Inc.
4.2.  Key drivers
Diamonds are a natural resource with limited life. Based on data for the world’s 54 largest mines, the 
10 largest mines are estimated to comprise approximately 61% of total global supply in 2015. Key drivers of 
the Industry are as follows: 
•
Global macroeconomic outlook: The value of production is largely driven by the rarity and uniqueness
of the natural resource and sale of gem-grade quality as luxury items. Demand for diamonds generally
grows in line with GDP growth.
•
•
•
•
Limited supply of natural diamonds: Given their production volume and market share, ALROSA and
De Beers have historically been price setters in the Industry and middle market players have been the
price takers. The declining reserves, increasing costs and lower grades contribute to diamond pricing.
Shift in emerging markets: Developing markets with higher socioeconomic consumers contribute to
the demand for diamonds. China and India are emphasised by analysts as key drivers to future
demand.
Consumer preferences: Consumers increasingly prefer branded luxury items. Changing consumer
preferences influence the demand for diamonds. Another change noted in consumers is that
investment in diamonds is becoming increasing popular, especially in Asia. High-net-worth individuals
buy rare high quality diamonds and store them away in anticipation of price appreciation.
The investment community for diamonds is still small, estimated to be less than 1% of current diamond
demand.
Alternatives: As technology becomes more sophisticated gems are used as replacement for natural
products and add downward pressure on pricing of natural diamonds. Lab-grown diamonds are usually
30% to 40% cheaper than its natural counterparts. However, there is no substitute for rare and unique
qualities of natural diamonds. If natural diamond deposits are exhausted, there may be broader
acceptance of lab-grown diamonds. Meanwhile, lab-grown diamonds are likely to have a greater
impact on industrial demand than retail.
On the other hand, as high quality rough diamonds become more difficult to source and more
expensive to produce, the Industry is seeing higher levels of recycled diamonds. However, sales are
not occurring frequently enough to significantly impact the market.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
23
4.3.  Key markets to KDL
4.3.1.
Antwerp, Belgium
KDL through the Proposed Transactions would be selling diamonds in Antwerp for a period of a year up to 
March 2017.
According to Antwerp Diamond Report 2014, approximately 84% of the world's rough diamonds pass through 
Antwerp. Antwerp remains the preferred partner and leader in the global diamond trade.
Illustrated in the chart below is the value per carat for rough diamonds (import and export) in Antwerp in 
the last six years to 2014.
Table 23: Value per carat (import and export) in Antwerp from 2009 to 2014
t
a
r
a
c
 
r
e
p
 
$
S
U
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Rough Diamond Import (US$/cts)
Rough Diamond Export (US$/cts)
Source: https://www.awdc.be/en/publications, BDO analysis
In 2011, the value of the rough diamonds per carat increased by over 50% for both imports and exports in 
Antwerp. The 2011 pricing appeared to have set a benchmark for the years from 2011 to 2014 with minimal 
volatility observed. The above observed prices in 2011 onwards are higher than analysts estimated price for 
global average price per carat in 2015 of US$103 per carat.
4.3.2.
Botswana, Africa
In 2014, Botswana produced approximately 20% of total volume produced by the top 10 diamond producing 
countries. Diamonds purchased in the region from international buyers has increased significantly due to 
De Beers’ set up of their global sales operation in the country’s capital city, Gaborone, in 2013.
The Botswana Government has implemented new policies and/or proposed changes for mining in Botswana: 
• 
•
The Botswana Government has the option of acquiring up to 15% working interest participation in each
A reduction in the company tax rate from 25% to 22%
mine.  Each mining licence has an initial period of 25 years
•
Aim to reduce red tape and increase profitability across the sector
In the 12th Edition of Doing Business 2015 Report by the World Bank Group, Botswana ranked as the 74th 
country where the regulations are business-friendly. The ease of doing business index ranks economies from 
1 to 189, with first place (Singapore) being the most business-friendly. Botswana is also the most 
creditworthy nation in Africa rated A- by S&P in 2014.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
24
4.4.  Current performance
The Industry performance has been relatively volatile over the past five years. Fluctuating production 
volumes and prices have underpinned this volatility.
Since the global financial crisis, the compound annual growth rate (CAGR) over the five years from 2009 for 
global diamond consumption was 5% for diamond jewellery and 6% for polished diamonds. Rough-diamond 
revenues grew 8% in 2014 due to higher sales by the top five producers. Despite the growth of the overall 
market, prices of rough diamonds have fallen by 15% since the beginning of 2015.
Table 24: Polished diamond sales value – growth by Geography (US$billion, nominal)
n
o
i
l
l
i
b
$
S
U
'
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
US
Japan
Gulf
China
India
Rest of World
Source: De Beers Insight Report 2015
Between the years 2010 to 2014, many new jewellery shops were opened in China and created a temporary 
boost in demand. Since then, China’s slowing GDP growth resulted in reduced demand for diamonds from 
the second largest diamond market.
Rough-diamonds are generally priced in US dollars. The growing strength of the US dollar in 2014 against 
the currencies of these markets also contributed in lower demand for rough diamonds.
The changing macroeconomic factors and tightening credit conditions have also placed margin pressure on 
middle-market companies which are forced to re-evaluate their business models. De Beers and ALROSA 
recognised the challenges the manufacturers and dealers faced and gave them the opportunity to defer 
allocations of the supply. In addition, De Beers and ALROSA have cut prices for their preferred customers by 
around 15% in 2015. This placed pressure on smaller producers and affected their pricing and margins.
The softened retail demand in 2015 made its way down the value chain and led to falling prices and 
decreased rough-diamond sales.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
25
4.5.
Industry outlook
According to Bain & Company, global rough-diamond demand over the next 15 years is forecasted to grow 
about 3% to 4% annually, and the supply is projected to decline by 1% to 2%, resulting in a widening gap 
between supply and demand starting in 2019. This is largely due to fundamental supply and demand factors 
rather than macroeconomic volatility. Bain & Company foresees the global supply of rough diamonds 
declining on average by 1% to 2% annually from 2015 to 2030 due to aging and depletion of existing mines 
and limited supply. Analysts forecast that global average price per carat would reach approximately US$119 
in 2020, being a CAGR of 2.93% over the next five years from 2015.
China, India and the US are expected to continue to be major diamond jewellery consumers, driving 
rough-diamond demand. In particular, India is transitioning from an emerging diamond market to a more 
mature market due to middle-class expansion and engagement ring penetration. Demand from Indian 
market is set to rise by 8% to 9% per year in mid-term and then decelerate to 4% to 5% average annual 
growth.
An early start in production would assist to increase KDL’s chances to strengthen its revenue and achieve 
profitability in the current challenging Industry conditions.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
26
5.
FAIRNESS ASSESSMENT
5.1.  General considerations
5.1.1.
Overview
RG 111 sets out the appropriate methodologies that a valuer should generally consider when valuing assets 
or securities. Details of common methodologies for valuing businesses and assets are included in Appendix 3 
and details of common valuation methodologies for derivatives are included at Appendix 4.
RG 111 does not prescribe the valuation methodologies that an expert should use in preparing its report, 
rather an expert should exercise its own skill and judgment to choose methodologies that are appropriate in 
the circumstances of the entity or the asset being valued. Therefore, in determining the fairness of the 
Proposed Transactions, we have had regard to valuation theory, the accepted and most common market 
practice in valuing the entity or asset in question and the availability of relevant information.
In undertaking our fairness opinion we have had regard to RG 111. RG 111.57 states that “the proposed 
related party transaction is ‘fair’ if the value of the financial benefit to be provided by the entity to the 
related party is equal to or less than the value of the consideration being provided to the entity.”
In accordance with RG 111.11, we have considered the fair market value of the subject of the offer on the 
basis of “a knowledgeable and willing, but not anxious, buyer and a knowledgeable and willing, but not 
anxious, seller acting at arm’s length”.
5.1.2.
Fairness assessment approach
We have formed our opinion in relation to fairness by comparing the Proposed Transactions as a whole. 
Our fairness assessment involves comparing the following to determine whether a financial benefit has been 
provided to DDA from any of the below:
Terms of the DDA Commission against publicly available reference market terms
Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement  
• 
• 
•
Terms of the DDA Interest to alternative funding sources
Proceeds of the sale of the assets under the DDA Security and the value of liability owing to DDA in the
event of a default
•
The terms of the DDA Options against the risks undertaken by DDA as a whole for providing the
DDA Loan.
Offtake Agreement  
•
Terms of the Offtake Agreement against historical terms achieved by KDL.
5.1.3.
Other valuation considerations
5.1.3.1.  Future events
The business of KDL to be considered in this fairness assessment is that which exists as at the current date.
Growth opportunities which may result from the commencement of production activities, business 
initiatives, acquisitions and the like (which are not capable of estimation), are not within the scope of this 
fairness assessment.
5.1.3.2.  Special value
We have not considered special value in forming our opinion.
5.1.3.3.  Valuation in Accordance with APES 225
This engagement has been conducted in accordance with professional standard APES 225 Valuation Services, 
as issued by the Australian Professional and Ethical Standards Board.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
27
5.2.  Fairness of the DDA Commission
5.2.1.
Overview
In relation to the fairness of the DDA Commission, as discussed above, RG 111 requires the expert to 
compare: 
•
the  value  of  the  financial  benefit  to  be  provided  by  Lerala  to  DDA  (that  is,  fee  of  1.75%  on  gross
revenue and auxiliary expenses), with
•
the value of the consideration being provided to Lerala by DDA (that is, sales and marketing of rough
diamonds in Antwerp and/or Botswana).
The terms of the DDA Commission is ‘fair’ if the fee of 1.75% on gross revenue and auxiliary expenses to be 
provided to DDA is equal to or less than the value of the commercial market terms and rates observed from 
publicly available information.
5.2.2.
De Beers Supply Agreement
In 2015, De Beers Global Sightholder Sales (Proprietary) Limited (GSS) released a 2015-2018 Rough Diamond 
Supply Agreement (GSS Supply Agreement). The GSS Supply Agreement sets out the supply planning fee 
terms and conditions for applicants that qualify for an allocation of rough diamonds by GSS. These 
applicants would make an intention to offer, indicating the aggregate level and nature of goods that GSS 
intends to make available for inspection. In return for GSS’ planned supply services, the applicants would 
pay a fee of 1.5% of the total purchases made by the applicants plus value added tax, if applicable. 
The planned supply services include priority announcement of supply, preferred delivery schedule, demand 
tracker, box consistency, access to an administrator, dedicated point of contact, in-market meetings with 
sales team, access to applicants’ website and premium content, shipping costs, priority room booking, 
invitations to De Beers events (in-market & receptions) and BPP monitoring.
The GSS Supply Agreement is similar to the Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement between Lerala and 
DDA in that DDA provide event management services, goods management services, demand management, 
event design services and event execution to Lerala. The other services that DDA also provide to Lerala 
include participation management, reporting and sales analysis and management of the auction platform 
process.
5.2.3.
Conclusion
De Beers is one of the largest suppliers of rough diamonds in the world. It sets out the terms of its own 
supply agreement with its purchasers whilst Lerala, a significantly smaller new entrant player would have 
to engage its own agent. It is considered reasonable that the lower fee of 1.5% is based on a higher level of 
sales, hence providing economies of scale not available to DDA. For instance, De Beers’ total revenue for 
FY15 was approximately US$4.7 billion which equates to approximately US$70 million in supply fees. 
This compares to a maximum estimate of approximately US$0.5 million DDA Commission payable by KDL in 
a year (based on KDL’s estimates of 357,000 carats of production per annum for the Lerala Diamond Mine 
multiplied by the total estimated value per carat for Lerala Diamond Mine as set out in section 3.3.1 
multiplied by 1.75%).
Further, KDL management advised that the commission payable 1.75% is in their opinion based on 
commercial terms and historical payments for the services offered.
Based on the above, we have assessed the fee of 1.75% on gross revenue and auxiliary expenses to be 
provided DDA to be less than or equal to the value of the commercial market terms and rates observed from 
publicly available information.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
28
5.3.  Fairness of the DDA Interest
5.3.1.
Overview
In relation to the fairness of the DDA Interest, as discussed above, RG 111 requires the expert to compare: 
•
the value of the financial benefit to be provided by Lerala to DDA (that is, interest payment on
amounts outstanding from time to time, to be computed on a daily basis on a year of 365 days as
simple interest until the DDA Loan has been repaid in full, using an interest rate of 10% per annum),
with
•
the value of the consideration being provided to Lerala by DDA (that is, DDA Loan).
The terms of the DDA Interest is ‘fair’ if the interest rate of 10% per annum is equal to or less than the 
value of the commercial arms-length terms and rates observed from publicly available information.
5.3.2.
Considerations
We have assessed the fairness of the DDA Interest having regard to the cost of alternative funding sources 
obtained by comparable companies listed on the ASX and operating in the precious metals and gems 
industry as well as other available market evidence on cost of funding. A summary of the costs of funding 
from alternative funding sources we have considered include: 
• 
• 
•
Other  subordinated  and  hybrid  instruments  (shareholders’  loans,  hybrid  notes,  preference  shares,
Domestic bank debt or loan agreements
Corporate bonds
mezzanine debt and convertible instruments)
•
Equity.
When comparing the DDA Interest to the cost of alternative funding, we note that the Company requires 
immediate funding primarily to bring Lerala Diamond Mine to production. The Directors believe all possible 
avenues of debt funding have been investigated, and no other debt options are currently available, or likely 
to be available in the timeframes such funding is required. Therefore, any lenders would consider the 
following risks in their assessment and consequently, the required rate of return on the loans: 
• 
• 
• 
•  Working capital requirements may be higher than the DDA Loan which may impact the cash flows to
Lerala Diamond Mines is yet to commence production and as such, there is no certainty to cash flows
Full realisation of the value of diamonds is uncertain
Timing on full recovery of the loan is uncertain
the debt holder.
Based on the above, it is reasonable to assume that KDL and/or Lerala’s credit risk rating would likely to be 
BBB- or lower.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
29
5.3.2.1.  Lending rates of loans facilities of comparable companies in the precious metals and gems
sector and gold industry
We have considered any loan facilities provided by banks, third parties and related parties to comparable 
companies within the precious metals and gems sector and gold industry. They are noted below:
Table 25: Loan facilities of comparable companies
Date
Borrower
Amount
Term /
Interest rate
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd 
(Diamonds)1,5
A$10m
maturity date
2 years
5% p.a
Zimplats Holdings Limited 
(Platinum)2,6
Zimplats Holdings Limited 
(Platinum)2,7
Lindian Resources Limited 
(Copper-gold)3,7
Lindian Resources Limited 
(Copper-gold)3,7
RNI NL 
(Copper-gold)4,7
US$75m
1-5 years
LIBOR plus 7% margin
US$24m
6 -12 months
LIBOR plus 2.6% per annum
A$250,000
31 Dec 15
10% flat rate
A$120,000
31 Dec 15
6% flat rate
A$23m
30 Nov 15
- 12.5% p.a for the first six 
months 
- 13.5% p.a for the remainder 
of the facility term
30/06/2015
30/06/2015
30/06/2015
7/05/2015
26/11/2014
20/01/2012
Source:
1.  KDL Debt Finance ASX announcement dated 12 October 2015 
2.  Zimplats FY15 Integrated Annual Report 
3. 
4.  RNI NL Taurus facility details
Lindian Resources Ltd FY14 Annual report
Notes:
5.  Zhejiang may elect for one third of the loan to be repaid in KDL shares at a 20% discount to the VWAP of
KDL's shares for the 20 business days prior to conversion and the loan is secured by a security interest over 
KDL's shares in Mantle Diamonds Limited (UK).
6.  The loan is secured and Impala Platinum Holdings Limited has provided political and commercial
guarantees.
7.  The loan is secured.
The interest rates from loan facilities of comparable companies ranged from 6% to 13.5%.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
30
5.3.2.2.  Corporate bonds
Outlined in the table below tradeable corporate bonds in major developed markets with S&P issuer credit 
rating of CCC+ or worse with a yield to worst of less than 50%:
Table 26: Corporate bonds
Issuer
Sec urity
rating
maturity
outstanding $m Coupon % Y ield to w orst %
Issue c redit
Date to
Amount
Hexion U.S. Finance Corp.
Hexion U.S. Finance Corp.
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Consolidated Container Company LLC
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Consolidated Container Company LLC
Senior Secured
CCC+
Ryerson I nc.
Hexion U.S. Finance Corp.
I racore I nternational, I nc.
I racore I nternational, I nc.
New Enterprise Stone & Lime Co., I nc.
Senior Subordinate CCC+
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Senior Secured
Senior Secured
CCC+
CCC+
New Enterprise Stone & Lime Co., I nc.
Senior Unsecured CCC+
AK Steel Corporation
Senior Secured
CCC+
Horsehead Holding Corp. (OTCPK:ZI NC.Q)
Senior Unsecured CCC+
AK Steel Corporation
American Gilsonite Company, Inc.
American Gilsonite Company, Inc.
Verso Paper Holdings, LLC
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Senior Secured
CCC+
Senior Unsecured CCC+
Senior Unsecured CCC
Thompson Creek Metals Company Inc. (TSX:TCM)
Senior Unsecured CCC
Cliffs Natural Resources I nc. (NYSE:CLF)
Senior Unsecured CCC
Cliffs Natural Resources I nc. (NYSE:CLF)
Senior Secured
CCC
Thompson Creek Metals Company Inc. (TSX:TCM)
Senior Unsecured CCC
Thompson Creek Metals Company Inc. (TSX:TCM)
Senior Unsecured CCC
Thompson Creek Metals Company Inc. (TSX:TCM)
Senior Unsecured CCC
Verso Paper Holdings, LLC
Verso Paper Holdings, LLC
Senior Unsecured CC
Senior Unsecured CC
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Median
Source: CapitalIQ 
Note: This data was accessed on 25 February 2016
15-Apr-18
15-Jun-17
1-Nov-20
15-Apr-18
15-Jun-17
15-Jun-17
15-Jun-19
15-Apr-20
15-Apr-20
15-Apr-20
15-Apr-20
15-Nov-19
15-May-20
1-Jun-18
1-Jun-18
15-Jul-20
15-Jul-20
15-Oct-18
1-Feb-18
1-Sep-18
1-Sep-18
15-Nov-20
15-May-19
15-May-19
307.68
417.73
461.51
307.68
822.37
822.37
400.97
2160.46
0.007
1533.24
439.06
209.08
738.46
174.23
174.23
348.46
348.46
279.47
1435.67
348.46
348.46
800.07
284.6
284.6
9.38%
8.13%
7.13%
9.38%
6.00%
6.00%
8.38%
6.63%
6.63%
6.63%
10.00%
5.00%
7.63%
9.50%
9.50%
10.13%
10.13%
11.25%
8.88%
11.00%
11.00%
9.00%
8.50%
8.50%
5.00%
11.25%
8.51%
8.69%
7.07%
7.29%
7.47%
8.09%
8.26%
8.26%
11.14%
14.25%
14.25%
14.25%
14.98%
21.93%
29.85%
35.84%
35.84%
20.43%
20.43%
31.01%
34.86%
35.79%
35.79%
38.34%
12.34%
12.34%
7.07%
38.34%
20.00%
14.62%
Generally, corporate bonds with lower ratings demand a higher yield than better rated bonds as shown 
above. The table above shows corporate bonds with CCC+ issuer credit rating or lower have a range of 
coupons from 5.0% to 11.3% and a range of yields from 7.1% to 38.3%.
5.3.2.3.  Convertible loan notes
The cost of funding (i.e. coupons) observed for ASX listed secured and unsecured convertible notes are 
summarised in the table below.
AUSTRALIAN FOUNDATION INVESTMENT COMPANY LIMITED Convertible note
Convertible note
Convertible note
Convertible note
Convertible note
Convertible note
Convertible note
CGNG
KBLGA
RSGG
AFIG
CGRG
CTNG
IANG
Table 27: Listed securities
Company
CRATER GOLD MIN LTD
KBL MINING LIMITED
RESOLUTE MINING
CML GROUP LTD
CONTANGO MICROCAP LIMITED
IAG FINANCE (NZ) LTD
LAKES OIL NL
NUFARM FINANCE (NZ)
PEET LIMITED
STOKES LTD
Average
Median
Security type
Security code
Convertible note
LKOGA
Convertible note
Convertible note
Convertible note
NFNG
PPCG
SKSG
Industry
Materials
Materials
Materials
Financials
Industrials
Financials
Financials
Energy
Financials
Financials
Industrials
Coupon
YTM/Conv.(%)
10.00%
12.00%
10.00%
6.25%
9.00%
5.50%
4.45%
10.00%
6.12%
9.50%
10.00%
8.44%
9.50%
-
-
-
n/a
-
-
4.60%
-
5.70%
8.90%
-
6.40%
5.70%
31
Source: Australian Financial Review dated 24 February 2016 and ASX website
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
The above table highlights that the average and median coupons for the convertible notes are 8.4% pa and 
9.5% pa, respectively. We note that the listed companies in the mining sector have coupon terms ranging 
from 10% to 12%.
5.3.2.4.  Cost of equity
The cost of equity observed in relation to comparable companies sourced from independent expert reports 
is tabled below.
Table 28: Cost of equity
Date
Company  Name
Nature of Assets
Loc ation
(Low ) %
(High) %
Cost Of Equity
Cost Of Equity
14/12/2015
Aquarius Platinum
Kroondal Mine
29/07/2015
Sirius Resources NL
Mimosa Mine
Platinum Mile
Tropicana JV
2/04/2015
Norton Gold Fields
Paddington Project
Platinum
Platinum
Platinum
Gold
Gold
South Africa
Zimbabwe
South Africa
Collison Zone, WA
Kalgoorlie, WA
23/06/2015
Evolution Mining
Mount Morgan
Gold Copper
Rockhampton, QLD
Cowal
Edna May
Cracow
Mt Rawdon
Mt Carlton
Pajingo
2/09/2015
Phoenix
16/07/2014 Gondwana
24/10/2014
Vantage GoldFields
16/12/2014 Orbis Gold Limited
28/11/2013
BCX Gold Investment (Gold One)
2/07/2013
Kentor Gold
Andash
27/04/2012
Chalice gold mines
Koka Gold Mine
13/09/2012
Republic Gold
Amayapampa
9/11/2012
Regis Resources
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold Silver Copper
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
NSW
WA
QLD
QLD
QLD
WA
Kyrgyz Republic
Bolivia
23/08/2012 Westgold
Westgold Projects (geared) Gold
14/02/2011
DiamonEx Limited
Lerala
Diamond
Botswana
6/10/2011
Adamus Resources
22/06/2011 Gold one
AV ERA GE
Nzema
Youga
Agbaou
Finkolo
Westgold Projects
Metals X projects
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Gold
Ghana
Burkina Faso
Cote D'Ivoire
Mali
Source: Independent expert reports 
Note 1: This refers to weighted average cost of capital, not cost of equity
16.56
21.35
16.56
6.81
10.96
14.22
10.90
9.39
9.60
17.40
16.60
16.26
21.30
17.50
16.00
7.89
20.52
15.0
(Note 1)
9.50
10.50
16.40
11.90
15.80
9.78
9.25
13.87
17.47
22.32
17.47
8.91
11.68
16.76
12.80
12.69
12.87
20.00
17.70
17.20
23.40
19.70
18.20
10.09
27.62
11.10
12.20
17.30
12.80
16.40
12.46
12.65
15.91
We note the following in relation to the above: 
•
The cost of equity is generally estimated using the capital asset pricing model and requires a level of
judgment in relation to future direction of the company, growth rates, beta, optimal gearing structure
and numerous other factors.
•
•
The weighted average cost of capital for Lerala Diamond Mine in 2011 whilst it was in development
was 15%. This indicates that the cost of equity would have been higher than 15%.
The cost of equity for precious metal (platinum) mines in South Africa ranges from 16.6% to 22.3%.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
32
5.3.3.
Conclusion
Set out below an overview of the range of costs of funding arising from various debt and equity instruments 
listed above:
Table 29: Comparable costs of funding
Comparable 
companies loan 
terms
Corporate bonds
Listed securities – 
Convertible notes
Cost of equity
Observations
Comments
•  We note that the DDA Interest of 10% falls
within the range.
•  We note that the DDA Interest of 10% falls
within the range.
•  We note that the listed companies in the
mining sector have coupon terms ranging from 
10% to 12% and that that the DDA Interest of 
10% falls within the range.
•  We note that DDA Interest of 10% falls below
the range indicated.
The interest rates from loan facilities 
of comparable companies ranged 
from 6% to 13.5%.
Corporate bonds with CCC+ rating or 
lower have a range of yields to worst 
from 7% to 38%.
The average and median coupons for 
the convertible notes are 8.4% pa and 
9.5% pa, respectively.
•
•
The weighted average cost of 
capital for Lerala Diamond Mine 
in 2011 whilst it was in 
development was 15%. 
This indicates that the cost of 
equity would have been higher 
than 15%. 
The cost of equity for precious 
metal (platinum) mines in South 
Africa ranges from 16.6% to 
22.3%.
Source: Australian Financial Review, ASX announcements, annual reports, independent expert reports, CapitalIQ, 
BDO analysis
Based on the above, we have assessed the value of the DDA Interest to be equal to or less than the value of 
costs of funding arising from various debt and equity instruments.
5.4.  Fairness of granting DDA Security
5.4.1.
Overview
In relation to the fairness of the DDA Security, as discussed above, RG 111 requires the expert to compare: 
•
the value of the financial benefit to be provided by Lerala to DDA (that is, proceeds of the sale of the
assets under the DDA Security), with
•
the value of the consideration being provided to Lerala by DDA (that is, value of the liability owing to
DDA).
The terms of the DDA Commission is ‘fair’ if the proceeds of the sale of the assets under the DDA Security is 
equal to or less than the value of liability owing to DDA in the event of a default.
5.4.2.
Considerations
In determining whether approval of the grant of the DDA Security to DDA is fair to the Non-associated 
Shareholders, we have considered the circumstances under which DDA could enforce the DDA Security in an 
event of default.
If an event of default has arisen and is not waived, DDA would be entitled to enforce the DDA Security by 
selling the secured diamonds in good faith, on an arms-length basis and consistent with normal commercial 
practices. An event of default occurs if Lerala or KDL suffer from an insolvency event or Lerala fails to 
repay DDA the amount of any of the DDA Loan advanced.
Given the indeterminacy of any potential future transaction, we have undertaken analysis as to the 
expected process that would be followed should an event of default occur and DDA take steps to enforce its 
security.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
33
If DDA exercises its rights, the sale of the secured diamonds are required to be dealt with in a manner 
which attempts to realise market value as at the time of the sale which may occur in the form of the 
following three alternative scenarios: 
•
If the realised market value of the secured diamonds is less than the total amount owing to DDA under
the DDA Commission and DDA Loan, than DDA will receive the realised market value of the secured
diamonds.
•
•
If the realised market value of the secured diamonds is the same as the total amount owing to DDA
under the DDA Commission and DDA Loan, than DDA will receive the realised market value of the
secured diamonds.
If the realised market value of the secured diamonds is more than the total amount owing to DDA
under the DDA Commission and DDA Loan, than DDA will only receive the amount owing to them.
5.4.3.
Conclusion
Based on the above, we have assessed the value of the DDA Security to be equal to or less than the value of 
the liabilities.
5.5.  Fairness of DDA Options
5.5.1.
Overview
The DDA Options are an additional cost of funding required by DDA to provide working capital facilities to 
Lerala. Therefore, the terms of the DDA Options are ‘fair’ if the value of the DDA Options plus the 
DDA Interest is equal to or less than the value of the cost of funding for similar credit risk profile issuance.
5.5.2.
Value of DDA Options
We have assessed the fair market value of the DDA Options using a binomial option pricing model with 
regards to the following terms and assumptions:
Table 30: Overview of the key terms of the DDA Options
Parameters
Selected input
Basis
Valuation date
19 February 2016
Assuming valuation date is the latest practicable date prior to the
Share price
Exercise price
Expected life
$0.09
$0.20
3 years
Risk free interest rate
2.43%
Dividend yield
0%
Expected volatility
100%
Other
issue of this Report
One month VWAP to 19 February 2016
As per the DDA Options terms
As per the DDA Options terms
Based on a continuous compounding yield of a 3-year Australian
Government bond rate as at 19 February 2016
KDL’s average forecast annual dividend yield over the next three
years
In determining the expected volatility, we have taken into account
the last three years historical market price volatility of KDL
We have not assumed: 
•
Any change of control events or reorganisation of capital during
the term of the DDA Options
•
Any dilution effect from the issue of the DDA Options noting
that they will not likely to have a material impact upon the
Source: Terms of the DDA Options, RBA website, CapitalIQ, BDO analysis
share price of KDL
Based on the above, we have estimated the costs of the DDA Options to be approximately $0.21 million 
which represents approximately 6% of total loan advanced (being, $0.21 million divided by the maximum
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
34
DDA Loan of approximately $3.9 million (being, US$2.8 million converted at the AUD:USD rate of 0.7159 on 
19 February 2016)).
The total costs of funding would be the value of the annualised interest cost plus the value of the options as 
a percentage of the DDA Loan. This equates to an annualised rate of approximately 15.5% (being, 
$0.21 million + 10% x $3.9 million ÷ $3.9 million).
5.5.3.
Conclusion
We refer to section 5.3.2.2 above in relation to corporate bond analysis, where we observed that corporate 
bonds with CCC+ issuer credit rating or lower have a range of yields to worst from 7.1% to 38.3%. The total 
costs of funding (i.e. DDA Options plus DDA Interest) of approximately 15.5% fall within the range of the 
costs of funding for similar credit risk profile issuance. Therefore, the terms of the DDA Options are ‘fair’ 
for the risks undertaken by DDA as a whole for providing the DDA.
5.6.  Fairness of DDA Offtake Agreement
5.6.1.
Overview
The terms of the Offtake Agreement would be ‘fair’ if they are equal to or less than the historical terms 
achieved by KDL.
5.6.2.
Considerations
The most recent comparable offtake agreement would be the offtake agreement entered into between 
Lerala and Restwell on 3 February 2016. Set out in the table below an overview of the key terms in the 
agreement.
Table 31: Overview of the key terms of the offtake agreement between Lerala and Restwell
Key terms
Details
Quantity
Price
Delivery
Shortfall
•
• 
•
• 
• 
•
•
Restwell to purchase US$6 million worth of rough diamonds from Lerala. The valuation of
each stone will be based on a valuation report undertaken by a licensed independent
diamond valuation specialist appointed by the parties.
Valuation of the shipment less a 15% discount.
If Restwell elects for the sale of the rough diamonds to be sold by Lerala to a third party
instead of to Restwell directly, only a 10% discount will be applied.
Restwell must pay Lerala a prepayment of US$1.0 million on or before 1 March 2016.
The rough diamonds are to be shipped to Restwell in China by 31 March 2017.
Lerala expects to commence mining sometime in April 2016 with first diamond sales
expected in June 2016. If there is any delay and Lerala has not commenced selling rough
diamonds by July 2016, the parties will discuss amendments to timing.
Lerala has obtained Botswana Government approval to sell its diamonds outside of Botswana
from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017. If this approval is revoked, a required Botswana
Government Approval is not obtained, or the total quantity is not delivered on or prior to
31 March 2017, the parties agree that the offtake agreement will terminate immediately and
the quantity (in whole or in part) outstanding will not be sold to Restwell.
Source: Restwell offtake agreement
5.6.3.
Conclusion
From the above, we note the terms are similar except that the pricing of the rough diamonds in the DDA 
Offtake has a 10% discount to valuation which is of better terms to the Restwell offtake agreement of 15% 
discount to valuation. Therefore, we have assessed the value of the terms of the Offtake Agreement to be 
less than the historical terms achieved by KDL.
5.7.  Overall fairness conclusion
Based on the assessments above, the Proposed Transactions as a whole is fair to the Non-associated 
Shareholders.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
35
6.
REASONABLENESS ASSESSMENT
In accordance with RG 111 an offer is reasonable if it is fair. An offer may also be considered reasonable if 
it is not fair.
We have performed an assessment of reasonableness as provided below. Set out below is a summary of the 
factors we have considered in our reasonableness assessment.
6.1.  Advantages
6.1.1.
Secured offtake
The Proposed Transactions provide KDL with a guaranteed offtake of the output of the Lerala Diamond 
Mine.
6.1.2.
Liquidity
Trading in KDL shares has been illiquid. If the Proposed Transactions are approved and implemented and 
that KDL becomes fully operational, this provides the KDL Shareholders with an opportunity to realise value 
for their shares which otherwise may be limited.
6.1.3.
Provision of funding certainty
If the Proposed Transactions are approved and implemented along with a successful rights issue to raise 
$4.0 million, KDL has stated that they will have access to sufficient cash to complete the commissioning of 
the Lerala Diamond Mine and to produce diamonds. This certainty of funding may have the impact of 
increasing the KDL share price and remove the going concern qualification in the KDL accounts as well as 
reducing the exposure to risks and uncertainties inherent in the continuing operation of KDL.
6.1.4.
No alternative proposals
The Directors of KDL have considered a range of strategic options for the Company including both additional 
debt and equity, which has included preliminary discussions with other potential capital providers. 
However, the Directors have advised that there are no other sources of funding for KDL at the date of this 
Report.
6.2.  Disadvantages
6.2.1.
Transaction costs
As part of the Proposed Transactions, KDL has advised it will incur transaction costs of approximately 
$55,000. We note that the majority of these transaction costs will have been incurred prior to the EGM and 
are not dependent upon the outcome of the meeting.
6.2.2.
Reduced level of diamonds available to other customers
The terms of the Proposed Transactions limit the amount of diamonds (if any) that are able to be sold to 
other purchasers other than DDA. There is a possibility that sales prices to other parties (recognising that 
these sale prices are not interdependent upon the provision of funding or guaranteed offtake volumes) may 
be higher than those able to be achieved from DDA.
6.2.3.
Ability to raise additional funding
The granting of the DDA Security may limit the ability for KDL to raise additional finance to enable it to 
increase expenditure on the Lerala Diamond Mine. Given the discussion at section 6.1.4 above, this is not 
considered a material disadvantage.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
36
6.3.  Other factors
6.3.1.
If the proposal does not proceed
If the Proposed Transactions were not approved and implemented, there would continue to be a going 
concern issue for KDL. This would have an impact on the share price of KDL and the ability of the entity to 
continue operations.
6.3.2.
Independent Directors recommendations and intentions
In the absence of a superior proposal and subject to the Independent Expert concluding that the Proposed 
Transactions are fair and reasonable, the Independent Directors have unanimously recommended that 
Non-associated Shareholders vote in favour of the Proposed Transactions in the absence of any other 
competing offer.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
37
7.
QUALIFICATIONS, DECLARATIONS AND CONSENTS
7.1.  Qualifications
BDOCF is the licensed corporate finance arm of BDO East Coast Partnership, Chartered Accountants and 
Business Advisers. BDOCF provides advice in relation to all aspects of valuations and has extensive 
experience in the valuation of corporate entities and provision of expert’s reports.
Mr Dan Taylor, B.Com and CA, is a director of BDOCF. Mr Taylor is also a partner of BDO East Coast 
Partnership. Mr Taylor has been responsible for the preparation of this IER.
Mr Taylor has over 20 years’ experience in Corporate Finance. He has undertaken numerous specialist 
Corporate Finance activities including company valuations, due diligence investigations, preparation and 
review of business feasibility studies, preparation of independent expert's reports, preparation of 
information memoranda and other corporate investigations. Accordingly, Mr Taylor is considered to have 
the appropriate experience and professional qualifications to provide the advice offered.
Mr David McCourt, BBus, CA, is a director of BDOCF. Mr McCourt is also a partner of BDO East Coast 
Partnership.
Mr McCourt is the director responsible for the review of this IER. Mr McCourt has over 16 years experience in 
a number of specialist corporate advisory activities including company valuations, financial modelling, 
preparation and review of business feasibility studies, accounting, advising on mergers and acquisitions and 
advising on independent expert reports. Accordingly, Mr McCourt is considered to have the appropriate 
experience and professional qualifications to provide the advice offered.
7.2.  Independence
We are not aware of any matter or circumstance that would preclude us from preparing this IER on the 
grounds of independence either under regulatory or professional requirements. In particular, we have had 
regard to the provisions of applicable pronouncements and other guidance statements relating to 
professional independence issued by Australian professional accounting bodies and ASIC.
Prior to accepting this engagement, we considered our independence in regard to KDL with reference to 
RG 112.
BDOCF and BDO East Coast Partnership have provided a range of services to KDL including acting as the 
independent external auditor (for the half year ended 31 December 2015) and conducting limited scope 
financial and tax due diligence procedures in relation to its proposed acquisition of all the shares in 
Gem Diamonds Australia Holdings Pty Ltd as the 100% owner of Kimberley Diamond NL in 2013. In addition, 
BDO East Coast Partnership’s tax practice was engaged to undertake income and payroll tax compliance 
work as well as advice on the tax consequences of undertaking the Proposed Transactions. The advice 
provided did not give any recommendations in relation to the Proposed Transactions and is not considered 
to be strategic of operational planning work in relation to RG 112.
It is our opinion that the above mentioned existing and historical relationships do not impact on our ability 
to provide an independent and unbiased report in the context of the Proposed Transactions. In our opinion 
we are independent of KDL.
We are not involved in advising on, negotiating, setting, or otherwise acting in any capacity for KDL in 
relation to the Proposed Transactions. Further, BDOCF has not held and, at the date of this IER, does not 
hold any shareholding in, or other relationship with KDL or DDA that could be regarded as capable of 
affecting its ability to provide an unbiased opinion in relation to the Proposed Transactions.
We will receive a fee of up to $35,000, plus Goods and Services Tax for the preparation of this IER. We will 
not receive any fee contingent upon the outcome of the Proposed Transactions, and accordingly, does not 
have any pecuniary or other interests that could reasonably be regarded as being capable of affecting its 
ability to give an unbiased opinion in relation to the Proposed Transactions.
Three drafts of this IER were provided to the Board and their advisors for review of factual accuracy. 
Certain changes were made to the IER as a result of the circulation of the draft IERs. However, no changes 
were made to the methodology, conclusions, or recommendations made to the Shareholders as a result of 
issuing the draft IERs.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
38
7.3.  Disclaimer
This IER has been prepared at the request of the Directors and was not prepared for any purpose other than 
that stated in this IER. This IER has been prepared for the sole benefit of the Directors and Shareholders. 
Accordingly, this IER and the information contained herein may not be relied upon by anyone other than the 
Directors and Shareholders without our written consent. We accept no responsibility to any person other 
than the Directors and Shareholders in relation to this IER.
The statements and opinions contained in this IER are given in good faith and are based upon our 
consideration and assessment of information provided by the Board, executives and management of all the 
entities.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
39
APPENDIX 1: GLOSSARY
Term
Act
ASIC
ASX
Definition
Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Australian Securities Exchange
BDOCF, we, us or our
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd (ABN 70 050 038 170)
Board
CAGR
DDA
DDA Commission
DDA Interest
DDA Loan
DDA Offtake
DDA Options
DDA Security
Board of directors of KDL
Compound annual growth rate
DDA Trading BVBA
As part of the Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement, Lerala will appoint DDA as 
exclusive sales and marketing agent for the diamonds produced by Lerala Diamond Mine 
for a period of three years (with an option to renew for a further two years) and will be 
paid commission of 1.75% on diamonds sold, plus reasonable expenses
Lerala to pay 10% interest per annum to DDA on any amounts outstanding under the 
DDA Loan
DDA will provide Lerala with a working capital loan facility of up to US$2.8 million 
Lerala will enter into an offtake agreement with DDA for the supply to DDA of US$5 million 
worth of diamonds at a discount of 10% to an agreed valuation 
KDL will issue to DDA 5,000,000 options with an exercise price of $0.20 per option as 
consideration for DDA agreeing to provide the DDA Loan and that Lerala may on-lend the 
advances to KDL.
The DDA Loan is secured by collateral of diamonds produced by Lerala, with the right, title 
and interest of such diamonds to be transferred to DDA until such time as the relevant 
portion of the loan which those diamonds secure is repaid
Directors
Directors of KDL
FOS
FSG
FYxx
GSS
Financial Ombudsman Service Limited
Financial Services Guide
Financial year ended 30 June 20xx
De Beers Global Sightholder Sales (Proprietary) Limited
GSS Supply Agreement
In 2015, GSS released a 2015-2018 Rough Diamond Supply Agreement
Industry
Global diamond mining industry
KDL or the Company
Kimberley Diamonds Ltd
KDL Shareholders
Shareholders of KDL
KDC
Lerala
Licence
Listing Rule 10.1
Listing Rule 10.11
Kimberley Diamond Company NL
Lerala Diamond Mines Limited
Australian Financial Services Licence No: 247420
ASX Listing Rule 10.1 Approval required for certain acquisitions or disposals
ASX Listing Rule 10.11 Approval required for an issue of securities
Non-associated Shareholders
Non-associated shareholders of KDL
Proposed Transactions
KDL has announced that its wholly owned subsidiary, Lerala, has entered into a Diamond 
Marketing and Sales Agreement and the Offtake Agreement with DDA. Together the 
Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement and the Offtake Agreement are referred to as the 
Proposed Transactions
Report or IER
Independent expert’s report
Restwell
RG 76
RG 111
RG 112
Restwell Investments Pty Ltd
ASIC Regulatory Guide 76: Related party transactions
ASIC Regulatory Guide 111: Content of expert reports
ASIC Regulatory Guide 112: Independence of experts
Transaction Document
Notice of extraordinary general meeting and explanatory memorandum
VWAP
Zhejiang
Source: BDOCF
Volume weighted average price
Zhejiang Huitong Auction Co Ltd
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
40
APPENDIX 2: SOURCES OF INFORMATION
In preparing this IER, we had access to and relied upon the following principal sources of information:
Board paper in relation to the Transaction Document
Diamond Marketing and Sales Agreement
Transaction Document
• 
• 
• 
•  Offtake Agreement 
•
Various discussions with the Board and management of KDL as well as Company information supplied by 
management
ASIC guidance notes and regulatory guides as applicable
• 
• 
•  Other generally available public information
Information sourced from Capital IQ
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
41
APPENDIX 3: VALUATION METHODS - BUSINESSES AND ASSETS
In conducting our assessment of the fair market value of KDL shares the following commonly used business 
valuation methods have been considered:
Discounted Cash Flow Method
The discounted cash flow (DCF) method is based on the premise that the value of a business or any asset is 
represented by the present value of its future cash flows. It requires two essential elements:
• 
•
the forecast of future cash flows of the business asset for a number of years (usually five to 10 years); and
the discount rate that reflects the riskiness of those cash flows used to discount the forecast cash flows 
back to net present value (NPV).
DCF is appropriate where:
•
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
the businesses’ earnings are capable of being forecast for a reasonable period (preferably 5 to 10 years) 
with reasonable accuracy;
earnings or cash flows are expected to fluctuate significantly from year to year;
the business or asset has a finite life;
the business is in a 'start up' or  in early stages of development;
the business has irregular capital expenditure requirements;
the business involves infrastructure projects with major capital expenditure requirements; or
the business is currently making losses but is expected to recover.
Capitalisation of Earnings Method
This method involves the capitalisation of normalised earnings by an appropriate multiple. Normalised earnings are 
the assessed sustainable profits that can be derived by the vendor’s business and excludes any one off profits or 
losses. An appropriate earnings multiple is assessed by reference to market evidence as to the earnings multiples 
of comparable companies.
This method is suitable for the valuation of businesses with indefinite trading lives and where earnings are 
relatively stable or a reliable trend in earnings is evident.
Net Asset Value
Asset based valuations involve the determination of the fair market value of a business based on the net realisable 
value of the assets used in the business.
Valuation of net realisable assets involves:
•
•
separating the business or entity into components which can be readily sold, such as individual business 
Shares or collection of individual items of plant and equipment and other net assets; and
ascribing a value to each based on the net amount that could be obtained for this asset if sold.
The net realisable value of the assets can be determined on the basis of:
•
•
•
orderly realisation:  this method estimates fair market value by determining the net assets of the 
underlying business including an allowance for the reasonable costs of carrying out the sale of assets, 
taxation charges and the time value of money assuming the business is wound up in an orderly manner. 
This is not a valuation on the basis of a forced sale where the assets might be sold at values materially 
different from their fair market value;
liquidation:  this is a valuation on the basis of a forced sale where the assets might be sold at values 
materially different from their fair market value; or
going concern:  the net assets on a going concern basis estimate the market value of the net assets but 
does not take into account any realisation costs. This method is often considered appropriate for the 
valuation of an investment or property holding company. Adjustments may need to be made to the book 
value of assets and liabilities to reflect their going concern value.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
42
The net realisable value of a trading company’s assets will generally provide the lowest possible value for the 
business. The difference between the value of the company’s identifiable net assets (including identifiable 
intangibles) and the value obtained by capitalising earnings is attributable to goodwill.
The net realisable value of assets is relevant where a company is making sustained losses or profits but at a level 
less than the required rate of return, where it is close to liquidation, where it is a holding company, or where all 
its assets are liquid. It is also relevant to businesses which are being segmented and divested and to value assets 
that are surplus to the core operating business. The net realisable assets methodology is also used as a check for 
the value derived using other methods.
These approaches ignore the possibility that the company’s value could exceed the realisable value of its assets.
Quoted Market Prices
The application of the price that a company’s shares trade on the ASX is an appropriate basis for valuation where:
•
•
the shares trade in an efficient market place where ‘willing’ buyers and sellers readily trade the 
company’s shares; and
the market for the company’s shares is active and liquid.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
43
APPENDIX 4: VALUATION METHODS - DERIVATIVES
In conducting our assessment of the fair market value of options the following commonly used valuation methods 
have been considered:
Black Scholes Option Pricing Model
Used to value European call options, this methodology takes into account the:
•
•
•
•
•
Exercise price of the option
Current price of underlying stock
Volatility of the price of underlying stock
Time to expiry of option
Risk free rate of return
Binomial and Trinomial Method
The value of an American option exercisable at various times (up to expiry) can be determined using the binomial 
tree method.
This method considers the different possible paths that may be followed by the stock price over the life of the 
option.
The trinomial method is an extension of the binomial options pricing model and is conceptually similar.
Monte Carlo Simulation
Monte Carlo simulation undertakes valuations where a selected valuation input factor (or factors) has inherent 
uncertainty as to its value. Monte Carlo simulation undertakes analysis by building models of multiple possible 
results by substituting a range of values (based on an assumed a probability distribution), for any selected factor 
that has inherent uncertainty as to its value.
Monte Carlo simulation re-calculates the model and records the results of each re-calculation over and over, each 
time using a different random value for any selected factor that has inherent uncertainty as to its value, sourced 
from the probability function. Monte Carlo simulation produces a distribution of possible outcome values. 
The multiple outcome values are then weighted by a probability estimate for each value (sourced from within the 
model) to produce a single point value.
BDO Corporate Finance (East Coast) Pty Ltd
44
GPO Box 3993 
Sydney NSW 2001 Australia 
+61 2 9290 9655
All Correspondence to: 
     By Mail     Boardroom Pty Limited 
             
             
  By Fax:  
    Online:     www.boardroomlimited.com.au  
  By Phone: (within Australia) 1300 737 760
(outside Australia) +61 2 9290 9600
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT 
For your vote to be effective it must be recorded before 10:00am AEST on Sunday 25 September 2016.
   TO VOTE ONLINE
STEP 1:   VISIT www.votingonline.com.au/kdlegmsept2016 
STEP 2:   Enter your Postcode OR Country of Residence (if outside Australia) 
STEP 3:   Enter your Voting Access Code (VAC): 
 
 
.
BY SMARTPHONE
Scan QR Code using smartphone
QR Reader App
TO VOTE BY COMPLETING THE PROXY FORM 
 
STEP 1  APPOINTMENT OF PROXY 
Indicate who you want to appoint as your Proxy. 
If you wish to appoint the Chair of the Meeting as your proxy, mark the box. If you wish to 
appoint someone other than the Chair of the Meeting as your proxy please write the full 
name of that individual or body corporate. If you leave this section blank, or your named 
proxy does not attend the meeting, the Chair of the Meeting will be your proxy. A proxy 
need  not  be  a  security  holder  of  the  company.  Do  not  write  the  name  of  the  issuer 
company or the registered securityholder in the space. 
 
Appointment of a Second Proxy 
You are entitled to appoint up to two proxies to attend the meeting and vote. If you wish to 
appoint  a  second  proxy,  an  additional  Proxy  Form  may  be  obtained  by  contacting  the 
company’s securities registry or you may copy this form. 
 
To appoint a second proxy you must: 
(a) complete two Proxy Forms.  On each Proxy Form state the percentage of your voting 
rights  or  the  number  of  securities  applicable  to  that  form.  If  the  appointments  do  not 
specify the percentage or number of votes that each proxy may exercise, each proxy may 
exercise half your votes. Fractions of votes will be disregarded. 
(b) return both forms together in the same envelope. 
 
STEP 2  VOTING DIRECTIONS TO YOUR PROXY 
To direct your proxy how to vote, mark one of the boxes opposite each item of business. 
All your securities will be voted in accordance with such a direction unless you indicate 
only a portion of securities are to be voted on any item by inserting the percentage or 
number that you wish to vote in the appropriate box or boxes. If you do not mark any of 
the boxes on a given item, your proxy may vote as he or she chooses. If you mark more 
than one box on an item for all your securities your vote on that item will be invalid. 
 
Proxy which is a Body Corporate 
Where  a  body  corporate  is  appointed  as  your  proxy,  the  representative  of  that  body 
corporate  attending  the  meeting  must  have  provided  an  “Appointment  of  Corporate 
Representative” prior to admission. An Appointment of Corporate Representative form can 
be obtained from the company’s securities registry.
STEP 3  SIGN THE FORM  
The form must be signed as follows: 
Individual: This form is to be signed by the securityholder. 
Joint Holding: where the holding is in more than one name, all the securityholders should 
sign. 
Power of Attorney: to sign under a Power of Attorney, you must have already lodged it 
with the registry. Alternatively, attach a certified photocopy of the Power of Attorney to this 
form when you return it. 
Companies: this form must be signed by a Director jointly with either another Director or a 
Company  Secretary.  Where  the  company  has  a  Sole  Director  who  is  also  the  Sole 
Company Secretary, this form should be signed by that person. Please indicate the office 
held by signing in the appropriate place. 
 
STEP 4  LODGEMENT 
Proxy forms (and any Power of Attorney under which it is signed) must be received no later 
than 48 hours before the commencement of the meeting, therefore by 10:00am AEST on 
Sunday 25 September 2016. Any Proxy Form received after that time will not be valid for 
the scheduled meeting.  
 
Proxy forms may be lodged using the enclosed Reply Paid Envelope or: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attending the Meeting 
If you wish to attend the meeting please bring this form with you to assist registration.
www.votingonline.com.au/kdlegmsept2016 
  Online              
 
 
  By Fax             
+ 61 2 9290 9655 
 
 
  By Mail            
Boardroom Pty Limited 
                                  
GPO Box 3993, 
 
Sydney NSW 2001 Australia 
 
                                  
 In Person        
Boardroom Pty Limited 
Level 12, 225 George Street, 
 
Sydney NSW 2000 Australia
KIMBERLEY DIAMONDS LTD  
 ACN 150 737 563
PROXY FORM
APPOINT A PROXY
STEP 1 
        
I/We being a member/s of Kimberley Diamonds Ltd (Company) and entitled to attend and vote hereby appoint:
the Chair of the Meeting (mark box)
Your Address 
This  is  your  address  as  it  appears  on  the  company’s  share 
register. If this is incorrect, please mark the box with an “X” and 
make  the  correction  in  the  space  to  the  left.  Securityholders 
sponsored by a broker should advise their broker of any changes. 
Please note you cannot change ownership of your securities 
using this form.
OR if you are NOT appointing the Chair of the Meeting as your proxy, please write the name of the person or body corporate (excluding the registered shareholder) you are 
appointing as your proxy below 
 
 
 
or failing the individual or body corporate named, or if no individual or body corporate is named, the Chair of the Meeting as my/our proxy at the Extraordinary General Meeting 
of the Company to be held at the offices of Boardroom Pty Ltd, Level 12, 225 George Street, Sydney, NSW on Tuesday 27 September 2016 at 10:00am AEST and at any 
adjournment of that meeting, to act on my/our behalf and to vote in accordance with the following directions or if no directions have been given, as the proxy sees fit. 
 
The Chair of the Meeting will vote all undirected proxies in favour of all Items of business. If you wish to appoint the Chair of the Meeting as your proxy with a direction to vote 
against, or to abstain from voting on an item, you must provide a direction by marking the 'Against' or 'Abstain' box opposite that resolution.
VOTING DIRECTIONS 
* If you mark the Abstain box for a particular item, you are directing your proxy not to vote on your behalf on a show of hands or on a poll and your vote will not 
be counted in calculating the required majority if a poll is called. 
 
 
Approval for the issue of up to an additional 50 million Shares 
 
 
Approval for amendments to draw down facility
Against
For
Abstain*
STEP 2
Resolution 1
Resolution 2
STEP 3
SIGNATURE OF SHAREHOLDERS 
This form must be signed to enable your directions to be implemented.
Individual or Securityholder 1
Securityholder 2
Sole Director and Sole Company Secretary
Director
Securityholder 3
Director / Company Secretary
Contact Name……………………………………………....                Contact Daytime Telephone………………………................................                     Date                 /               /  2016