
424B3 1 northbay424b3-091113.htm northbay424b3-091113.htm
As filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3)
SEC File No.   333-190562
PROSPECTUS
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
25,368,011 Shares of Common Stock
This prospectus relates to the sale of up to 25,368,011 shares of our common stock by Tangiers Investors LP (“Tangiers”). The prices at which the selling
stockholder may sell the shares will be determined by the prevailing market price for the shares or in negotiated transactions. We will not receive proceeds
from the sale of the shares by the selling stockholder. However, we may receive proceeds of up to approximately $1,648,920.72 from the sale of our common
stock to the selling stockholder, pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement, as amended, entered into with the selling stockholder on October 7, 2009
(“Securities Purchase Agreement”), once the registration statement (“Registration Statement”), of which this prospectus is a part, is declared effective.
 
The shares offered include up to 25,368,011 shares of common stock which may be sold from time to time to Tangiers up to 60 months from the initial
effective  date  of  January  24,  2011.  The  shares  covered  herein  are  only  a  portion  of  the  shares  covered  by  the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement.  The
remaining shares that are subject of this agreement may be included in future registration statements at our option (See “About This Offering” and “Tangiers
Transaction”, below)
 
Tangiers Capital, LLC (“Tangiers Capital”), which makes the investment decisions on behalf of and controls Tangiers, is an “underwriter” within the meaning
of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We will pay the expenses of registering these shares, but all selling and other expenses incurred by Tangiers
Capital will be paid by Tangiers Capital.
 
Our common stock is quoted on OTCQB under the symbol “NBRI”. The last reported sales price of our common stock on the OTCQB on September 10,
2013, was $0.066 per share.
 
INVESTING IN OUR COMMON STOCK INVOLVES A HIGH DEGREE OF RISK. SEE “RISK FACTORS” BEGINNING ON PAGE 8 TO READ ABOUT
FACTORS YOU SHOULD CONSIDER BEFORE BUYING SHARES OF OUR COMMON STOCK.
 
NEITHER THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION NOR ANY STATE SECURITIES COMMISSION HAS APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED
OF  THESE  SECURITIES  OR  PASSED  UPON  THE  ADEQUACY  OF  ACCURACY  OF  THIS  PROSPECTUS.  ANY  REPRESENTATION  TO  THE
CONTRARY IS A CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
 
THE INFORMATION IN THIS PROSPECTUS IS NOT COMPLETE AND MAY BE CHANGED. WE MAY NOT SELL THESE SECURITIES UNTIL THE
REGISTRATION  STATEMENT  FILED  WITH  THE  SECURITIES  AND  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION  IS  EFFECTIVE.  THIS  PROSPECTUS  IS  NOT  AN
OFFER TO SELL THESE SECURITIES AND IT IS NOT SOLICITING AN OFFER TO BUY THESE SECURITIES IN ANY JURISDICTION WHERE THE
OFFER OR SALE IS NOT PERMITTED.
The date of this Prospectus is September 12, 2013
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
 
THE OFFERING
 
RISK FACTOR
 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
THE TANGIERS TRANSACTION
 
USE OF PROCEEDS
 
DETERMINATION OF OFFERING PRICE 
 
DILUTION
 
SELLING SHAREHOLDER
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
 
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
 
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES TO BE REGISTERED
1
6
8
16
16
19
20
20
21
22
23
24
26
20
INTERESTS OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
 
DISCLOSURE OF SEC POSITION OF INDEMNIFICATION FOR SECURITIES ACT LIABILITIES
 
EXPERTS
 
VALIDITY OF SECURITIES
 
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
 
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
 
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY
 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
 
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
 
COMPENSATION OF DIRECTORS
 
UNAUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE THREE AND SIX MONTH PERIODS ENDED JUNE 30, 2013
 
AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE PERIODS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012 AND DECEMBER 31, 2011
Table of Contents
GENERAL
27
27
27
27
27
66
76
76
76
78
80
82
117
As  used  in  this  Prospectus,  references  to  “the  Company,”  “North  Bay”,  “we”,  “our,”  “ours”  and  “us”  refer  to  North  Bay  Resources  Inc.,  unless  otherwise
indicated. In addition, any references to our “financial statements” are to our financial statements except as the context otherwise requires.
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights selected information contained elsewhere in this prospectus. This summary does not contain all the information that you should
consider before investing in the common stock. You should carefully read the entire Prospectus, including “Risk Factors”, “Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and the Financial Statements, before making an investment decision.
 
Corporate Background and Our Business
 
The  Company  was  incorporated  in  the  State  of  Delaware  on  June  18,  2004  under  the  name  Ultimate  Jukebox,  Inc.    On  September  4,  2004,  Ultimate
Jukebox, Inc. merged with NetMusic Corporation, and subsequently changed the Company name to NetMusic Entertainment Corporation.  On March 10,
2006, the Company ceased digital media distribution operations, began operations as a natural resources company, and changed the Company name to
Enterayon, Inc.  On January 15, 2008, the Company merged with and assumed the name of its wholly-owned subsidiary, North Bay Resources Inc.  As a
result of the merger, Enterayon, Inc. was effectively dissolved, leaving North Bay Resources Inc. as the remaining company.
 
The Company’s business plan is based on the Generative Business Model, which we believe can generate a steady stream of revenue before any property
is ever developed into a commercial mining operation.  The Generative Business Model comprises the following steps:
1.  Targeting and acquiring mining properties with good historical assays. (1)
2.  Identifying  potential  partners  for  the  development  of  each  of  the  Company’s  properties  and  entering  into  joint-venture  or  option
agreements.  In most cases, the partner is another mining company whose shares trade on a public exchange.
3.  The initial agreement usually comprises a small non-refundable cash payment in advance and a significant number of shares in the stock
of the partner or acquiring company.  Cash and shares increase in staged payments on the anniversary date of the agreement.  In the
case of an option agreement, the Company will retain a net smelter royalty ("NSR") with a buyout provision should the property be the site
of a major discovery and/or developed into a commercially-operating mine.  In the case of a joint-venture, we retain a percentage of
ownership, typically 50%, in the event the partner satisfies all the terms of the contract to completion. (2)
4.  The partner or acquiring company also must commit to a specific work program over a period of several years to develop the property,
often involving a commitment of several million dollars.
5.  We believe these work programs enable us to maintain our properties for little or no cost, as the annual maintenance fees due to the
government are offset by the amount of money spent on property exploration and development paid for by our partners.  Any surplus of
expenditures  beyond  what  is  due  to  maintain  the  properties  can  then  be  applied  as  “portable  assessment  credits”  towards  the
maintenance of other Company properties that are not yet producing revenue but which have good prospects of doing so in the future.  (3)
6.  If at any time, the partner defaults on the work agreement or does not make staged cash or stock payments by the anniversary date, the
property then reverts back to us, which then leaves us free to find another partner and begin the process all over again.
(1) The acquisition of a mining property in British Columbia conveys the mineral or placer rights for mining-related purposes only, and while our rights allow
us to use the surface of a claim for mining and exploration activities, our claims do not convey any other surface, residential or recreational rights to the
Company.  Additionally, our right to extraction is not absolute, as any mechanized extraction work on claims in British Columbia requires additional permits
and possibly conversion of our claims to mining leases, the approval of which is not guaranteed.  As of July 1, 2012 when new regulations became effective
in British Columbia, the registration fee to stake a claim in British Columbia is $1.75 per hectare. The initial term of any claim staked is one year.   This term
may be extended for up to 10 years at a time by filing a statement of work showing minimum expenditures on a mineral claim of $5 per hectare per year for
the first 2 years, $10 per hectare per year for the next 2 years, $15 per hectare per year for the following 2 years, and $20 per hectare per year for each year
thereafter. For placer claims, the annual work expenditure is $20 per hectare. In the event no work is performed by the anniversary date of each claim, the
claims may be extended for up to one year at a time by paying twice the applicable work commitment as a fee to the Province of British Columbia, which is
referred to as Cash In Lieu Of Work (“CIL Fee”). These fees are the responsibility of the Company to maintain our mineral or placer rights in good standing.
1
Table of Contents
 
(2) On June 24, 2013, the Company executed a definitive joint-venture agreement for mining operations on the Company’s 100%-owned Fraser River Project
near Lytton, British Columbia, with Solid Holdings Ltd. (“Solid”), a private company domiciled in British Columbia and based in Houston, BC. The terms of
the agreement call for Solid to provide all equipment, personnel, and related expenditures required to initiate and sustain mining operations at the Fraser
River Project JV.  The Company will be responsible for maintaining the property in good standing and securing the permits required for mining operations to
proceed.  The Company will retain 100% ownership of the property, and will be paid a 20% NSR on all metals recovered from operations, with Solid
retaining 100% of the net profits following payment of the aforementioned NSR.  Solid will be deemed the project operator, and will be responsible for the
day-to-day operations.
 
On October 24, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement on its Willa property with Caribou King Resources Ltd. ("Caribou"), a Canadian issuer listed
on the TSX Venture Exchange.  Under the terms of agreement, Caribou may earn up to a 100% interest in the claims in the Willa property (“Willa Claims”) by
making aggregate payments to North Bay of USD $232,500 in cash and issuing 1,000,000 shares of Caribou common stock.  Of the aggregate payments,
$7,500 in cash and 500,000 shares are due upon receipt of regulatory acceptance of the agreement by the TSX Venture Exchange.  This regulatory approval
has been received, and the initial consideration has been paid.  An additional $50,000 cash and 500,000 shares of Caribou stock are due upon the first
anniversary  of  the  agreement,  and  a  $175,000  cash  payment  is  due  upon  the  second  anniversary  of  the  agreement.    In  addition  to  the  consideration
received, North Bay shall be granted a royalty equal to 2% of NSR. At any time up to the commencement of commercial production, Caribou may purchase
one-half of the NSR (being 1%) in consideration of USD $1,000,000 payable to North Bay, such that North Bay will then retain a 1% NSR.
 
(3) Our primary cost in any option or joint venture agreements is typically the degree to which we give up our rights to any property.  In the case of an option
agreement, we give up all of our rights if all of the terms of the contract are fulfilled, and will only retain a NSR, typically 2%.  In the case of a joint-venture, we
will generally retain only 25% to 50% of our rights if all of the terms of the contract are fulfilled, and may be subject to further dilution should we elect not to
further participate in the joint-venture.  An exception to this is when a joint-venture is agreed to on a profit-sharing basis, where the Company elects to retain
100% ownership of the project, and both parties are obligated to contribute its share of the project development costs.
 
Our properties in British Columbia are located and acquired through the use of a suite of online applications which are provided to people and companies
licensed to acquire and maintain mineral rights within the Province of British Columbia.   Mineral Titles Online (“MTO”) is an Internet-based mineral titles
administration  system  provided  and  maintained  by  the  British  Columbia  Ministry  of  Energy,  Mines,  and  Petroleum  Resources    that  allows  the  mineral
exploration industry to acquire and maintain mineral titles by selecting the area on a seamless digital GIS map of British Columbia and pay the associated
fees electronically.
 
The MTO system is also interactively linked to British Columbia’s MINFILE Project and Assessment Report Indexing System (“ARIS”), both of which are
provided and maintained by the British Columbia Geological Survey.
 
The MINFILE Project is a mineral inventory system that contains information on more than 12,300 metallic mineral, industrial mineral and coal occurrences in
British Columbia.  It is used by industry, governments, universities and the public to find information on documented mineralization anywhere in British
Columbia, develop exploration strategies, conduct geoscience research, and evaluate the resource potential of an area.
 
The  ARIS  database  has  over  30,500  approved  mineral  exploration  assessment  reports  filed  by  the  exploration  and  mining  industry  since  1947.  These
reports provide information on geological, geophysical, geochemical, drilling and other exploration-related activities throughout B.C.
 
Both MINFILE and ARIS are interlinked with MTO, which combined and interfaced with other geospatial applications such as Google Earth, provide a skilled
user with the ability to virtually visit any location in British Columbia, analyze its geographical and geological setting, access and evaluate its geological
records and the historical archives of any prior development work, and determine the relative value of a given area.  If the area is also open to staking, a
claim can then be staked, and the required claim registration fees can be paid immediately and interactively.
 
The Company also plans on generating revenue through mining once commercial operations begin on any of its properties.  Towards this end, the Company
has acquired the Ruby Mine Property (the “Ruby Mine”) in Sierra County, California. The purchase price was $2,500,000, of which $510,000 in cash and
stock was paid as of the closing date of July 1, 2011, and the remaining $1,990,000 is a seller-financed mortgage, which as of April 1, 2013 accrues interest
at a 6% per annum.  The balance due on the mortgage is $1,901,579 as of June 30, 2013.  Pursuant to a mortgage modification agreement dated executed
on March 28, 2013, the term of the mortgage has been extended to December 30, 2015.  As part of the terms of acquisition, the seller received 10,000,000
shares of the Company’s common stock with a market value of $150,000 as of the day the agreement was signed, and which was then applied to the
purchase price.  The seller has also been granted 10,000,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.02, 2,000,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.09, and
2,000,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.10.
2
Table of Contents
 
This is an arms-length transaction, and there is no family or other relationship with any affiliate of the seller, Ruby Development Company, with any officer,
director, or affiliate of North Bay Resources Inc.
 
Operational funding for the Ruby project (“Ruby Project”) of up to $7.5 million is expected to be provided through the federal EB-5 program (the "EB-5
Program") described below.  It is expected that this funding will be non-dilutive, as no shares of Company stock will be issued to EB-5 investors.  The EB-5
funding will be debt, which must be repaid from mining operations over five years and at an interest rate of no more than 6%.  In the interim, if the Company
has not generated enough revenue from claim sales and joint-ventures to meet our commitments, we believe we can rely on loans and our equity credit line
established by way of our Securities Purchase Agreement with Tangiers Investor LP (“Tangiers”) to cover our acquisition costs.
 
The Company presently has an agreement with ACG Consulting, LLC ("ACG") intended to establish a new economic regional center ("Regional Center")
under the federal EB-5 Program  that will encompass all of Northern California's Gold Country. Once established, the Regional Center is expected to provide
full funding for the Company's prospective mining projects in Northern California.
 
EB-5 is a federal program authorized by the US Congress in the Immigration Act of 1990, and is intended to help stimulate the US economy by creating new
jobs in rural areas or areas of high unemployment. The term "EB-5" is an acronym for "the fifth employment based visa preference category." As it implies,
the source of the investment capital comes from overseas investors who wish to immigrate to the US by investing in a commercial enterprise that will benefit
the US economy and create at least 10 full-time jobs. The program is administered by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services ("USCIS"), as
provided under Section 610 of Public Law 102-395. Since its inception in 1990, the EB-5 Program has been the conduit through which over $1 billion has
been invested by foreign nationals in US enterprises to create jobs throughout the US economy.
 
A  USCIS  designated  “Regional  Center”  under  the  EB-5  Pilot  Program  is  defined  as  any  economic  unit,  public  or  private,  engaged  in  the  promotion  of
economic growth, improved regional productivity, job creation and increased domestic capital investment.
 
Once USCIS has approved a Regional Center application, an investor seeking an EB-5 green card through the Regional Center Investment Program must
make the qualifying investment of $1 million within an approved Regional Center.  If the investment is also within a USCIS-designated targeted employment
area, of which Sierra County, California, where the Ruby Mine is located, is so designated, then the minimum investment requirement is $500,000.  Before
an investor can participate in a Regional Center EB-5 investment program, each investor must independently petition USCIS for an EB-5 visa. USCIS solely
determines whether the investor qualifies for the EB-5 visa. USCIS' diligence includes a detailed review of the sources of the investor's funds, family history,
and other representations of the head of household and his immediate family members under the age of 21.  Each investor must further demonstrate that at
least 10 or more full-time jobs will be created directly or indirectly as a result of the investment into our project.
 
Upon approval by USCIS, the Regional Center will serve as the legal vehicle through which investment capital may be solicited from foreign nationals under
the EB-5 Program, in reliance upon Regulation S, to provide EB-5 financing for all approved industries within the Regional Center's designated geographical
area. The new Regional Center will encompass all of what is commonly known as "Gold Country", which traverses State Route 49 from Plumas County in
the  north  to  Mariposa  County  in  the  south.  The  full  extent  of  the  Regional  Center  is  expected  to  include  all  of  the  counties  in  Northern  California  from
Monterey up to the Oregon border, and from the Pacific coastline across to the Nevada border.
 
The agreement provides that North Bay and ACG shall form a limited liability company (“LLC”) concurrent with the filing of our Regional Center application
with USCIS, in which North Bay will own 49% of the Regional Center, and ACG will own 51%. ACG and North Bay, working together through the Regional
Center, will seek to raise up to $7.5 million in EB-5 funding for North Bay's initial mining project, subject to USCIS approval. ACG will also be an equity
partner by way of membership in a joint-venture LLC in each project North Bay may bring into the Regional Center, the amount of which will vary on a deal
by deal basis based on the amount of consulting services ACG actually provides, and the amount of EB-5 funding actually received. At the present time, no
projects other than mining are being considered, and the industry focus for the Regional Center is expected to be limited to mining initially.
 
Terms of the agreement specify that upon filing an application for a new Regional Center with USCIS, North Bay shall pay ACG up to $50,000 as its share of
the startup expenses.  In lieu of cash, North Bay may elect to issue a convertible debenture to ACG, at an interest rate of 8%, and convertible to shares of
common stock, the number of shares of which, if and when issued, shall be equal to the principal and interest to be paid on the date of conversion divided by
the prevailing market price of our common stock on the date of conversion. In the event the Company does issue a convertible debenture, we expect it to be
dilutive to shareholders, the extent of which will be determined by the market price of our shares on the day of conversion.  In addition, upon receipt by the
Company of the first tranche of EB-5 funding at a minimum of $500,000, the Company shall reimburse ACG for its share of the marketing expenses in the
amount of $110,000 cash. The Company will await guidance from USCIS after the Regional Center is established as to whether marketing costs incurred to
secure funds through the EB-5 Program can be recouped from EB-5 funds subsequently received.  Alternatively, if the Company has not generated enough
revenue from claim sales and joint-ventures to cover these costs, we believe we can rely on loans as well as our equity credit line established by way of our
Securities Purchase Agreement with Tangiers to cover these expenses.   As of December 31, 2012, the Company has paid a total of $37,216 in startup
expenses incurred by ACG to prepare and file EB-5 applications with USCIS.  These expenses have been paid in full, in cash, and as such there will be no
convertible debenture issued in connection with this agreement. As of December 31, 2012, no shares have been or will be issued in connection with this
agreement.
3
Table of Contents
 
Subsequent to the execution of the agreement with ACG, the Company was presented with the opportunity to include the Ruby Project within the scope of an
existing  USCIS-approved  EB-5  Regional  Center,  and  with  the  goal  of  expediting  the  approval  process  for  the  Ruby  Project  by  USCIS,  the  Company,
together with ACG, has entered into a Memorandum of  Understanding  with  an  existing  Regional  Center,  the  Northern  California  Regional  Center,  LLC
("NCRC").  NCRC has agreed to expand the scope of its USCIS-approved designation to include mining projects in the counties of Sierra and Nevada in
Northern California, and together with ACG has agreed to sponsor North Bay's application to obtain $7.5 million through the EB-5 Program for the Ruby
Project in Sierra County, California.
 
NCRC was approved on April 22, 2010 by USCIS as a designated EB-5 Regional Center, and is currently approved to sponsor qualifying investments in
such capacity within the Northern California counties of Colusa, Butte, Glenn, Sacramento, San Joaquin, Shasta, Sutter, Tehama, Yuba and Yolo.  Pursuant
to its regional center designation, NCRC may sponsor qualifying investments in certain industry economic sectors that do not currently include mining.  The
Memorandum  of  Understanding  provides  that  NCRC  will  seek  USCIS  approval  for  an  expansion  of  NCRC’s  Regional  Center  Geographic  Area  (the
“Expansion”) to include the counties of Nevada and Sierra, where the Ruby Mine is located, and for approval to include mining within its designated industry
sectors (the “Mining Designation”).
The applications and all supporting documentation required by USCIS were filed by NCRC in January, 2011.  In July, 2011, NCRC received formal approval
by USCIS for the expansion of the Regional Center, and the inclusion of the Ruby Mine as a qualified EB-5 project.
 
With the approval of the Expansion and Mining Designation by USCIS, NCRC is now permitted to sponsor qualified investments in North Bay’s Ruby Project
under the EB-5 Program.  The Memorandum of Understanding provides that NCRC will receive a $5,000 administrative fee to be paid by each investor
independent of the investor’s minimum EB-5 investment of $500,000.  In addition, upon the Ruby Project receiving the aggregate sum of $7,500,000 through
the EB-5 Program, NCRC shall be entitled to an undivided one and one half percent (1.5%) interest in the Ruby Project.  No shares of Company stock have
been or will be issued in connection with this agreement, and the entire EB-5 funding is expected to be non-dilutive to shareholders.  While a new Regional
Center remains a long-term goal of North Bay and ACG, the agreement to bring the Ruby Project within the scope of a pre-existing Regional Center is seen
by the Company as the most efficient and expeditious way to complete funding for the Ruby Project through the EB-5 Program in the near-term.  This is an
arms-length agreement, and neither the Company nor any of its officers or directors has any ownership position or pre-existing relationship with NCRC.
 
Procedurally, once USCIS has approved the Ruby Project, regardless of whether under the auspices of NCRC’s Regional Center or a new Regional Center
owned by North Bay and ACG, the Regional Center will organize a limited partnership (“LP”) that will be made up of the foreign investors, as limited partners,
each of whom will subscribe to a Regulation S offering and purchase a unit in the LP at the purchase price of $500,000.  Each investor will complete and
deliver to the LP a subscription agreement, and will pay a minimum of $500,000 into an escrow account, which will be held in escrow until the investor’s I-
526 petition filed with USCIS has been either approved or denied by USCIS.  If the investor’s I-526 petition is denied by USCIS the Escrow Agent will return
the investor’s funds to the investor.  If the I-526 petition is approved the Escrow Agent will pay the investment to the LP.  As each new investor's I-526 petition
is approved by USCIS and funds are released from escrow, the LP will then loan the funds to the Ruby Project.
 
To facilitate receipt by the Ruby Project of EB-5 funding from the investor LP and to comply with USCIS requirements, the Ruby Project must be organized
as an original business and a new enterprise under the EB-5 Program. Accordingly, North Bay and ACG have therefore jointly organized an appropriate
special  purpose  entity  as  a  limited  liability  company  domiciled  in  California  called  Ruby  Gold,  LLC  (the  "JV")  that  will  own  and  operate  the  Ruby
Project.  The initial ownership/membership interest in the JV will be held 60% by North Bay and 40% by ACG.  Once approved by USCIS, it is expected that
the EB-5 funding for the Ruby Project will then come from the investor LP in the form of a loan to the JV.
 
Governance of the JV shall be through a board of directors (the "JV Board"). The appointment of the members of the JV Board shall be allocated between
North Bay and ACG on a pro rata basis of their ownership/membership interest in the JV, provided however, that from the date on which the JV is organized
and at all times subsequent thereto, at least one member of the JV Board shall be appointed by ACG. The operating agreement of the JV shall provide that
the number of members of the JV Board shall be adjusted from time to time so as to reflect North Bay's and ACG's respective ownership/membership interest
in the JV. Additionally, the operating agreement of the JV shall provide that if the initial capital contributions made by the owner/members of the JV shall not
be sufficient to operate the Ruby Project, then any such required or desired capital shall be satisfied by the JV borrowing such capital.
4
Table of Contents
 
As determined by the agreement with ACG dated July 28, 2010, net income from the Ruby Project is to be distributed as follows: (a) until the first $3,000,000
of the EB-5 Financing is returned to the EB-5 investors, 80% of the net profits from the Ruby Project will be returned to the EB-5 investors and 20% will be
distributed to the owners of the JV; (b) after the first $3,000,000 of the EB-5 Financing is returned to the EB-5 investors and until the entire amount of the EB-5
Financing has been returned to the EB-5 investors, 70% of the net profits from the Ruby Project will be returned to the EB-5 investors and 30% will be
distributed to the owners of the JV; (c) after the entire amount of the EB-5 Financing has been returned to the EB-5 investors, 100% of the net profits from the
Ruby Project will be distributed to the owners of the JV.  By virtue of the loan covenant dated September 27, 2010 with Tangiers and the Memorandum of
Understanding dated October 14, 2010 with NCRC, the interests of Tangiers (0.75%) and NCRC (1.5%) are included in the net profit distributions to the
owners of the JV.  The loan from Tangiers was satisfied and retired in the first quarter of 2011, but the profit interest agreed to and described herein remains
in effect.
 
The Company notes that its intention to utilize EB-5 funding is a matter of economics and the success of the Ruby Project itself is not exclusively contingent
on the EB-5 financing heretofore disclosed. Unless and until all of the milestones related to USCIS approvals for EB-5 are achieved and funds are received,
the Company may elect to accept alternative funding should a suitable funding source be identified and acceptable terms negotiated.  As of the date of this
prospectus, the EB-5 funding remains pending, and there is no guarantee that it will be completed.
 
On June 4, 2013, the Company executed a Memorandum of Understanding (the “Agreement”) with a private US investor (the “Investor”) for an advance sale
of up to 120 ounces of specimen gold from the Ruby Mine in Sierra County, California.  The price paid in advance by the Investor shall be at a ten percent
(10%) discount to the then-current spot price of gold (the “Purchase Price”) on the day the gold is produced and made available for shipment (the “Delivery
Date”).  The  Investor  will  acquire  the  right  to  purchase  the  gold  at  their  discretion.  Upon  signing  the  Agreement,  the  Company  received  an  initial  cash
advance of $150,000 (the “Advance”), which is based on a 10% discount to the current spot price of gold, for delivery of the first 120 ounces of specimen gold
produced from the Ruby Mine on or before February 1, 2014 (the “Due Date”).  The Advance paid will be applied to the amount due to the Company on the
Delivery Date, as determined by the then-current spot price of gold on the Delivery Date.  In the event that 120 ounces of specimen gold is not available for
delivery by the Due Date, the Investor will be entitled to be repaid the Advance in cash plus 10% interest equal to $165,000 total, with an option to still
purchase the same amount of gold at a discount of 10% to the then-current spot price of gold when the specimen gold becomes available for delivery at a
later date.
 
On November 1, 2011, the Company agreed to option the Taber Mine in Sierra County, California, for a period of up to nine months, during which time the
Company will continue to conduct further due diligence.  On July 11, 2012, the Company executed an amendment to the Taber Mine Option Agreement to
extend the option for one additional year. The consideration to be paid during the term of the option is $2,000 per month.  Should the Company elect to
exercise the option, the parties will then enter into a definitive lease agreement, with an optional buyout provision.  As of the date of this prospectus, the term
of the option has expired, and the Company has elected not to renew it. 
 
Our CEO, Mr. Perry Leopold owns 100 shares of the Company’s Series I Preferred Stock. Each outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock represents
its proportionate share of eighty per cent (80%) of all votes entitled to be voted and which is allocated to the outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock
and therefore Mr. Leopold is able to control the outcome of most corporate matters on which our shareholders are entitled to vote. These shares are not
convertible into common stock or any commodities. The Series I Preferred Stock was issued in February 2007. These shares were issued to our Chief
Executive Officer, Mr. Perry Leopold, in February 2007 as an anti-takeover measure to insure that Mr. Leopold maintains control of the Company during
periods when the Company’s stock may be severely undervalued and subject to hostile takeover in the open market.  As specified in the Certificate of
Designation filed by the Company with the Delaware Secretary of State in February 2007, the outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock shall vote
together  with  the  shares  of  Common  Stock  of  the  Corporation  as  a  single  class  and,  regardless  of  the  number  of  shares  of  Series  I  Preferred  Stock
outstanding and as long as at least one of such shares of Series I Preferred Stock is outstanding, shall represent eighty percent (80%) of all votes entitled to
be voted at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Corporation or action by written consent of shareholders.  Each outstanding share of the
Series I Preferred Stock shall represent its proportionate share of the 80% which is allocated to the outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock”.
 
Our headquarters are located at 2120 Bethel Road, Lansdale, PA 19446, with a mailing address of PO Box 162, Skippack, PA 19474.  Our website is
located at www.northbayresources.com. Our telephone number is (215) 661-1100.
 
Going Concern
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated modest revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends
and  is  unlikely  to  pay  dividends.  The  continuation  of  the  Company  as  a  going  concern  is  dependent  upon  the  continued  financial  support  from  its
shareholders,  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  obtain  necessary  equity  financing  to  continue  operations  and  to  determine  the  existence,  discovery  and
successful exploration of economically recoverable reserves in its resource properties, confirmation of the Company’s interests in the underlying properties,
and  the  attainment  of  profitable  operations.  The  Company  has  had  very  little  operating  history  to  date.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  do  not
include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the
Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
5
Table of Contents
 
We  have  experienced  recurring  net  losses  from  operations,  which  losses  have  caused  an  accumulated  deficit  of  $14,851,172  as  of  June  30,  2013.  In
addition, we have a working capital deficit of $3,446,084 as of June 30, 2013. We had a net loss of $1,375,324 for the six months ended June 30, 2013, and
net losses of $2,119,706 and $1,045,749 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These factors, among others, raise substantial
doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to generate profits and are unable to continue to obtain financing to meet our working
capital requirements, we may have to curtail our business sharply or cease operations altogether. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon
our  ability  to  generate  sufficient  cash  flow  to  meet  our  obligations  on  a  timely  basis  to  retain  our  current  financing,  to  obtain  additional  financing,  and,
ultimately, to attain profitability. Should any of these events not occur, we will be adversely affected and we may have to cease operations.
 
As of December 31, 2012, the accumulated deficit attributable to CEO stock awards, including previous management and valued according to GAAP, totals
$2,558,535 since June 18, 2004 (inception). As of December 31, 2012, the accumulated deficit attributable to CEO compensation is $884,474 in deferred
compensation.  This reflects the total amounts unpaid as per the management agreement with The PAN Network dating back to January 2006, less any
amounts actually paid or forgiven since 2006.  These totals are non-cash expenses which are included in the accumulated deficit since inception.  Actual
CEO compensation paid in cash over the course of the seven years since 2006 has totaled $225,870, consisting of $10,000 in 2006, $50,764 in 2007,
$23,139 in 2008, $29,979 in 2009, $21,988 in 2010, $90,000 in 2011, and $116,000 in 2012.  These cash expenditures are also included in the accumulated
deficit. 
 
The ongoing execution of our business plan is expected to result in operating losses over the next twelve months. Management believes it will need to raise
capital through loans or stock issuances in order to have enough cash to maintain its operations for the next twelve months. There are no assurances that we
will be successful in achieving our goals of obtaining cash through loans, stock issuances, or increasing revenues and reaching profitability.
In view of these conditions, our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to meet our financing requirements, and to ultimately
achieve  profitable  operations.  Management  believes  that  its  current  and  future  plans  provide  an  opportunity  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  The
accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the
amounts and classification of liabilities that may be necessary in the event we cannot continue as a going concern.
 
The Offering:
Securities Being Offered by Selling Stockholder Up to 25,368,011 shares of our common stock.
 
Offering Price
Assumes the issuance to the selling stockholder of all shares being registered herein under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
OTCQB Market Symbol
 
(1)
 
This  offering  relates  to  the  resale  of  25,368,011  shares  of  our  common  stock,  par  value  of  $0.001,  by  the  selling  stockholder,  Tangiers  Investors  LP
(“Tangiers”). The Company will receive proceeds from the sale of our common stock to Tangiers under the Securities Purchase Agreement entered into with
the selling stockholder on October 7, 2009 and amended on July 24, 2013 (“Securities Purchase Agreement”).
6
Table of Contents
Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, we may, at our sole discretion, periodically issue and sell to Tangiers shares of our common stock for a total
Terms of the Offering
Risk Factors
Common Stock Outstanding before Offering
 
Common Stock Outstanding after Offering (1)
 
Use of Proceeds
The selling shareholder will sell our common stock at prevailing market prices
or privately negotiated prices.
 
The selling shareholder will determine when and how it will sell the common stock offered in this
prospectus.
 
The securities offered hereby involve a high degree of risk and should not be purchased by investors who
cannot afford the loss of their entire investment. See “Risk Factors.”
 
114,282,030 shares of our common stock are issued and outstanding as of the date of this prospectus.
 
139,650,041shares of common stock.
 
The selling stockholder will receive all of the proceeds from the sale of the shares offered for sale by it
under this prospectus. Accordingly, we will not receive proceeds from the sale of the shares by the selling
stockholder. However, we may receive up to $1,648,920.72  in proceeds from the sale of our common stock
to the selling stockholder from the shares covered herein and sold to the selling stockholder under the
Securities Purchase Agreement described below. Any proceeds that we receive under the purchase
agreement are expected to be used for general working capital purposes.
 
NBRI
aggregate  purchase  price  of  $10,000,000.  We  have  previously  registered  19,726,822  shares  under  this  facility,  of  which  19,651,471  shares  have  been
issued since January 24, 2011, at an aggregate average price per share of $0.065. During the second quarter of fiscal 2013, we discovered certain shares of
the 19,651,471 shares were inadvertently offered and sold without registration under the Securities Act, as amended, during the period from October 24,
2011 through April 25, 2013.  A more detailed discussion is included in Note 10 of the audited Financial Statements on page 144 and in the Risk Factor on
page 16. We have deregistered the remaining shares by filing a post-effective amendment to the registration statement. Under this registration statement on
Form S-1 (“Registration Statement”), we are only registering 25,368,011 additional shares of our common stock. We will issue additional shares to Tangiers,
at our option, in order to continue to receive advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement. If additional shares are issued, they will be covered by
future registration statements. The registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part of must be declared effective prior to us being able to issue those
additional shares to Tangiers so that we may obtain further cash advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
  
Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, the dollar amount of each advance is based upon the average daily trading volume in dollar amount during
the ten (10) trading days preceding the advance notice date (the “Base Amount”).  For each share of common stock purchased under the Securities Purchase
Agreement, Tangiers will pay us 90% of the lowest volume weighted average price (“VWAP”) of the Company's common stock as quoted by Bloomberg, LP
on other principal market on which the Company's common stock is traded for the five days immediately following the notice date (the “Market Price”). Any
advance notice that exceeds the Base Amount by up to 200% will be further discounted by 7.5% (or 82.5% of the Market Price), and any advance notice in
excess of 200% and up to or equal to 300% of the Base Amount will be further discounted by an additional 7.5% (or 75% of the Market Price).   The price
paid by Tangiers for the Company's stock shall be determined as of the date of each individual request for an Advance under the Securities Purchase
Agreement. Tangiers’ obligation to purchase shares of the Company's common stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement is subject to certain
conditions, including the Company obtaining an effective registration statement for shares of the Company's common stock sold under the Securities
Purchase Agreement, and is limited to a maximum of $250,000 per ten consecutive trading days after the advance notice is provided to Tangiers. The
Securities Purchase Agreement shall terminate and Tangiers shall have no further obligation to make advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement at
the earlier of the passing of 60 months after the date that the Securities and Exchange Commission declares the Company’s registration statement
effective or the Company receives advances from Tangiers equal to $10,000,000. Upon the execution of the Securities Purchase Agreement, Tangiers
received a one-time commitment fee in October 2009 equal to $85,000 of the Company's common stock divided by the lowest volume weighted average
price of the Company's common stock during the 10 business days immediately following the date of the Securities Purchase Agreement, as quoted by
Bloomberg, LP.
By way of example, the following table illustrates the total share issuance from a hypothetical $50,000 draw request (“Advance Notice”) where the Base
Amount  preceding  the  Advance  Notice  has  been  tabulated  to  be  $20,000,  and  the  VWAP  during  the  5  day  period  following  the  Advance  Notice  is
determined to be $0.05.  The Base Amount for this hypothetical draw request is thus $20,000, which at a 10% discount of the Market Price of $0.05 per share
will set the issuance price at $0.045 and will result in 444,444 shares being issued.  The amount that is more than 100% of the Base Amount but less than or
equal  to  200%  of  the  Base  Amount  (Tier  1)  is  $20,000,  which  at  a  17.5%  discount  of  the  Market  Price  results  in  an  additional  484,849  shares  being
issued.  The amount that is greater than 200% of the Base Amount (Tier 2) is $10,000, which at a 25% discount to the Market Price results in an additional
266,667 shares being issued, for a total issuance on this exemplar $50,000 draw request of 1,195,960 shares.
10-day
Avg $ Volume
(Base Amount)
Tier Split (Base
/ Tier 1 / Tier 2)
Low VWAP
During 5-day
Pricing Period
Discount
Tier Price
10
   17.5
   25
$ 0.05
    $ 0.05
    $ 0.05
$ 20,000
$ 20,000
    $ 20,000
    $ 10,000
    $ 50,000
Draw Request    
  $ 50,000
     
     
 $ 50,000
Base
Tier 1
Tier 2
Total
 
Our common stock is recently trading around $0.06 per share. If this price is maintained, of which there is no assurance, our shares will be issued to Tangiers
at a minimum of $0.045 (25% discount) to a maximum of 0.054 (10% discount) per share, depending on the amount of each draw request. As of the date of
this prospectus, $1,281,000 has been drawn from this facility since January 24, 2011, leaving $8,719,000 remaining to be drawn if the entire $10,000,000
available to us is to be received. Therefore, assuming said minimum price and including the amount already received, we will need to register as many as
193,755,556 additional shares of our common stock in order to obtain the full $10,000,000 available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement as of the
date of this prospectus. We are only registering 25,368,011 on this Registration Statement. The total amount of 25,368,011 shares of our common stock will
be issued to Tangiers in order to obtain the funds available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement. We will be required to file other registration
statements if we intend to obtain the full amount of funds available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement. If we issue to Tangiers all 25,368,011
shares of our common stock at the current stock price we will only be able to receive approximately $1,359,873 in net proceeds after the minimum discount of
10% is applied and after deducting expenses related to filing this registration statement. This Registration Statement must be declared effective prior to us
being able to issue those additional shares to Tangiers so that we may obtain cash advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
Shares Issued
444,444
   484,849
   266,667
   1,195,960
%  $ 0.04500
%  $ 0.04125
%  $ 0.03750
7
Table of Contents
 
As of the date of this prospectus, the shares of common stock to be issued in order to receive advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement upon
issuance would equal approximately 22.20% of our outstanding common stock.
RISK FACTORS
The shares of our common stock being offered for resale by the selling security holder are highly speculative in nature, involve a high degree of risk and
should be purchased only by persons who can afford to lose  the  entire  amount  invested  in  the  common  stock.  Before  purchasing  any  of  the  shares  of
common stock, you should carefully consider the following factors relating to our business and prospects. The risks and uncertainties described below are
not exclusive. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known or that the Company currently deems immaterial may also impair operations. If any of
the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition or operating results could be materially adversely affected.  As one of our stockholders,
you will be subject to the risks inherent in our business.  In such case, the trading price of our common stock could decline and you may lose all or part of
your investment.  As of the date of this prospectus, our management is aware of the following material risks and we have included all known material risks in
this section:
 
Risks Related To Our Business
 
We have been the subject of a going concern opinion by our independent auditors who have raised substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going
concern
Our audited financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and discharge
its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated modest revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends and is
unlikely to pay dividends. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon the continued financial support from its shareholders, the
ability of the Company to obtain necessary equity financing to continue operations and to determine the existence, discovery and successful exploration of
economically recoverable reserves in its resource properties, confirmation of the Company’s interests in the underlying properties, and the attainment of
profitable  operations.  The  Company  has  had  very  little  operating  history  to  date.  These  financial  statements  do  not  include  any  adjustments  to  the
recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue
as a going concern. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
 
We  have  experienced  recurring  net  losses  from  operations,  which  losses  have  caused  an  accumulated  deficit  of  $14,851,172  as  of  June  30,  2013.  In
addition, we have a working capital deficit of $3,446,084 as of June 30, 2013. We had a net loss of $1,375,324 for the six months ended June 30, 2013, and
net losses of $2,119,706 and $1,045,749 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These factors, among others, raise substantial
doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to generate profits and are unable to continue to obtain financing to meet our working
capital requirements, we may have to curtail our business sharply or cease operations altogether. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon
our  ability  to  generate  sufficient  cash  flow  to  meet  our  obligations  on  a  timely  basis  to  retain  our  current  financing,  to  obtain  additional  financing,  and,
ultimately, to attain profitability. Should any of these events not occur, we will be adversely affected and we may have to cease operations.
 
As of December 31, 2012 the accumulated deficit attributable to CEO stock awards, including previous management and valued according to GAAP, totals
$2,558,535 since June 18, 2004 (inception). As of December 31, 2012 the accumulated deficit attributable to CEO compensation is $884,474 in deferred
compensation.  This reflects the total amounts unpaid as per the management agreement with The PAN Network dating back to January 2006, less any
amounts actually paid or forgiven since 2006.  These totals are non-cash expenses which are included in the accumulated deficit since inception.  Actual
CEO compensation paid in cash over the course of the seven years since 2006 has totaled $225,870, consisting of $10,000 in 2006, $50,764 in 2007,
$23,139 in 2008, $29,979 in 2009, $21,988 in 2010, $90,000 in 2011, and $116,000 in 2012.  These cash expenditures are also included in the accumulated
deficit.
8
Table of Contents
 
Excluding  management  fees,  which  are  deferred  as-needed,  the  Company  has  required  approximately  $7,000  (USD)  per  month  to  maintain  its  mineral
claims in British Columbia in good standing and pay general administrative expenses.   We believe these expenses can be maintained at present levels for
the foreseeable future.  Going forward, as a fully-reporting company, we estimate it will cost an additional $2,500 to $5,000 per month in SEC compliance
fees, consisting primarily of accounting, legal, and edgarization fees.  If we cannot generate enough revenue from claim sales and joint-ventures to cover
these costs, we believe we can rely on loans and our equity credit line established with Tangiers to make up for any revenue shortfall once this Registration
Statement is declared effective by the SEC.  However, as there is no assurance that this Registration Statement or any subsequent Registration Statement
will be declared effective, the equity line with Tangiers may be unavailable to us.  If we cannot generate sufficient revenue or raise additional funds through
equity, we may not be able to maintain our mineral claims or make timely filings with the SEC.  In fiscal year 2013, our mortgage on the Ruby Mine Property
(“Ruby Mine”) requires us to pay $10,000 per month during the quarter ended March 31, 2013, $15,000 per month during the quarter ended June 30, 2013,
and $20,000 per month from July 1, 2013 through December 30, 2015. A $1 million dollar balloon payment is due by December 30, 2013, representing 40%
of the first five visas sold through the EB-5 Program (as defined below).  The Company believes it can rely on loans and our equity credit line established
with Tangiers to make up for any revenue shortfall once our this registration statement to register the Tangiers equity credit line is made effective by the SEC,
and on our funding for the Ruby Mine project (“Ruby Mine Project”) through the EB-5 Program once that funding effort is completed.  However, as there is no
assurance that this or any subsequent registration statement will be made effective, the equity line with Tangiers may be unavailable to us, and there is no
assurance that we will receive sufficient funding from the EB-5 Program.  If we cannot generate sufficient revenue or raise additional funds through loans,
equity, or EB-5, we may not be able to maintain our mortgage on the Ruby Mine.
 
The ongoing execution of our business plan is expected to result in operating losses over the next twelve months. Management believes it will need to raise
capital through loans and stock issuances in order to have enough cash to maintain its operations for the next twelve months. There are no assurances that
we will be successful in achieving our goals of obtaining cash through loans or stock issuances, or increasing revenues and reaching profitability.
 
In view of these conditions, our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to meet its financing requirements, and to ultimately
achieve  profitable  operations.  Management  believes  that  its  current  and  future  plans  provide  an  opportunity  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  The
accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and
classification of liabilities that may be necessary in the event we cannot continue as a going concern.
 
We may not be able to engage in joint-ventures, which could have a significant negative impact on our financial condition.
 
We  intend  to  increase  our  revenues  and  available  cash  through  joint-venture  opportunities.  We  may  not  have  the  resources  required  to  promote  our
properties and attract viable joint-venture partners. If we are unable to secure additional joint-venture partners for our mining properties, we will not be able to
generate enough revenue to achieve and maintain profitability or to continue our operations.
 
Because of our dependence on a limited number of potential partners, our failure to attract new partners for our mining properties could impair our ability to
continue successful operations. The absence of a significant partnership base may impair our ability to attract new partners. Our failure to develop and
sustain long-term relationships with joint-venture partners would impair our ability to continue development of our properties.   Once secured, the failure of a
joint-venture partner to obtain sufficient financing to meet their commitments to us may cause the joint-venture to fail, and our business prospects may suffer.
 
We may not be able to increase our revenue or effectively operate our business. To the extent we are unable to achieve revenue growth, we may continue to
incur losses. We may not be successful or make progress in the growth and operation of our business. Our current and future expense levels are based on
operating plans and estimates of future revenues and are subject to increase as strategies are implemented. Even if our revenues grow, we may be unable to
adjust spending in a timely manner to compensate for any unexpected revenue shortfall.
 
Accordingly, any significant shortfall in revenues would likely have an immediate material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial
condition.  Further,  if  we  substantially  increase  our  operating  expenses  and  such  expenses  are  not  subsequently  followed  by  increased  revenues,  our
operating performance and results would be adversely affected and, if sustained, could have a material adverse effect on our business. To the extent we
implement cost reduction efforts to align our costs with revenue, our revenue could be adversely affected.
9
Table of Contents
 
We  may  face  many  of  the  challenges  that  a  developing  company  in  the  mining  industry  typically  encounters  which  may  impede  or  prevent  successful
implementation of our business plan.
 
These challenges include, but are not limited to:
·  Evaluation and staking of new prospects;
·  Maintaining claims in good standing;
·  Engaging and retaining the services of qualified geological, engineering and mining personnel and consultants;
·  Establishing and maintaining budgets, and implementing appropriate financial controls;
·  Identifying and securing joint-venture partners;
·  Establishing initial exploration plans for mining prospects;
·  Obtaining and verifying independent studies to validate mineralization levels on our prospects; and
·  Ensuring the necessary exploratory and operational permits are filed on a timely basis, the necessary permits are maintained and approved by
governmental authorities and jurisdictions, and adhering to all regulatory and safety requirements.
The failure to address one or more of these above factors may impair our ability to carry out our business plan.  In that event, an investment in us would be
substantially impaired.
 
Our business plan is dependent on continually finding new mining prospects with sufficient mineralization, grade and consistency without which it may not
be practical to pursue the business plan, and investors will lose their investment.
 
Our business model depends on locating new prospects with commercially sufficient amounts of precious and other metal mineralization.  Until feasibility
studies are completed, permits issued, and actual extraction and processing begins, we will not know if our prospects are commercially viable.  Even if initial
reports about mineralization in a particular prospect are positive, subsequent activities may determine that the prospect is not commercially viable.  Thus, at
any stage in the exploration and development process, we may determine there is no business reason to continue, and at that time, our financial resources
may not enable us to continue exploratory operations and will cause us to terminate our current business plan.
 
Our metals exploration efforts are highly speculative in nature and may be unsuccessful.
 
Metals exploration is highly speculative in nature, involves many risks and frequently is unsuccessful. Once mineralization is discovered, it may take a
number  of  years  from  the  initial  phases  of  drilling  before  production  is  possible,  during  which  time  the  economic  feasibility  of  production  may  change.
Substantial expenditures are required to establish proven and probable ore reserves through drilling, to determine metallurgical processes to extract the
metals from the ore and, in the case of new properties, to construct mining and processing facilities. As a result of the foregoing uncertainties, no assurance
can be given that our exploration programs will result in the identification, expansion, or replacement of current or future production with new proven and
probable ore reserves.
 
Development projects have no operating history upon which to base estimates of proven and probable ore reserves and estimates of future cash operating
costs. Such estimates are, to a large extent, based upon the interpretation of geologic data obtained from drill holes and other sampling techniques, and
feasibility  studies  which  derive  estimates  of  cash  operating  costs  based  upon  anticipated  tonnage  and  grades  of  ore  to  be  mined  and  processed,  the
configuration of the ore body, expected recovery rates of the mineral from the ore, comparable facility and equipment operating costs, anticipated climatic
conditions  and  other  factors.  As  a  result,  it  is  possible  that  actual  cash  operating  costs  and  economic  returns  based  upon  development  of  proven  and
probable ore reserves may differ significantly from those originally estimated. Moreover, significant decreases in actual over expected prices may mean
reserves, once found, will be uneconomical to produce. It is not unusual in new mining operations to experience unexpected problems during the start-up
phase.
 
Other risk factors include changes in regulations, environmental concerns or restrictions, legacy rights accorded to local First Nations communities, technical
issues relating to exploration, development, and extraction, such as rock falls, subsidence, flooding and weather conditions, safety requirements, and labor
issues.    Any  of  these  factors  individually  or  together  could  delay  or  halt  implementation  of  the  business  plan  or  raise  costs  to  levels  that  may  make  it
unprofitable or impractical to pursue our business objectives.
10
Table of Contents
 
Regulatory  compliance  is  complex  and  the  failure  to  meet  all  the  various  requirements  could  result  in  loss  of  a  claim,  fines  or  other  limitations  on  our
business plan.
 
With the exception of the Ruby Mine in Sierra County, California, all of our mining claims are in British Columbia, Canada, where we are subject to regulation
by  numerous  federal  and  provincial  governmental  authorities,  but  most  importantly,  by  the  British  Columbia  Ministry  of  Energy,  Mines,  and  Petroleum
Resources.    Our  Ruby  Mine  project  (“Ruby  Project”)  in  Sierra  County,  California,  is  subject  to  US  regulation  by  the  Federal  Environmental  Protection
Agency, the Federal Department of the Interior, the Bureau of Land Management, the US Forestry Service, the US Department of Labor Mine Safety and
Health Administration, as well as other comparable state agencies, such as the California Department of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation, the
California State Water Resources Control Board  and the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health.  At the Ruby, we are also subject to various
federal and state statutes, such as the federal Mine Safety & Health Act of 1977, the federal Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of
2006,  the federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, also known as the "Superfund" law, the federal Clean Air Act ,
the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act. Where EB-5 funding has been applied for,
offered, or secured, we are subject to regulation by the US Department of Homeland Security and the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
("USCIS"). The acquisition of a prospect in Mexico, or any other country, will be subject to similar regulatory agencies requirements by various agencies in
each country.  In all cases, the failure or delay in making required filings and obtaining regulatory approvals or licenses will adversely affect our ability to
carry out our business plan.  The failure to obtain and comply with any regulations or licenses may result in fines or other penalties, and even the loss of our
rights over a prospect. We expect compliance with these regulations to be a substantial expense in terms of time and cost. Therefore, compliance with or the
failure to comply with applicable regulation will affect our ability to succeed in our business plan and ultimately to generate revenues and profits.  We expect
that our operations will comply in all material respects with applicable laws and regulations.  We believe that the existence and enforcement of such laws
and regulations will have no more restrictive an effect on our operations than on other similar companies in the resource industry.
 
The Ruby Mine has no proven or probable reserves, and production may be less than expected, or may never begin at all.
 
Our current resource estimate at the Ruby Mine is inferred, or hypothetical.  While past production is a good indicator, past production does not guarantee
future results.  If our mining efforts fail to produce a grade of gold high enough to sustain an economic enterprise, our Ruby Mine Project may fail.  In the
event of such a failure, our inability to repay any accumulated debt incurred from the Ruby project may cause our business to fail.
Our ability to begin mining operations at the Ruby Mine requires that we raise sufficient capital to pay off the mortgage on the Ruby Mine property and
provide enough operating capital to begin as well as sustain commercial production.  We have elected to avail ourselves of the federal EB-5 Program to
secure funding, for which the Ruby Mine has been pre-approved by the USCIS in July 2011, but which is contingent on our ability to raise sufficient funds
from foreign investors who participate in the federal EB-5 Program.  If we fail to secure enough capital from the EB-5 Program or any other alternative funding
sources, we may have to curtail the Ruby project and forfeit the property.
 
Competition may develop which could hinder our ability to locate, stake and explore new mining claims, or to attract new joint-venture partners.
 
As metal prices continue to increase and demand grows, we expect new companies to form and compete with the already numerous junior and developed
mining, exploration and production companies in existence.  Some of these companies may be more efficient in locating new claims, which could impede
our business plan.  As well, some of these companies may be better funded, or more successful in attracting joint-venture partners, and thereby diminish our
ability to execute our business plan.
 
We could fail to attract or retain key personnel, which could be detrimental to our operations.
 
Our success largely depends on the efforts and abilities of our Chief Executive Officer, Perry Leopold. The loss of his services could materially harm our
business because of the cost and time necessary to find his successor. Such a loss would also divert management’s attention away from operational issues.
We do not presently maintain key-man life insurance policies on our Chief Executive Officer. To the extent that we are smaller than our competitors and have
fewer resources, we may not be able to attract sufficient number and quality of staff.
11
Table of Contents
 
New development activities require substantial capital expenditures.
 
New development activities, if done independently and without benefit of a joint-venture partner, require substantial capital expenditures for the extraction,
production and processing stages and for machinery, equipment and experienced personnel. There can be no assurance that the Company will generate
sufficient cash flow and/or that it will have access to sufficient external sources of funds in the form of outside investment or loans to continue development
activities at the same or higher levels than in the past.
 
Our Chief Executive Officer controls another company, Speebo, Inc. (“Speebo”), that could potentially create a conflict of interest
 
Speebo is a private exploration company founded and funded in 2006 by our Chief Executive Officer, Perry Leopold, as a proof-of-concept in the use of MTO
technology as the primary methodology for the identification and acquisition of mineral properties of merit.  As a result of Mr. Leopold’s success in acquiring
claims in this manner and subsequently generating revenue from them, the Board of Directors of North Bay agreed with Mr. Leopold’s contention that new
technology holds the key to a successful exploration enterprise in the 21st century, and in 2007 the Company adopted the Generative Business Model that
incorporates MTO (as defined below) technology as the core methodology in the execution of our current business plan.  Speebo continues to operate to a
limited extent, and often acts for the benefit of North Bay.  Two key claims currently owned by North Bay, Bouleau Creek Gold and Pine River Vanadium,
were  originally  acquired  and  subsequently  gifted  to  the  Company  by  Speebo.    To  date  there  have  never  been  any  material  related-party  transactions
between Speebo and North Bay for the benefit of Speebo, nor has there been any instance, material or otherwise, of Speebo ever receiving any benefit
whatsoever from its affiliation as a related-party.  While the potential inherently exists for a conflict-of-interest in the future, the reality of the relationship to
date has been complimentary and supportive to the sole benefit of North Bay, and not competitive in any way.  In the event a potential transaction in the
future might convey a benefit to Speebo, it may only be done with the unanimous consent of the Board of Directors, and in full compliance with the Code of
Ethics adopted by the Company in October, 2009.
 
A single shareholder, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board Mr. Perry Leopold, has the ability to control our business direction.
 
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, Mr. Perry Leopold, owns 80% of the voting shares of our stock by virtue of his ownership of 100% of
the  authorized  Series  I  Preferred  Shares.  These  shares  were  issued  to  him  in  February  2007  as  an  anti-takeover  measure  to  insure  that  Mr.  Leopold
maintains control of the Company during periods when the Company’s stock may be severely undervalued and subject to hostile takeover in the open
market.  As specified in the Certificate of Designation filed by the Company with the Delaware Secretary of State in February 2007, “the outstanding shares
of Series I Preferred Stock shall vote together with the shares of Common Stock of the Corporation as a single class and, regardless of the number of shares
of Series I Preferred Stock outstanding and as long as at least one of such shares of Series I Preferred Stock is outstanding, shall represent eighty percent
(80%) of all votes entitled to be voted at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Corporation or action by written consent of shareholders.  Each
outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock shall represent its proportionate share of the 80% which is allocated to the outstanding shares of Series I
Preferred Stock.” These Series I Preferred Shares also supersede any other shares that Mr. Leopold may own, so that any additional shares he may acquire
do not increase his 80% voting rights, and are therefore included within the 80%.  Accordingly, Mr. Leopold is likely to be in a position to control the election
of our Board of Directors and the selection of officers, management and consultants.  He will also have a significant influence in determining the outcome of
all corporate transactions or other matters, including mergers, consolidations and the sale of all or substantially all of our assets, and also the power to
prevent or cause a change in control. While we have no current plans with regard to any merger, consolidation or sale of substantially all of our assets, the
interests of Mr. Leopold may still differ from the interests of the other stockholders.
 
Our executive officers do not have any training specific to the technicalities of mineral exploration, and there is a higher risk our business will fail
 
Mr.  Perry  Leopold,  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  since  2006,  does  not  have  any  formal  training  as  a  geologist  or  a  mining  engineer.  As  a  result,  our
management may lack certain skills that are advantageous in managing an exploration company. In addition, Mr. Leopold’s decisions and choices may not
take into account standard engineering or managerial approaches mineral exploration companies commonly use. Consequently, our operations, earnings,
and ultimate financial success could suffer irreparable harm due to management’s lack of experience in geology and mine engineering.
12
Table of Contents
 
We anticipate our operating expenses will increase and we may never achieve profitability
 
Prior to completion of our exploration stage, we anticipate that we will incur increased operating expenses without increasing or realizing any revenues. We
expect to incur continuing and significant losses into the foreseeable future. As a result of continuing losses, we may exhaust all of our resources and be
unable to execute on our business plan. Our accumulated deficit will continue to increase as we continue to incur losses. We may not be able to earn profits
or continue operations if we are unable to generate significant revenues. There is no history upon which to base any assumption as to the likelihood that we
will be successful, and we may not be able to generate any operating revenues from mining or ever achieve profitable operations. If we are unsuccessful in
addressing these risks, our business will most likely fail.
 
We have one employee, our Chief Executive Officer, who also has other business interests, and he may not be able to devote a sufficient amount of time to
our business operations, causing our business to fail
 
Mr. Perry Leopold, our Chief Executive Officer, currently devotes 40 or more hours per week to our business affairs, and currently devotes less than 10 hours
per week total on his other business interests, specifically, Speebo, Circular Logic, Inc., and The PAN Network. Mr. Leopold also serves as a consultant to a
major consumer electronics firm on legacy technology issues related to his work with The PAN Network in aiding the development of the internet in the
1980’s, and which is done only as time permits, on an as-needed as-available basis. Currently, we do not have any other employees. If the demands of any
of  Mr.  Leopold’s  other  business  interests  should  increase  in  the  future,  it  is  possible  that  Mr.  Leopold  may  not  be  able  to  devote  sufficient  time  to  the
management  of  our  business,  as  and  when  needed.  If  our  management  is  unable  to  devote  a  sufficient  amount  of  time  to  manage  our  operations,  our
business will fail.
 
A single shareholder, our Chief Executive Officer Mr. Perry Leopold, owns 100% of our outstanding convertible preferred stock, and the market price of our
shares would most likely decline if he were to convert these shares to common stock and sell a substantial number of shares all at once or in large blocks.
 
Our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Perry Leopold owns 4,000,000 shares of our Series A Preferred stock, which equates to 20,000,000 shares of common stock
upon conversion if he so elects.  Mr. Leopold will then be eligible to sell these shares publicly subject to the volume limitations in Rule 144. The offer or sale
of a large number of shares at any price may cause the market price to fall. Sales of substantial amounts of common stock or the perception that such
transactions could occur may materially and adversely affect prevailing markets prices for our common stock.
 
If First Nations land claims affect the title to our mineral claims, our ability to develop claims may be lost.
 
The  Province  of  British  Columbia  and  Canadian  government  policy  at  this  time  is  to  consult  with  all  potentially  affected  First  Nations  bands  and  other
stakeholders in the area of any potential commercial production. In the event that we encounter a situation where a First Nations person or group claims an
interest in any of our mineral claims, we may be unable to provide compensation to the affected party in order to continue with our exploration work, or if such
an option is not available, we may have to relinquish any interest that we may have in this claim. The Supreme Court of Canada has ruled that both the
federal and provincial governments in Canada are now obliged to negotiate these matters in good faith with First Nations groups. If any of our mineral claims
should become the subject of a dispute with First Nations groups, the costs and/or losses could be greater than our financial capacity and our business
would fail.
 
The Province of British Columbia owns most of the land covered by our Canadian mineral claims, and our ability to conduct exploratory programs is subject
to the consent of the Province of British Columbia, leading to possible ejection from or forfeiture of our mineral claims.
 
The land covered by most of our mineral claims in Canada is owned by the Province of British Columbia. The ability to conduct an exploratory program on
any of our claims is subject to the consent of the Province of British Columbia.   In order to keep our claims in good standing with the Province of British
Columbia, the Province of British Columbia requires that before the expiry dates of the mineral claim that exploration work on any mineral claim valued at an
amount stipulated by the government be completed together with the payment of a filing fee, or, a payment to the Province of British Columbia in lieu of
completing said exploration work. In the event that these conditions are not satisfied prior to the expiry dates of the mineral claim, we will lose our interest in
any mineral claim so affected, and the mineral claim then become available again to any party that wishes to stake an interest in these claims. In the event
that either we are ejected from the land or our mineral claims expire, we will lose all interest that we have in the claims so affected.
13
Table of Contents
 
Our mineral and placer rights in British Columbia are limited.
 
Our acquisition of any mining claim in British Columbia conveys the mineral or placer rights for mining-related purposes only, and while our rights allow us to
use  the  surface  of  a  claim  for  mining  and  exploration  activities,  our  claims  do  not  convey  any  other  surface,  residential  or  recreational  rights  to  the
Company.  Additionally, our right to extraction is not absolute, as any mechanized extraction work on claims in British Columbia requires additional permits
and possibly conversion of our claims to mining leases, the approval of which is not guaranteed.  In the event a mining permit is not approved, the subject
claims may become worthless to us, and we may be forced to allow them to forfeit.
 
Some of the land overlying our Canadian mineral claims is owned by private parties, and our ability to conduct exploratory programs is subject to their
consent.
The  land  covered  by  some  of  our  mineral  claims  in  Canada  is  owned  by  private  parties  by  virtue  of  legacy  Crown  Grants  registered  over  the  past
century.  Access and availability to conduct an exploratory program on any of these claims is subject to the consent of the private landowner.   In the event
any private party objects to our access and blocks our ability to conduct exploration and development work on these claims, these claims may become
worthless to us, and we may be forced to allow them to forfeit.
 
Risk Factors Related to Our Securities, the Securities Purchase Agreement and This Offering
We are registering herein 25,368,011 shares of common stock to be issued under the Securities Purchase Agreement.  The sale of such shares could
depress the market price of our common stock.
 
We are registering 25,368,011 shares of common stock under the registration statement of which this Prospectus forms a part for issuance pursuant to the
Securities Purchase Agreement.  The sale of these shares into the public market by Tangiers could depress the market price of our common stock.
Existing stockholders will experience significant dilution from our sale of shares under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
The sale of shares pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement will have a dilutive impact on our stockholders. As a result, the market price of our
common stock could decline significantly as we sell shares pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement. In addition, for any particular advance, we will
need to issue a greater number of shares of common stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement as our stock price declines. If our stock price is lower,
then our existing stockholders would experience greater dilution.
The investor under the Securities Purchase Agreement will pay less than the then-prevailing market price of our common stock.
The common stock to be issued under the Securities Purchase Agreement will be issued at 90% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price of our
common stock during the five consecutive trading days immediately following the date we submit an Advance Notice to Tangiers.  In the event we submit an
Advance Notice in excess of the Base Amount, as determined by average daily trading volume in dollar amount during the ten (10) trading days preceding
the Advance Notice, the discount on the excess shares might be as much as 25%. These discounted sales could also cause the price of our common stock
to decline.
The sale of our stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement could encourage short sales by third parties, which could contribute to the further decline of
our stock price.
The  significant  downward  pressure  on  the  price  of  our  common  stock  caused  by  the  sale  of  material  amounts  of  common  stock  under  the  Securities
Purchase Agreement could encourage short sales by third parties. Such an event could place further downward pressure on the price of our common stock.
We may be limited in the amount we can raise under the Securities Purchase Agreement because of concerns about selling more shares into the market
than the market can absorb without a significant price adjustment.
The Company intends to exert its best efforts to avoid a significant downward pressure on the price of its common stock by refraining from placing more
shares into the market than the market can absorb. This potential adverse impact on the stock price may limit our willingness to use the Securities Purchase
Agreement. Until there is a greater trading volume, it seems unlikely that we will be able to access the maximum amount we can draw without an adverse
impact on the stock price.
14
Table of Contents
We may not be able to access sufficient funds under the Securities Purchase Agreement when needed.
Our common stock is recently trading around $0.06 per share. If this price is maintained, of which there is no assurance, our shares will be issued to Tangiers
at a minimum of $0.045 to a maximum of $0.054 per share, depending on the amount of each draw request and the applicable discount applied (see “The
Offering”).  As  of  the  date  of  this  prospectus,  $1,281,000  has  been  drawn  from  this  facility  since  the  original  effective  date  of  January  24,  2011,  leaving
$8,719,000 remaining to be drawn if the entire $10,000,000 available to us is to be received. Therefore, assuming said minimum price and including the
amount already received, we will need to register as many as 193,755,556 additional shares of our common stock in order to obtain the full $10,000,000
available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement as of the date of this prospectus. We are only registering 25,368,011 on this registration statement.
The total amount of 25,368,011 shares of our common stock will be issued to Tangiers in order to obtain the funds available to us under the Securities
Purchase Agreement, as amended.   We will be required to file other registration statements if we intend to obtain the full amount of funds available to us
under the Securities Purchase Agreement. If we issue to Tangiers all 25,368,011 shares of our common stock at the current stock price we will only be able
to  receive  approximately  $1,359,873  in  net  proceeds  after  a  10%  discount  is  applied  and  after  deducting  expenses  related  to  filing  this  Registration
Statement. This Registration Statement must be declared effective prior to us being able to issue those additional shares to Tangiers so that we may obtain
cash advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
  
Our ability to raise funds under the Securities Purchase Agreement is also limited by a number of factors, including the fact that the maximum advance
amount during any 10 trading day period is capped at $250,000, as well as the fact that we are not permitted to submit any request for an advance within 10
trading days of a prior request. Also, the Company may only draw an amount up to or equal to 300% of the average daily trading volume in dollar amount
during the 10 trading days preceding the advance date. As such, although sufficient funds are made available to the Company under the Securities Purchase
Agreement, such funds may not be readily available when needed by the Company.
 
We will not be able to use the Securities Purchase Agreement if the shares to be issued in connection with an advance would result in Tangiers owning
more than 9.9% of our outstanding common stock.
 
Under the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement, we may not request advances if the shares to be issued in connection with such advances would
result in Tangiers and its affiliates owning more than 9.9% of our outstanding common stock. We are permitted under the terms of the Securities Purchase
Agreement to make limited draws on the Securities Purchase Agreement so long as Tangiers’ beneficial ownership of our common stock remains lower than
9.9%. A possibility exists that Tangiers and its affiliates may own more than 9.9% of our outstanding common stock (whether through open market purchases,
retention of shares issued under the Securities Purchase Agreement, or otherwise) at a time when we would otherwise plan to obtain an advance under the
Securities  Purchase  Agreement.    As  such,  by  operation  of  the  provisions  of  the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement,  the  Company  may  be  prohibited  from
procuring additional funding when necessary due to these provisions discussed above.
 
The Securities Purchase Agreement will restrict our ability to engage in alternative financings.
 
The structure of transactions under the Securities Purchase Agreement will result in the Company being deemed to be involved in a near continuous indirect
primary public offering of our securities. As long as we are deemed to be engaged in a public offering, our ability to engage in a private placement will be
limited because of integration concerns which therefore limits our ability to obtain additional funding if necessary.
 
If the market price of our common stock decreases as we draw down on our equity line with Tangiers, we may have to increase the number of authorized
shares.
 
As of the date of this prospectus, we have 114,282,030 shares outstanding out of 250,000,000 shares authorized.  We have also reserved 52,131,637 shares
of common stock for the possible conversion, consisting of 12,581,637 shares for the possible conversion of outstanding convertible notes, 20,000,000
shares for the possible conversion of outstanding preferred stock, and 19,550,000 shares for the possible exercise of outstanding warrants.  If the market
price of our common stock remains at its current level or decreases, we may have to increase the number of authorized shares if we are to obtain the full
$10,000,000 available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
 
There may not be sufficient trading volume in our common stock to permit us to generate adequate funds.
The Securities Purchase Agreement, as amended, provides that the maximum dollar amount of each advance request will be the lesser of $250,000 or no
more than 300% of the average daily trading volume in dollar amount during the ten (10) trading days preceding the Advance Date.   If the average daily
trading volume in our common stock is too low, it is possible that it would reduce the amount of each advance or advances to amounts at each time that may
not provide adequate funding for our planned operations.
15
Table of Contents
Our shares are quoted on OTCQB under the symbol “NBRI”. As such, we are required to remain current in our filings with the SEC and our securities will not
be eligible for quotation if we are not current in our filings with the SEC; failure to remain current in our filings is a breach of the Securities Purchase
Agreement
 
Because our shares are quoted on OTCQB, we are required to remain current in our filings with the SEC in order for shares of our common stock to remain
eligible for quotation on OTCQB. In the event that we become delinquent in our required filings with the SEC, quotation of our common stock will be
terminated following a 30 or 60 day grace period if we do not make our required filing during that time. If our shares are not eligible for quotation on OTCQB
investors in our common stock may find it difficult to sell their shares. Furthermore, failure to remain current in our filings with the SEC is a breach of the
Securities Purchase Agreement, and a cause for Tangiers to terminate said agreement.
 
We have offered and sold certain shares of common stock without registration under the Securities Act of 1933.  Some holders of our securities may have the
right to rescind their purchases. If these security holders exercise their right to rescind their purchases, our operations could be materially adversely affected.
We  have  inadvertently  offered  and  sold  certain  shares  of  common  stock  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933  (the  “Securities  Act”),  as
amended, during the period from October 24, 2011 through April 25, 2013.  Pursuant to Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act, by the time our prospectus had
been in use for 9 months from the effective date of January 24, 2011, the balance sheet date of the audited financial statement contained in our prospectus
was more than 16 months old, and had not been refreshed to present our current financial statements within said prospectus. This inadvertent failure to
update our prospectus according to Rule Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act may have caused our prospectus to no longer be effective as of October 24,
2011, and thus may have constituted a violation of Section 5 of the Securities Act (which generally requires an effective registration of offers and sales of
securities) and may give rise to liability under Section 12 of the Securities Act (which generally provides a rescission remedy for offers and sales of securities
in violation of Section 5) as well as potential liability under the anti-fraud provisions of federal and state securities laws.
The Securities Act requires that any claim for rescission be brought within one year of the violation.  The time periods within which claims for rescission must
be brought under state securities laws vary and may be two years or more from the date of the violation.  As of the date of this prospectus and within the
federal  statute  of  limitations  approximately  10  million  shares  of  our  outstanding  common  stock  are  subject  to  rescission,  with  a  potential  liability
approximating $600,000, including interest at 10% per annum.
As of the date of this prospectus management is unable to determine at this time whether any claim for rescission may be filed against us; however, there can
be  no  assurance  that  claims  will  not  be  asserted.    In  addition,  regulatory  agencies  could  launch  a  formal  investigation  and/or  institute  an  enforcement
proceeding against us for violations of federal and state registration and qualification requirements.  If any security holders exercise their right to rescind their
purchases, or if a formal investigation results in an enforcement action against us, our operations could be materially adversely affected.
 
Trading of our stock may be restricted by the Securities and Exchange Commission’s penny stock regulations, which may limit a stockholder’s ability to buy
and sell our stock.
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted regulations which generally define “penny stock” to be any equity security that has a market price
(as defined) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Our securities are covered by the
penny stock rules, which impose additional sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell to persons other than established customers and
“accredited investors”. The term “accredited investor” refers generally to institutions with assets in excess of $10,000,000 or individuals with a net worth in
excess of $1,000,000 or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their spouse. The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a
transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from the rules, to deliver a standardized risk disclosure document in a form prepared by the Securities and
Exchange Commission, which provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market. The broker-dealer also
must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the
transaction and monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account. The bid and offer quotations, and
the broker-dealer and salesperson compensation information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting the transaction and must be
given to the customer in writing before or with the customer’s confirmation. In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a penny
stock not otherwise exempt from these rules, the broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the
purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction. These disclosure requirements may have the effect of reducing the level of
trading activity in the secondary market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock rules. Consequently, these penny stock rules may affect the ability of
broker-dealers to trade our securities. We believe that the penny stock rules discourage investor interest in and limit the marketability of our common stock.
16
Table of Contents
 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
This prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference in this prospectus contain certain forward-looking statements and  are based on the beliefs of
our management as well as assumptions made by and information currently available to our management. Statements that are not based on historical facts,
which can be identified by the use of such words as “likely,” “will,” “suggests,” “target,” “may,” “would,” “could,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,”
“intend,”  “plan,”  “predict,”  and  similar  expressions  and  their  variants,  are  forward-looking.  Such  statements  reflect  our  judgment  as  of  the  date  of  this
prospectus and they involve many risks and uncertainties, including those described under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those predicted
in  any  forward-looking  statements.  Although  we  believe  that  the  expectations  reflected  in  the  forward-looking  statements  are  reasonable,  we  cannot
guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Moreover, neither we nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy
and completeness of these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
THE TANGIERS TRANSACTION
General
On October 7, 2009 we entered into the Securities Purchase Agreement which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set
forth therein, Tangiers is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $10 million of our shares of common stock over the term of the Securities Purchase
Agreement. In consideration for entering into the Securities Purchase Agreement, concurrently with the execution of the Securities Purchase Agreement, we
issued to Tangiers the 6,569,147 shares of our common stock on October 7, 2009, as a commitment fee. Concurrently with entering into the Securities
Purchase Agreement, we also entered into the Registration Rights Agreement, in which we agreed to file one or more registration statements as permissible
and necessary to register under the Securities Act for the sale of the shares of our common stock that have been and may be issued to Tangiers under the
Securities Purchase Agreement.
As of the date of this prospectus, there were 114,282,030 shares of our common stock outstanding (88,075,556 shares held by non-affiliates), including the
6,569,147 shares previously issued to Tangiers (that are not covered by the Registration Statement of which this prospectus is a part), but excluding the
25,368,011 shares offered herein that may be issued to Tangiers pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement. If all of such 25,368,011 shares of our
common stock offered hereby were issued and outstanding as of the date hereof, such shares would represent 22.20% of the total common stock outstanding
or 28.80% of the non-affiliate shares of common stock outstanding as of the date hereof. The number of shares of our common stock ultimately offered for
sale by Tangiers is dependent upon the number of shares purchased by Tangiers under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
 
Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, as amended, and the Registration Rights Agreement, we are registering with this Registration Statement of
which this prospectus is a part 25,368,011 shares of our common stock under the Securities Act, which we may issue to Tangiers after this Registration
Statement is declared effective under the Securities Act. All 25,368,011 shares of common stock are being offered pursuant to this prospectus.
 
Mechanics of Purchase of Shares (Advances) under the Securities Purchase Agreement
 
After the Securities and Exchange Commission has declared effective the Registration Statement of which this prospectus is a part (“Effective Date”), we
have the right, in our sole discretion, to present Tangiers at any time(s) with an Advance Notice requiring Tangiers to advance to us per advance an amount
no less than $10,000 (Minimum Advance Amount) nor greater than $250,000 (Maximum Advance Amount). The Base Amount (the “Base Amount”) of each
advance notice is calculated based on the average dollar volume over the 10 day period preceding an Advance Notice. In the event the Base Amount is
lower than the Minimum Advance Amount of $10,000, the Base Amount shall be equal to the Minimum Advance Amount. The purchase price of the common
stock acquired with each advance will be 90% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price (the “Market Price”) of our common stock during the five (5)
consecutive trading days after the Advance Notice date. Any advance notice that exceeds the Base Amount by up to 200% will be further discounted by 7.5%
(or 82.5% of the Market Price), and any advance notice in excess of 200% and up to or equal to 300% of the Base Amount will be further discounted by an
additional 7.5% (or 75% of the Market Price). Under the present Registration Statement the total number of shares issued pursuant to the aforementioned
advances will not exceed 25,368,011 shares which will amount to only a portion of the dollar amount of Tangiers’ full commitment under the Securities
Purchase  Agreement  (of  $10,000,000  in  stock  purchases  from  us).  In  order  for  us  to  present  Tangiers  with  Advance  Notices  for  the  balance  of  the  full
commitment  amount,  we  are  required  under  the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement  to  file  and  have  declared  effective  additional  registration  statements
covering the balance of shares.
The purchase price and share numbers will be adjusted for any reorganization, recapitalization, non-cash dividend, stock split, or other similar transaction
occurring during the trading day(s) used to compute the purchase price. We may deliver multiple purchase notices to Tangiers from time to time during the
term of the Securities Purchase Agreement, so long as the most recent purchase has been completed.
 
There are no trading volume requirements or restrictions under the Securities Purchase Agreement, and we will control the timing and amount of any sales of
our common stock to Tangiers. Tangiers has no right to require any sales by us, but is obligated to make purchases from us as we direct in accordance with
the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement,  as  amended.  There  are  no  limitations  on  use  of  proceeds,  financial  or  business  covenants,  restrictions  on  future
fundings, rights of first refusal, participation rights, penalties or liquidated damages in the Securities Purchase Agreement.
 
Limitation
The advance provisions of the Securities Purchase Agreement notwithstanding, the amount of an advance requested by us shall not result in the issuance of
a number of shares of our common stock that will cause Tangiers and its affiliates to beneficially own in excess of nine and 9/10 percent (9.9%) of the then
outstanding Common Stock of the Company.
17
Table of Contents
Default Termination by Tangiers
Generally, Tangiers may terminate the Securities Purchase Agreement upon the occurrence of any of the following events of default:   (i) any stop order or
suspension of the effectiveness of a registration statement for an aggregate of fifty (50) Trading Days, other than due to the acts of the Investor, during the
Commitment Period, or (ii) any breach by us of the representations or warranties or covenants contained in the Securities Purchase Agreement or any
related agreements which could have a material adverse effect on us, subject to a cure period of thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice.. Such breaches
include: the suspension from trading or failure of our common stock to be listed on our principal market; our failure to deliver instructions to our transfer agent
to issue to Tangiers shares of our common stock which Tangiers is entitled to receive under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
Commitment Period
The commitment period commences when the first registration statement filed pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement is declared effective (i.e.,
January 24, 2011) and ends sixty (60) months after said effective date.
No Short-Selling or Hedging by Tangiers
Tangiers has agreed that neither it nor any of its agents, representatives and affiliates shall engage in any direct or indirect short-selling or hedging of our
common stock during any time prior to the termination of the Securities Purchase Agreement.
 
Effect of Performance of the Securities Purchase Agreement on Our Stockholders
The Securities Purchase Agreement does not limit the ability of Tangiers to sell any or all of the 25,368,011 shares registered in this offering. It is anticipated
that shares registered in this offering will be sold over a period of up to approximately 30 months from the date of this prospectus. The sale by Tangiers of a
significant amount of shares registered in this offering at any given time could cause the market price of our common stock to decline and/or to be highly
volatile. Tangiers may ultimately purchase all, some or none of the 25,368,011 shares of common stock not yet issued but registered in this offering. After it
has acquired such shares, it may sell all, some or none of such shares. Therefore, sales to Tangiers by us pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement
also may result in substantial dilution to the interests of other holders of our common stock. However, we have the right to control the timing and amount of
any sales of our shares to Tangiers and we may terminate the Securities Purchase Agreement at any time at our discretion without any penalty or cost to us.
 
Amount of Potential Proceeds to be Received under the Securities Purchase Agreement
 
In connection with entering into the Securities Purchase Agreement, we authorized the future sale to Tangiers of up to $10 million of our common stock. The
number of shares ultimately offered for sale by Tangiers in this offering is dependent upon the number of shares purchased by Tangiers under the Securities
Purchase Agreement.
 
We  cannot  predict  at  what  price  our  shares  of  common  stock  will  be  trading  at  the  time  that  Tangiers  acquires  shares  under  the  Securities  Purchase
Agreement. However, based upon our recent stock price of around $0.06 per share, our shares will be issued to Tangiers at $0.045 to $0.054 per share,
depending on the amount of each Advance. As of the date of this prospectus, $1,281,000 has been drawn from this facility since the original effective date of
January 24, 2011, leaving $8,719,000 remaining to be drawn if the entire $10,000,000 available to us is to be received. Therefore, assuming said minimum
price and including the amount already received, we will need to register as many as 193,755,556 additional shares of our common stock in order to obtain
the full $10,000,000 available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement as of the date of this prospectus. We are only registering 25,368,011 on this
Registration Statement. The total amount of 25,368,011 shares of our common stock will be issued to Tangiers in order to obtain the funds available to us
under the Securities Purchase Agreement, as amended.   We will be required to file other registration statements if we intend to obtain the full amount of
funds available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement. If we issue to Tangiers all 25,368,011 shares of our common stock at the current stock price
we will only be able to receive approximately $1,637,141.06 in net proceeds after deducting expenses related to filing this Registration Statement. We intend
to use said net proceeds for working capital. See “Use of Proceeds”, below. This Registration Statement must be declared effective prior to us being able to
issue those shares to Tangiers so that we may obtain cash advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
  
Tangiers intends to sell any shares purchased under the Securities Purchase Agreement at the then prevailing market price. Tangiers may sell shares of our
common stock that are subject to a particular advance before it actually receives those shares. These sales of our common stock in the public market could
lower the market price of our common stock. In the event that the market price of our common stock decreases, we would not be able to draw down the
remaining  balance  available  under  the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement  with  the  number  of  shares  being  registered  in  the  accompanying  Registration
Statement.
18
Table of Contents
There is an inverse relationship between our stock price and the number of shares to be issued under the Securities Purchase Agreement. That is, as our
stock price declines, we would be required to issue a greater number of shares under the Securities Purchase Agreement for a given advance.  If the market
price of our common stock remains at its current level or decreases, we may have to increase the number of authorized shares if we are to obtain the full
$10,000,000 available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement
This prospectus relates to shares of our common stock that may be offered and sold from time to time by the selling stockholder. There will be no proceeds to
us from the sale of shares of our common stock in this offering. The selling stockholder will receive all such proceeds.
USE OF PROCEEDS
However, we will receive proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock to Tangiers under the Securities Purchase Agreement, as amended.
Tangiers will purchase our shares of common stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement in a range of 10% to 25% discount to the current market price,
depending on the amount of each Advance Notice. The purchase price of the shares purchased under the Securities Purchase Agreement will be 90% of the
Market Price of our common stock during the five (5) consecutive trading days after the Advance Notice date.  The Base Amount of each advance notice is
calculated based on the average dollar volume over the 10 day period preceding an Advance Notice. Any advance notice that exceeds the Base Amount by
up to 200% will be further discounted by 7.5% (or 82.5% of the Market Price), and any advance notice in excess of 200% and up to or equal to 300% of the
Base Amount will be further discounted by an additional 7.5% (or 75% of the Market Price).   Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, as amended,
we cannot draw more than $250,000 every 10 trading days.
For illustrative purposes only, the following table shows how the number of shares issued subsequent to each Advance Notice would increase if more than
the Base Amount is drawn on any Advance Notice.  The Base Amount is calculated based on the average dollar volume over the 10 day period preceding
an Advance Notice.  The Market Price is defined as 90% of the lowest daily VWAP during the 5 day period following the Advance Notice.  The table
assumes that the 10 day average dollar volume is $10,000 per day, and the lowest volume weighted average price over the 5 day period following the
Advance Notice is $0.10.  The Base Amount for this Advance Notice would then be $10,000.  In this example, the Advance Notice is for $30,000, or 300%
more than the Base Amount.  The Market Price for the first $10,000 is then $0.09, or 90% of the lowest 5 day VWAP.  The Market Price for the next $10,000
(up to 200% more than the Base Amount) is $0.0825, or 82.5% of the 5 day VWAP.  The Market Price for the next $10,000 (more than 200% higher than the
Base Amount) is $0.075, or 75% of the 5 day VWAP.  The total number of shares to be issued for the $30,000 Advance Notice would then be 365,657
shares.
5 Day VWAP
Advance Notice
Base Amount (100%)
Up to 200% of Base Amount
More than 200% of Base Amount
Total
$ 0.10
  $ 30,000
Draw
$ 10,000
    $ 10,000
    $ 10,000
    $ 30,000
Discount
10
   17.50
   25
Market Price
(w/Discount)
%  $ 0.0900
%  $ 0.0825
%  $ 0.0750
111,111
      121,212
      133,333
      365,657
Shares Issued
$
  $
1,648,920.72    $
1,638,920.72    $
For illustrative purposes only, we have set forth below our intended use of proceeds for the range of net proceeds indicated below to be received under the
Securities  Purchase  Agreement.  The  table  assumes  estimated  offering  expenses  of  $10,000  for  this  offering,  and  aggregate  expenses  of  $50,000  on
subsequent offerings. The figures below are estimates only, and may be changed due to various factors, including the timing of the receipt of the proceeds.
 
Gross proceeds:
Net proceeds:
Number of shares that would have to be issued under the Securities
Purchase Agreement at an assumed offering price equal to $0.06.
 
USE OF PROCEEDS
General Working Capital
Total
 
The Securities Purchase Agreement allows us to use our proceeds for general corporate purposes. We have chosen to pursue the Securities Purchase
Agreement funding because it will make a large amount of cash available to us with the advantage of allowing us to decide when, and how much, we will
draw from this financing. We will be in control of the draw down amounts and hope to be able to draw down from the Securities Purchase Agreement
whenever  the  Company  deems  that  such  funds  are  needed.  Our  objective  will  be  to  draw  down  on  the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement  funding  during
periods of positive results for us and during stages when our stock price is rising, in order to control and minimize, as much as possible, the potential dilution
for our current and future stockholders. It may not be possible for us to always meet our objective; therefore, we will continue to identify alternative sources of
financing, as we always have, including loans and additional private placements of our stock.
1,638,920.72    $
1,638,920.72    $
8,807,000    $
8,807,000    $
4,980,000    $
4,980,000    $
9,950,000 
9,950,000
8,847,000    $
8,807,000    $
5,000,000    $
4,980,000    $
10,000,000 
9,950,000
25,368,011
$
  $
83,333,334
147,450,000
166,666,667
19
Table of Contents
The selling shareholder will sell our shares at prevailing market prices or privately negotiated prices. Each of the selling shareholder, any broker-dealers,
and any broker-dealer executing sell orders on behalf of the selling shareholder, may be deemed to be an “underwriter” as such term is defined in the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”).
DETERMINATION OF OFFERING PRICE
DILUTION
The issuance of the 25,368,011 shares pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement will have a dilutive impact on our stockholders. For any particular
advance, we will need to issue a greater number of shares of common stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement which would expose our existing
stockholders to greater dilution.
The following table presents information regarding the selling shareholder. A description of our relationship to the selling shareholder and how the selling
shareholder acquired the shares to be sold in this offering is detailed in the information immediately following this table.
SELLING SHAREHOLDER
Shares
Beneficially
Owned before
Percentage of
Outstanding
Shares
Beneficially
Owned before
Offering(2)
Offering(1)
Shares that
Could Be
Issued to Draw
Down Under
the Securities
Purchase
Agreement
Shares that
May Be
Acquired
Under the
Securities
Purchase
Agreement(3)
Percentage of
Outstanding
Shares Being
Registered to
Be Acquired
Under the
Securities
Purchase
Agreement
Percentage of
Outstanding
Shares
Beneficially
Owned after
Offering(1)
9.99%
9.99%
Shares to Be
Sold in the
Offering
 25,368,011     
 25,368,011
Selling
Stockholder
11,266,412     
11,266,412
Tangiers
Total
——————— 
(1) Beneficial  ownership  is  determined  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  and  generally  includes  voting  or
investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock are deemed to be beneficially owned by the person holding such securities for the
purpose of computing the percentage of ownership of such person, but are not treated as outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage
ownership of any other person. Note that affiliates are subject to Rule 144 and Insider trading regulations – percentage computation is for form purposes
25,368,011      161,462,963     
 25,368,011      161,462,963
22.20%   
22.20%
9.99%   
9.99%
only. The number of shares and the percentage of ownership represent the maximum amount of shares that Tangiers can beneficially control under a
contractually stipulated 9.99% ownership restriction.
Includes unsold shares of our common stock that Tangiers received as a commitment fee under the Securities Purchase Agreement in October 2009.
(2)
 
(3) Represents the number of additional shares of our common stock that would be issued to Tangiers at an assumed market price of $0.06 less 10%, or
$0.054, to draw down the entire $10 million available under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
Shares Acquired In Financing Transactions with North Bay
 
Tangiers. Tangiers is the investor under the Securities Purchase Agreement. All investment decisions of, and control of, Tangiers are held by Robert Papiri
and Michael Sobeck, its managing partners. Tangiers Capital, LLC (“Tangiers Capital”) makes the investment decisions on behalf of and controls Tangiers.
Tangiers acquired all shares being registered in this offering in a financing transaction with us. This transaction is explained below:
20
Table of Contents
 
Securities  Purchase  Agreement.  On  October  7,  2009,  we  entered  into  a  Securities  Purchase  Agreement  with  Tangiers,  as  amended.  Pursuant  to  the
Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company may, at its discretion, periodically sell to Tangiers shares of its common stock for a total purchase price of up
to $10,000,000. As described in detail in the “Use of Proceeds” section above, for each share of common stock purchased under the Securities Purchase
Agreement, Tangiers will pay us up to 90% of the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company's common stock as quoted by Bloomberg, LP on
the principal market on which the Company's common stock is traded for the five days immediately following the notice date. The price paid by Tangiers for
the Company's stock shall be determined as of the date of each individual request for an advance under the Securities Purchase Agreement. Tangiers’
obligation to purchase shares of the Company's common stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement is subject to certain conditions, including the
Company obtaining an effective registration statement for shares of the Company's common stock sold under the Securities Purchase Agreement and is
limited to a maximum of $250,000 per ten consecutive trading days after the advance notice is provided to Tangiers. The Securities Purchase Agreement
shall terminate and Tangiers shall have no further obligation to make advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement at the earlier of the passing of 60
months after the date that the Securities and Exchange Commission first declares the Company’s registration statement effective or the Company receives
advances from Tangiers equal to $10,000,000. Upon the execution of the Securities Purchase Agreement in October 2009, Tangiers received a one-time
commitment fee equal to $85,000 of the Company's common stock divided by the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company's common stock
during  the  10  business  days  immediately  following  the  date  of  the  Securities  Purchase  Agreement,  as  quoted  by  Bloomberg,  LP.    This  resulted  in  the
issuance of 6,589,147 shares to Tangiers in January, 2010.
 
Tangiers, a selling stockholder under this Registration Statement, intends to sell up to 25,368,011 shares of our common stock which will be issued to
Tangiers so that we may receive financing pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement.  As of the date of this prospectus, the shares of common stock to
be issued in order to receive advances under the Securities Purchase Agreement upon issuance would equal approximately 22.20% of our outstanding
common stock. We will register each resale offering after each put to Tangiers.
 
There are certain risks related to sales by Tangiers, including:
The outstanding shares will be issued based on a discount to the market rate. As a result, the lower the stock price is around the time Tangiers
is issued shares, the greater chance that Tangiers gets more shares. This could result in substantial dilution to the interests of other holders of
common stock.
·
·
·
To the extent Tangiers sells our common stock, our common stock price may decrease due to the additional shares in the market. This could
allow Tangiers to sell greater amounts of common stock, the sales of which would further depress the stock price.
The significant downward pressure on the price of our common stock as Tangiers sells material amounts of our common stock could encourage
short sales by others. This could place further downward pressure on the price of our common stock.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
The selling stockholder has advised us that the sale or distribution of our common stock owned by the selling stockholder may be sold or transferred directly
to purchasers by the selling stockholder as principals or through one or more underwriters, brokers, dealers or agents from time to time in one or more
transactions (which may involve crosses or block transactions) (i) on the over-the-counter market or in any other market on which the price of our shares of
common stock are quoted or (ii) in transactions otherwise than on the over-the-counter market. Any of such transactions may be effected at market prices
prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to such prevailing market prices, at varying prices determined at the time of sale or at negotiated or fixed prices,
in each case as determined by the selling stockholder or by agreement between the selling stockholder and underwriters, brokers, dealers or agents, or
purchasers. If the selling stockholder effects such transactions by selling their shares of common stock to or through underwriters, brokers, dealers or agents,
such underwriters, brokers, dealers or agents may receive compensation in the form of discounts, concessions or commissions from the selling stockholder
or  commissions  from  purchasers  of  common  stock  for  whom  they  may  act  as  agent  (which  discounts,  concessions  or  commissions  as  to  particular
underwriters, brokers, dealers or agents may be in excess of those customary in the types of transactions involved).
Tangiers is an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act of 1933 in connection with the sale of common stock under the Securities Purchase
Agreement. Tangiers will pay us up to 90% of, or a 10% discount to, the volume weighted average price of our common stock on the principal trading market
on  which  our  common  stock  is  traded  for  the  five  (5)  consecutive  trading  days  immediately  following  the  advance  date.  In  addition,  Tangiers  received
6,589,147 shares of our common stock, which were previously issued as a commitment fee under the Securities Purchase Agreement. Tangiers’ obligations
under the Securities Purchase Agreement are not transferable.
21
Table of Contents
The commitment amount of the Securities Purchase Agreement is $10,000,000. After estimated fees and offering costs, we may receive net proceeds of
approximately $9,950,000. As of the date of this prospectus, $1,281,000 has been drawn from this facility since the original effective date of January 24,
2011, leaving $8,719,000 remaining to be drawn if the entire $10,000,000 available to us is to be received. Therefore, assuming said minimum price and
including the amount already received, we will need to register as many as 193,755,556 additional shares of our common stock in order to obtain the full
$10,000,000 available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement. We are only registering 25,368,011 shares of our common stock under this
Registration Statement which will be issued to Tangiers in order to obtain the funds available to us under the Securities Purchase Agreement. This means
that we will be required to file other registration statements if we intend to obtain the full amount of funds available to us under the Securities Purchase
Agreement. If we issue to Tangiers all 25,368,011 shares of our common stock being registered in this prospectus at an assumed discounted average price
of $0.054 per share, we will only be able to receive approximately $1,359,873 in net proceeds after paying expenses related to this Registration Statement of
approximately $10,000.
 
The dollar amount of the equity line was based on a number of considerations which include (i) the Company’s capital requirements; (ii) the Company’s then
share price and then number of shares outstanding; and (iii) Tangiers’ ability to purchase shares in an amount required to provide capital to the Company.
Under the Securities Purchase Agreement, Tangiers contractually agrees not to engage in any short sales of our stock and to our knowledge Tangiers has
not engaged in any short sales or any other hedging activities related to our stock.
 
Tangiers was formed as a Delaware limited partnership. Tangiers is a domestic hedge fund in the business of investing in and financing public companies.
Tangiers does not intend to make a market in our stock or to otherwise engage in stabilizing or other transactions intended to help support the stock price.
Prospective investors should take these factors into consideration before purchasing our common stock.
 
Under the securities laws of certain states, the shares of our common stock may be sold in such states only through registered or licensed brokers or dealers.
The selling stockholder is advised to ensure that any underwriters, brokers, dealers or agents effecting transactions on behalf of the selling stockholder are
registered to sell securities in all fifty states. In addition, in certain states the shares of our common stock may not be sold unless the shares have been
registered or qualified for sale in such state or an exemption from registration or qualification is available and is complied with.
We  will  pay  all  of  the  expenses  incident  to  the  registration,  offering  and  sale  of  the  shares  of  our  common  stock  to  the  public  hereunder  other  than
commissions, fees and discounts of underwriters, brokers, dealers and agents. If any of these other expenses exists, we expect the selling stockholder to pay
these expenses. We have agreed to indemnify Tangiers and its controlling persons against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act. We
estimate  that  the  expenses  of  the  offering  to  be  borne  by  us  will  be  approximately  $10,000.  The  offering  expenses  are  estimated  as  follows:  a  SEC
registration fee of approximately $400, edgarization fees of $1,600, accounting fees of $6,000 and legal fees of $2,000. We will not receive any proceeds
from the sale of any of the shares of our common stock by the selling stockholder. However, we will receive proceeds from the sale of our common stock
under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
The selling stockholder is subject to applicable provisions of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and its regulations, including Regulation M.
Under Regulation M, the selling stockholder or its agents may not bid for, purchase, or attempt to induce any person to bid for or purchase, shares of our
common stock while such selling stockholder are distributing shares covered by this prospectus. Pursuant to the requirements of Regulation S-K and as
stated in Part II of this Registration Statement, the Company must file a post-effective amendment to the accompanying Registration Statement once informed
of a material change from the information set forth with respect to the Plan of Distribution.
We are not a party to any pending legal proceeding, nor is our property the subject of a pending legal proceeding, that is not in the ordinary course of
business or otherwise material to the financial condition of our business. None of our directors, officers or affiliates is involved in a proceeding adverse to our
business or has a material interest adverse to our business.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
22
Table of Contents
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
The following table sets forth the names and positions of our executive officers and directors. Our directors are elected at our annual meeting of stockholders
and serve for one year or until successors are elected. Our Board of Directors elects our officers, and their terms of office are at the discretion of the Board,
except to the extent governed by an employment contract.
  
Our directors, executive officers and other significant employees, their ages and positions are as follows:
Name
Perry Leopold
Fred Michini
Age
62
  70
Position with the Company
  Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
  Director
Perry Leopold.  Mr. Leopold has served as Chairman and CEO of the Company since February 2006. Prior to joining the Company he led a number of
successful  enterprises  over  the  past  30  years  in  a  diverse  number  of  fields,  ranging  from  the  arts  and  technology  to  finance  and  natural  resources.  In
February  2006,  Mr.  Leopold  was  engaged  as  CEO  to  engineer  the  Company's  total  corporate  restructuring  and  lead  its  re-emergence  as  the  natural
resources company formerly known as Enterayon, Inc. Mr. Leopold subsequently designed the Company's business model and incorporated state-of-the-art
technology to assist in cost-efficient acquisition targeting, which has resulted in over 50 acquisitions of high-quality mining properties throughout British
Columbia. Educated at the University of Pennsylvania, Mr. Leopold is also the founder and current President of Speebo (1), a privately owned exploration
and development company. In addition, he is currently serving as President of Circular Logic, Inc., a registered Commodity Trading Advisor (“CTA”) and
Commodity Pool Operator (“CPO”) firm specializing in commodity trading system development. Mr. Leopold is also the owner of The PAN Network, a private
company he founded as a sole-proprietorship in 1981, and which has since been in continuous operation to the present day. Mr. Leopold is qualified to serve
on the Board of Directors because of his familiarity with the Company’s business and industrial experience.
 
Fred Michini. Mr. Michini has served as a Director of the Company since August 2007.  He is a tax, financial, management accounting and litigation support
specialist, and has extensive previous experience serving as the Chief Financial Officer of a variety of public and private companies, including Speebo (1), a
private  mineral  exploration  company  currently  controlled  by  North  Bay’s  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Perry  Leopold.  Mr.  Michini  is  also  a  Certified  Public
Accountant, has been Partner and Managing Partner of two regional accounting firms, has served as an auditor for the U.S. General Accounting Office, and
is a former Board Member of the Central Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Michini earned his B.S. from LaSalle University and his MBA from
Temple University.  Mr. Michini has been employed as a CPA and Real Estate Tax Consultant by AJ Michini Associates since 1973 and by AJ Michini MBA
CPA since 1984.  In addition, Mr. Michini serves as Acting CFO for Artimplant USA, a subsidiary of the Swedish public company Artimplant AB, a position he
has held since 2005. As of January, 2008 Mr. Michini was no longer associated with Speebo. Mr. Michini’s expertise in accounting makes him a valuable
member of the Board of Directors.
 
(1) Speebo is a private exploration and development company with mineral and energy-related claims throughout British Columbia.  In addition to its metal-
based mineral claims, Speebo holds the rights to several oil shale properties in the Queen Charlotte Islands.  Prior to 2008 when British Columbia issued a
permanent moratorium on uranium mining, Speebo also held the rights to dozens of uranium properties, most of which have subsequently been allowed to
terminate Speebo has no active mining operations at the present time, nor does it intend to. Speebo was incorporated as a C-Corp in October 2006, and was
reclassified as an S-Corp as of January 2008.  Perry Leopold is the sole officer, director, and shareholder. There have never been any material related-party
transactions between Speebo and the Company.
 
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between any of our directors, executive officers or directors.
Involvement In Certain Legal Proceedings
 
During the past ten years, none of our officers, directors, promoters or control persons have been involved in any legal proceedings as described in Item
401(f) of Regulation S-K.
 
Director Independence
Our  common  stock  is  listed  on  the  OTC  Bulletin  Board  inter-dealer  quotation  system,  which  does  not  have  director  independence  requirements.  For
purposes  of  determining  director  independence,  we  have  applied  the  definition  set  forth  in  NASDAQ  Rule  4200(a)(15).  Perry  Leopold  would  not  be
considered “independent” under the NASDAQ rule due to the fact that he is an employee of the Company. Fred Michini is considered “independent” under
the NASDAQ rule due to the fact that he has not served on the Board of Directors of or business dealings with an affiliate within the past 3 years.
23
Table of Contents
 
Committees; Audit Committee Financial Expert.
 
Our Board of Directors has an audit committee made up solely of Fred Michini.
 
Our Board of Directors has determined that the Company has one audit committee financial expert, Mr. Michini.
Our common stock is quoted on OTCQB, which does not require companies to maintain audit, compensation or nominating committees.
  
Code of Ethics
 
We adopted a Code of Ethics on October 16, 2009 that applies to all of our directors, officers and employees, including our principal executive officer,
principal financial officer and principal accounting officer. The Code of Ethics is filed as Exhibit 14 to this Registration Statement.
 
Board Leadership Structure and Role in Risk Oversight
Although we have not adopted a formal policy on whether the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer positions should be separate or combined, we have
traditionally determined that it is in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders to partially combine these roles.  Due to the small size of the
Company, we believe it is currently most effective to have the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer positions partially combined.
Our Board of Directors is primarily responsible for overseeing our risk management processes.  The Board of Directors receives and reviews periodic reports
from management, auditors, legal counsel, and others, as considered appropriate regarding the Company’s assessment of risks. The Board of Directors
focuses on the most significant risks facing us and our general risk management strategy, and also ensures that risks undertaken by us are consistent with
the  Board  of  Directors’s  appetite  for  risk.  While  the  Board  of  Directors  oversees  the  Company,  our  management  is  responsible  for  day-to-day  risk
management processes. We believe this division of responsibilities is the most effective approach for addressing the risks facing the Company and that our
board leadership structure supports this approach.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
The following table sets forth certain information, as of the date of this prospectus, with respect to the beneficial ownership of the Company’s outstanding
voting securities by (i) any holder of more than five (5%) percent; (ii) each of the Company’s executive officers and directors; and (iii) the Company’s directors
and executive officers as a group. Except as otherwise indicated, each of the stockholders listed below has sole voting and investment power over the
shares beneficially owned.
Title Of Class
 
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Series A Preferred
Series I Preferred
Name And Address Of Beneficial
Owner (1)
Perry Leopold(4)(5)
  Fred Michini
  Tangiers (3)
  Ruby Development Company(6)
All executive officers and directors as
a group (2 persons)
Perry Leopold(4) 
  Perry Leopold(5)
Amount And
Nature
Of Beneficial
Ownership (2)
35,044,362     
1,162,112     
11,266,412     
24,000,000
Approximate
Ownership
Percent of
Class (%)**
26.10% 
1.02% 
9.99% 
18.71%
Total
Voting
Percent of
Class (%)**
80.00%    
0.20%      
2.00%      
3.74%
36,206,474     
4,000,000     
100
26.96% 
100% 
 
100% (5)
80.20%      
100%      
100%
(5)
(5)
** The percentages listed for each shareholder assume the exercise or exchange by that shareholder only, of his or its entire convertible or exchangeable
security (including options or warrants), as the case may be, and thus include the shares underlying said convertible or exchangeable security (including
options or warrants).  However, the percentages do not assume the exercise of all convertible or exchangeable securities (including options or warrants) by
all the shareholders holding such securities.
 
(1)
Except as noted above, the address for the above identified officers and directors of the Company is c/o North Bay Resources Inc., 2120 Bethel Road,
Lansdale, PA 19446.
24
Table of Contents
 
(2)
Beneficial Ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission and generally includes voting or
investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock subject to options, warrants, or convertible securities currently exercisable or
convertible, or exercisable or convertible within 60 days of the date of this prospectus are deemed outstanding for computing the percentage of the
person holding such option or warrant. Percentages are based on a total of 114,282,030 shares of common stock outstanding on the date of this
prospectus and shares issuable upon the exercise of options, warrants exercisable, and securities convertible on or within 60 days of the date of this
prospectus, as described above. The inclusion in the aforementioned table of those shares, however, does not constitute an admission that the named
shareholder is a direct or indirect beneficial owner of those shares. Unless otherwise indicated, to our knowledge based upon information produced by
the persons and entities named in the table, each person or entity named in the table has sole voting power and investment power, or shares voting
and/or investment power with his or her spouse, with respect to all shares of capital stock listed as owned by that person or entity.
(3)
Tangiers is the investor under the Securities Purchase Agreement, and currently owns 2,010,392 shares of common stock. All investment decisions of,
and control of, Tangiers are held by Robert Papiri and Michael Sobeck, its managing partners. Tangiers Capital, LLC makes the investment decisions
on behalf of and controls Tangiers. Tangiers acquired all shares being registered in this offering in a financing transaction with us.  As of the date of
this prospectus, Tangiers also holds an aggregate of 5,550,000 warrants, as follows:  (a) 2.5 million 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and
exercisable  at  $0.05  pursuant  to  a  $50,000  Convertible  Promissory  Note  Agreement  dated  September  27,  2010,  (b)  250,000  5  year  warrants
convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.115 pursuant to a $50,000 Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated December 29, 2011, (c)
500,000 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.13 pursuant to two $50,000 Convertible Promissory Note Agreements
dated February 2, 2012, (d) 500,000 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.09 pursuant to two $37,500 Convertible
Promissory Note Agreements dated March 15, 2012, (e) 150,000 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.07 pursuant to a
$50,000 Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated May 16, 2012, (f) 150,000 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at
$0.06 pursuant to a $25,000 Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated May 30, 2012, and (g) 750,000 5 year warrants convertible to common
stock and exercisable at $0.14 and 750,000 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.07 pursuant to a $100,000 Convertible
Promissory Note Agreement dated June 19, 2012. As of the date of this prospectus, Tangiers also holds the following promissory notes: (a) one
$25,000  convertible  promissory  note  with  an  interest  rate  of  9.9  per  year,  convertible  into  common  stock  at  a  price  of  $0.08  per  share  (with  an
outstanding balance of $28,733 as of the date of this prospectus), (b) two $50,000 convertible promissory notes with an interest rate of 9.9 per year,
convertible into common stock at a price of $ 0.08 per share (with an aggregate outstanding balance of $113,982 as of the date of this prospectus), (c)
two $37,500 convertible promissory notes with an interest rate of 9.9% per year, convertible into common stock at a price of $0.09 per share (with an
aggregate outstanding balance of $84,632 as of the date of this prospectus, (d) one $50,000 convertible promissory note with an interest rate of 9.9%
per year, convertible into common stock at a price of $0.06 per share (with an outstanding balance of $55,581 as of the date of this prospectus), (e) one
$25,000 convertible promissory note convertible into common stock at a price of $0.06 per share (with an outstanding balance of $27,695 as of the
date of this prospectus), (f) one $100,000 convertible promissory note with an interest rate of 7% per year, convertible into common stock at the lesser
of 7 cents or the undiscounted VWAP price on the day prior to conversion, with a floor price of 2 cents (with an outstanding balance of $107,240 as of
the date of this prospectus), and (g) one $750,000 convertible promissory note with an interest rate of 7% per annum, convertible into common stock at
a the undiscounted VWAP on the day of conversion, subject to a floor price of $0.0129 per share, and a ceiling price of the undiscounted VWAP on the
date prior to each tranche received (with an outstanding balance of $356,235  as of the date of this prospectus). All of the warrants and promissory
notes held by Tangiers contain a blocker provision under which Tangiers can only exercise its warrants or convert its promissory notes to a point
where it would own a maximum of 9.99% of the total shares outstanding. The number of shares, the percentage of ownership and voting percentage
listed  in  the  table  above  represents  the  maximum  amount  of  shares  that  Tangiers  can  beneficially  control  under  a  contractually  stipulated  9.99%
ownership restriction as of the date of this prospectus.
(4)  Mr. Leopold, the Company’s CEO and Chairman owns 4,000,000 shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock. Each outstanding share of the
Series A Preferred Stock has 10 votes per share, and may be converted to shares of common at a ratio of 5 to 1. The Series A Preferred Stock was
issued in August 2009.
(5)  Mr.  Leopold  owns  100  shares  of  the  Company’s  Series  I  Preferred  Stock.  Each  outstanding  share  of  the  Series  I  Preferred  Stock  represents  its
proportionate share of eighty per cent (80%) of all votes entitled to be voted and which is allocated to the outstanding shares of Series I Preferred
Stock. These shares are not convertible into common stock or any commodities. The Series I Preferred Stock was issued in February 2007. These
shares were issued our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Perry Leopold, in February 2007 as an anti-takeover measure to insure that Mr. Leopold maintains
control  of  the  Company  during  periods  when  the  Company’s  stock  may  be  severely  undervalued  and  subject  to  hostile  takeover  in  the  open
market.  As specified in the Certificate of Designation filed by the Company with the Delaware Secretary of State in February 2007, ”the outstanding
shares of Series I Preferred Stock shall vote together with the shares of Common Stock of the Corporation as a single class and, regardless of the
number of shares of Series I Preferred Stock outstanding and as long as at least one of such shares of Series I Preferred Stock is outstanding, shall
represent eighty percent (80%) of all votes entitled to be voted at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Corporation or action by written
consent of shareholders.  Each outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock shall represent its proportionate share of the 80% that is allocated to
the outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock. The Series I preferred shares supersede any other shares that Mr. Leopold may own so that any
additional securities that Mr. Leopold may own do not increase his 80% voting rights, and are therefore included within the 80%.
 
The four (4) principals of Ruby Development Company (“RDC”), R.E. Frederking Trustee, W. R. Frederking, G. W. Frederking, and R. L. Frederking.,
each own 2,500,000 shares of common stock.  RDC is also entitled to 10,000,000 warrants, immediately exercisable, to purchase up to 10,000,000
shares of common stock at $0.02 per share until December 30, 2015, 2,000,000 5 year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.10
per share until May 1, 2016, and 2,000,000 5-year warrants convertible to common stock and exercisable at $0.09 per share until March 6, 2017. The
warrants  may  be  exercised,  in  whole  or  in  part,  any  time,  and  from  time  to  time,  at  RDC's  discretion.  The  number  of  shares,  the  percentage  of
ownership and voting percentage listed in the table above include the shares underlying the aforementioned warrants held by the shareholder.
(6)
25
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES TO BE REGISTERED
General
 
The following description of our capital stock and the provisions of our Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws, each as amended, is only a summary.
 
Our  Articles  of  Incorporation  authorize  the  issuance  of  250,000,000  shares  of  common  stock,  $0.001  par  value  per  share.  We  are  authorized  to  issue
10,000,000 shares of preferred stock.  As of December 31, 2012, and the date of this prospectus, there were 4,000,100 shares of preferred stock outstanding.
 Set forth below is a description of certain provisions relating to our capital stock.
 
Common Stock
 
Each outstanding share of common stock has one vote on all matters requiring a vote of the stockholders. There is no right to cumulative voting; thus, the
holder of fifty percent or more of the shares outstanding can, if they choose to do so, elect all of the directors.  In the event of a voluntary or involuntary
liquidation, all stockholders are entitled to a pro rata distribution after payment of liabilities and after provision has been made for each class of stock, if any,
having preference over the common stock. The holders of the common stock have no preemptive rights with respect to future offerings of shares of common
stock. Holders of common stock are entitled to dividends if, as and when declared by the Board out of the funds legally available therefore.  It is our present
intention to retain earnings, if any, for use in our business.  The payment of dividends on the common stock is, therefore, unlikely in the foreseeable future.
 
On February 7, 2008, we declared a reverse stock split at a ratio of 1 for 10.
 
Preferred Stock
 
We have 10,000,000 authorized shares of preferred stock with a par value of $0.001 per share, issuable in such series and bearing such voting, dividend,
conversion, liquidation and other rights and preferences as the Board of Directors may determine.  As of December 31, 2012, and the date of this prospectus,
4,000,100 shares of our preferred stock are outstanding.
 
Our preferred stock is divided among the following:
 
4,000,000 Series A Preferred Shares.  Each outstanding share of the Series A Preferred Stock has 10 votes per share, and may be converted to shares of
common  at  a  ratio  of  5  to  1.  4,000,000  shares  of  the  Series  A  Preferred  Stock  were  issued  in  August  2009  to  Mr.  Leopold,  the  Company’s  CEO  and
Chairman.
 
0 Series G Preferred Shares. Each outstanding share of the Series G Preferred Stock has no votes per share, and may be converted to 1/100 of an ounce of
gold two years following the date of issuance subject to the availability of gold from the Company’s inventory, or shares of common at a ratio of 20 to 1.
100,000  shares  of  the  Series  G  Preferred  Stock  were  issued  in  August  2009  to  Mr.  Leopold,  the  Company’s  CEO  and  Chairman.    These  shares  were
returned and cancelled in July 2012, and the Series G Preferred Class was subsequently eliminated.
 
100 Series I Preferred Shares. Each outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock represents its proportionate share of eighty per cent (80%) of all votes
entitled to be voted and which is allocated to the outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock. These shares are not convertible into common stock or any
commodities. The Series I Preferred Stock was issued to our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Perry Leopold, on February 12, 2007 as an anti-takeover measure
to insure that Mr. Leopold maintains control of the Company during periods when the Company’s stock may be severely undervalued and subject to hostile
takeover in the open market.  As specified in the Certificate of Designation filed by the Company with the Delaware Secretary of State in February 2007, ”the
outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock shall vote together with the shares of Common Stock of the Corporation as a single class and, regardless of
the number of shares of Series I Preferred Stock outstanding and as long as at least one of such shares of Series I Preferred Stock is outstanding, shall
represent eighty percent (80%) of all votes entitled to be voted at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Corporation or action by written
consent of shareholders.  Each outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock shall represent its proportionate share of the 80% which is allocated to the
outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock.
 
Dividend Policy
 
We currently intend to retain any earnings for use in our business, and therefore do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
26
Table of Contents
 
Anti-Takeover Effects Of Provisions Of The Articles Of Incorporation of Authorized And Unissued Stock
 
The authorized but unissued shares of our common stock are available for future issuance without our stockholders’ approval. These additional shares may
be utilized for a variety of corporate purposes including but not limited to future public or direct offerings to raise additional capital, corporate acquisitions and
employee incentive plans.  The issuance of such shares may also be used to deter a potential takeover of the Company that may otherwise be beneficial to
stockholders by diluting the shares held by a potential suitor or issuing shares to a stockholder that will vote in accordance with the Company’s Board of
Directors’ desires.  A takeover may be beneficial to stockholders because, among other reasons, a potential suitor may offer stockholders a premium for their
shares of stock compared to the then-existing market price.
 
The existence of authorized but unissued and unreserved shares of preferred stock may enable the Board of Directors to issue shares to persons friendly to
current management which would render more difficult or discourage an attempt to obtain control of the Company by means of a proxy contest, tender offer,
merger or otherwise, and thereby protect the continuity of our management.
INTERESTS OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
No expert or counsel named in this prospectus as having prepared or certified any part of this prospectus or having given an opinion upon the validity of the
securities being registered or upon other legal matters in connection with the registration or offering of the common stock was employed on a contingency
basis or had, or is to receive, in connection with the offering, a substantial interest, directly or indirectly, in the registrant or any of its parents or subsidiaries.
DISCLOSURE OF SEC POSITION OF INDEMNIFICATION FOR SECURITIES ACT LIABILITIES
Our Articles of Incorporation include an indemnification provision under which we have agreed to indemnify our directors and officers from and against
certain claims arising from or related to future acts or omissions as a director or officer of the Company.  Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under
the  Securities  Act  may  be  permitted  to  our  directors,  officers  and  controlling  persons  pursuant  to  the  foregoing  provisions,  or  otherwise,  we  have  been
advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and
is, therefore, unenforceable. If a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by us of expenses incurred or paid by a director,
officer or controlling person of North Bay Resources Inc. in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or
controlling person in connection with the securities being registered) we will, unless in the opinion of our counsel the matter has been settled by controlling
precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by us is against public policy as expressed in the Securities
Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
EXPERTS
The audited financial statements included in this prospectus and elsewhere in the Registration Statement for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2012 and
December  31,  2011  have  been  audited  by  M&K  CPAS,  PLLC.  The  reports  of  M&K  CPAS,  PLLC  are  included  in  this  prospectus  in  reliance  upon  the
authority of this firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
VALIDITY OF SECURITIES
The opinion regarding validity of the shares offered herein has been provided by the Sichenzia Ross Friedman Ference LLP and has been filed with the
Registration Statement.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Business of the Issuer
 
North Bay Resources Inc., a Delaware corporation, engages in the acquisition, management, development, and mining of precious metals and other mineral
properties. The Company’s mission is to build a portfolio of viable mining prospects throughout the world and develop them through our subsidiaries and
joint-venture  partners  to  their  full  economic  potential.  We  seek  to  acquire,  develop,  and  exploit  natural  resource  properties  with  extensive  reserves  of
precious  metals,  including  gold,  silver,  platinum,  and  palladium,  as  well  as  base  metals,  including  copper,  zinc,  lead,  molybdenum,  etc.    We  intend  to
develop our properties both independently and through joint-venture partners.
27
Table of Contents
 
The  Company  was  incorporated  in  the  State  of  Delaware  on  June  18,  2004  under  the  name  Ultimate  Jukebox,  Inc.    On  September  4,  2004,  Ultimate
Jukebox, Inc. merged with NetMusic Corporation, and subsequently changed the Company name to NetMusic Entertainment Corporation.  On March 10,
2006, the Company ceased digital media distribution operations, began operations as a natural resources company, and changed the Company name to
Enterayon, Inc.  On January 15, 2008, the Company merged with and assumed the name of its wholly-owned subsidiary, North Bay Resources Inc.  As a
result of the merger, Enterayon, Inc. was effectively dissolved, leaving North Bay Resources Inc. as the remaining company.
 
We  currently  generate  revenue  from  claim  sales  and  joint-venture  agreements.    When  we  sell  a  claim,  we  capture  near-term  revenue,  but  forego  any
possibility of a future revenue stream.  When we enter into a joint-venture, we receive near-term revenue as well as a commitment for future revenue, but
since the joint-venture partner has the option to withdraw at any time, we cannot project revenue from a joint-venture into the future.  However, should a joint-
venture partner withdraw, we still retain control of the asset, and can therefore enter into another joint-venture with another partner, develop the property
ourselves, or else elect to sell the claims.
 
The Company makes use of a suite of online applications which are provided to people and companies licensed to acquire and maintain mineral rights
within the Province of British Columbia.   Mineral Titles Online (“MTO”) is an Internet-based mineral titles administration system provided and maintained by
the British Columbia Ministry of Energy, Mines, and Petroleum Resources  that allows the mineral exploration industry to acquire and maintain mineral titles
by selecting the area on a seamless digital GIS map of British Columbia and pay the associated fees electronically.
 
This MTO system is also interactively linked to British Columbia’s MINFILE Project and Assessment Report Indexing System (“ARIS”), both of which are
provided and maintained by the British Columbia Geological Survey.
 
The MINFILE Project is a mineral inventory system that contains information on more than 12,300 metallic mineral, industrial mineral and coal occurrences in
British Columbia.  It is used by industry, governments, universities and the public to find information on documented mineralization anywhere in British
Columbia, develop exploration strategies, conduct geoscience research, and evaluate the resource potential of an area.
 
The  ARIS  database  has  over  30,500  approved  mineral  exploration  assessment  reports  filed  by  the  exploration  and  mining  industry  since  1947.  These
reports provide information on geological, geophysical, geochemical, drilling and other exploration-related activities throughout B.C.
 
Both MINFILE and ARIS are interlinked with MTO, which combined and interfaced with other geospatial applications such as Google Earth, provide a skilled
user with the ability to virtually visit any location in British Columbia, analyze its geographical and geological setting, access and evaluate its geological
records and the historical archives of any prior development work, and determine the relative value of a given area.  If the area is also open to staking, a
claim can then be staked, and the required claim registration fees can be paid immediately and interactively.
 
Going Concern
 
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated modest revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends
and  is  unlikely  to  pay  dividends.  The  continuation  of  the  Company  as  a  going  concern  is  dependent  upon  the  continued  financial  support  from  its
shareholders,  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  obtain  necessary  equity  financing  to  continue  operations  and  to  determine  the  existence,  discovery  and
successful exploration of economically recoverable reserves in its resource properties, confirmation of the Company’s interests in the underlying properties,
and  the  attainment  of  profitable  operations.  The  Company  has  had  very  little  operating  history  to  date.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  do  not
include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the
Company be unable to continue as a going concern. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding the ability of the Company to continue as a going
concern.
 
We  have  experienced  recurring  net  losses  from  operations,  which  losses  have  caused  an  accumulated  deficit  of  $14,851,172  as  of  June  30,  2013.  In
addition, we have a working capital deficit of $3,446,084 as of June 30, 2013, 2013. We had a working capital deficit of $3,842,373 as of December 31, 2012.
We  had  net  losses  of  $2,119,706  and  $1,045,749  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2012  and  2011,  respectively.  These  factors,  among  others,  raise
substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to generate profits and are unable to continue to obtain financing to meet
our  working  capital  requirements,  we  may  have  to  curtail  our  business  sharply  or  cease  operations  altogether.  Our  continuation  as  a  going  concern  is
dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations on a timely basis to retain our current financing, to obtain additional
financing, and, ultimately, to attain profitability. Should any of these events not occur, we will be adversely affected and we may have to cease operations.
28
Table of Contents
 
As of December 31, 2012 the accumulated deficit attributable to CEO stock awards, including previous management and valued according to GAAP, totals
$2,558,535  since  inception  in  2004.  As  of  December  31,  2012  the  accumulated  deficit  attributable  to  CEO  compensation  is  $884,474  in  deferred
compensation.  This reflects the total amounts unpaid as per the management agreement with The PAN Network dating back to January 2006, less any
amounts actually paid or forgiven since 2006.  These totals are non-cash expenses which are included in the accumulated deficit since inception.  Actual
CEO compensation paid in cash over the course of the seven years since 2006 consists of $10,000 in 2006, $50,764 in 2007, $23,139 in 2008, $29,979 in
2009, $21,988 in 2010, $90,000 in 2011, and $116,000 in 2012.  These cash expenditures are also included in the accumulated deficit.
 
The ongoing execution of our business plan is expected to result in operating losses over the next twelve months. Management believes it will need to raise
capital through loans or stock issuances in order to have enough cash to maintain its operations for the next twelve months. There are no assurances that we
will be successful in achieving our goals of obtaining cash through loans, stock issuances, or increasing revenues and reaching profitability.
 
In view of these conditions, our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to meet our financing requirements, and to ultimately
achieve  profitable  operations.  Management  believes  that  its  current  and  future  plans  provide  an  opportunity  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  The
accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the
amounts and classification of liabilities that may be necessary in the event we cannot continue as a going concern.
 
Generative Business Model
 
The Company’s business plan is based on the Generative Business Model, which we believe is designed to generate a steady stream of revenue before any
property is ever developed into a commercial mining operation.
 
The Generative Business Model comprises the following steps:
1.  Targeting and acquiring properties with good historical assays.
2.  Identifying potential partners for the development of each of the Company’s properties and entering into joint-venture or option agreements.  In
most cases, the partner is another mining company whose shares trade on a public exchange.
3.  The initial agreement usually comprises a small non-refundable cash payment in advance and a significant number of shares in the stock of
the partner or acquiring company.  Cash and shares increase in staged payments on the anniversary date of the agreement.  In the case of an
option agreement, the Company will retain a Net Smelter Royalty with a buyout provision should the property be the site of a major discovery
and/or developed into a commercially-operating mine.  In the case of a joint-venture, we retain a percentage of ownership, typically 50%, in
the event the partner satisfies all the terms of the contract to completion.
4.  The partner or acquiring company also must commit to a specific work program over a period of several years to develop the property, often
involving a commitment of several million dollars.
5.  We  believe  these  work  programs  enable  us  to  maintain  our  properties  for  little  or  no  cost,  as  the  annual  maintenance  fees  due  to  the
government  are  offset  by  the  amount  of  money  spent  on  property  exploration  and  development  paid  for  by  our  partners.    Any  surplus  of
expenditures beyond what is due to maintain the properties can then be applied as “portable assessment credits” towards the maintenance of
other Company properties that are not yet producing revenue but which have good prospects of doing so in the future.
6.  If  at  anytime  the  partner  defaults  on  the  work  agreement  or  does  not  make  staged  cash  or  stock  payments  by  the  anniversary  date,  the
property then reverts back to us,  which then leaves us free to find another partner and begin the process all over again.
Material Agreements
 
On June 24, 2013, the Company executed a definitive joint-venture agreement for mining operations on the Company’s 100%-owned Fraser River Project
near Lytton, British Columbia, with Solid, a private company domiciled in British Columbia and based in Houston, BC. The terms of the agreement call for
Solid to provide all equipment, personnel, and related expenditures required to initiate and sustain mining operations at the Fraser River Project JV.  The
Company  will  be  responsible  for  maintaining  the  property  in  good  standing  and  securing  the  permits  required  for  mining  operations  to  proceed.    The
Company will retain 100% ownership of the property, and will be paid a 20% net smelter royalty (“NSR”) on all metals recovered from operations, with Solid
retaining 100% of the net profits following payment of the aforementioned NSR.  Solid will be deemed the project operator, and will be responsible for the
day-to-day operations.
On June 5, 2013 the Company executed a binding Memorandum of Understanding with a private US investor for an advance sale of up to 2,120 ounces of
specimen gold production from the Ruby Mine. The agreement provides that up to 2,120 ounces of specimen gold from the Ruby Mine will be purchased in
advance of production at a 10% discount of the then-current spot price of gold. The Company has received a $150,000 advance cash payment on the first
120 ounces, priced at $1,250 per ounce based on the current spot price of gold at the time of the agreement. Subsequent tranches to sell up to 2,000
additional ounces in advance of production will be prepaid based on current spot prices, with final settlement based on the spot price of gold at the time of
production and delivery. As of the date of this prospectus, an aggregate of 160 ounces of specimen gold has been presold through this facility, and a total of
$200,000 cash has been received.
29
Table of Contents
On October 24, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement on its Willa property with Caribou King Resources Ltd. ("Caribou"), a Canadian issuer listed
on the TSX Venture Exchange.  Under the terms of agreement, Caribou may earn up to a 100% interest in the claims in the Willa property (“Willa Claims”) by
making aggregate payments to North Bay of USD $232,500 in cash and issuing 1,000,000 shares of Caribou common stock.  Of the aggregate payments,
$7,500 in cash and 500,000 shares are due upon receipt of regulatory acceptance of the agreement by the TSX Venture Exchange.  This regulatory approval
has been received, and the initial consideration has been paid.  An additional $50,000 cash and 500,000 shares of Caribou stock are due upon the first
anniversary  of  the  agreement,  and  a  $175,000  cash  payment  is  due  upon  the  second  anniversary  of  the  agreement.    In  addition  to  the  consideration
received, North Bay shall be granted a royalty equal to 2% of net smelter returns ("NSR"). At any time up to the commencement of commercial production,
Caribou may purchase one-half of the NSR (being 1%) in consideration of USD $1,000,000 payable to North Bay, such that North Bay will then retain a 1%
NSR.
 
The Company has not issued nor does it expect to issue any of its own stock in connection with any of these agreements.  The Company does not receive
any funds directly with regard to contractual work commitments, and relies on each joint venture partner to make the agreed expenditures independently and
on its own schedule during the course of the work programs.  
 
In  the  event  any  contract  terminates  before  all  the  terms  of  the  agreement  have  been  satisfied,  North  Bay  shall  regain  its  100%  interest  in  the  subject
property.
 
EB-5
 
On  July  28,  2010,  the  Company  executed  an  agreement  with  ACG  Consulting,  LLC  ("ACG")  intended  to  establish  a  new  economic  Regional  Center
("Regional Center") under the federal EB-5 program (the "EB-5 Program") that will encompass all of  Northern California's Gold Country. Once established,
the Regional Center is expected to provide full funding for the Company's Ruby Mine Project in Sierra County, California.  Terms of the agreement specify
that upon filing an application for a new Regional Center with USCIS, North Bay shall pay ACG its share of the startup expenses, which as of December 31,
2011 were $0. During the first quarter of 2011, the Company agreed to reimburse ACG $37,216 in expenses incurred to prepare and file EB-5 applications
with USCIS.  As of March 31, 2011, $15,000 of this amount had been paid, and $22,216 remained outstanding.  As of September 30, 2012, $0 remains
outstanding and this account has been paid in full.  No shares of Company stock have been or will be issued in connection with this agreement.
The agreement also provides that North Bay will own 49% of the Regional Center, and ACG will own 51%. ACG and North Bay, working together through
the Regional Center, will seek to raise up to $7.5M in EB-5 funding for North Bay's Ruby Mine Project, subject to USCIS approval. ACG will also be an
equity partner in each project North Bay may bring into the Regional Center, the amount of which will vary on a deal by deal basis based on the amount of
consulting services ACG actually provides. At the present time, no projects other than mining are being considered, and the industry focus for the Regional
Center is expected to be limited to mining initially.
Effective October 14, 2010, the Company, together with ACG, entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with Northern California Regional Center, LLC
("NCRC"), whereby NCRC has agreed to expand its scope to include mining projects in the counties of Sierra and Nevada in Northern California, and
together with ACG has agreed to sponsor North Bay's application to secure $7.5 million for the Ruby Gold project in Sierra County, California, through the
EB-5  Program.    NCRC  was  approved  on  April  22,  2010  by  the  USCIS  as  a  designated  EB-5  Regional  Center,  and  is  currently  approved  to  sponsor
qualifying investments in such capacity within the counties of Colusa; Butte; Glenn; Sacramento; San Joaquin; Shasta; Sutter; Tehama; Yuba; and Yolo in
the State of California.  Pursuant to its regional center designation, NCRC may sponsor qualifying investments in certain industry economic sectors that do
not currently include mining.  The agreement with North Bay and ACG calls for NCRC to seek USCIS approval for an expansion of NCRC’s Regional Center
Geographic  Area  (the  “Expansion”)  to  include  Sierra  County,  where  the  Ruby  Mine  is  located,  and  for  approval  to  include  mining  within  its  designated
industry  sectors  (the  “Mining  Designation”).  These  applications  have  been  filed  with  USCIS,  and  are  currently  being  reviewed.  Upon  approval  of  the
Expansion and Mining Designation by USCIS, NCRC will then be permitted to sponsor qualified investments in North Bay’s Ruby Gold project under the
EB-5 Program.  Under the terms of the agreement, NCRC will receive a $5,000 fee for each investor whose minimum $500,000 investment is approved by
USCIS.    In  addition,  upon  the  Ruby  Gold  project  receiving  the  aggregate  sum  of  $7,500,000  through  the  EB-5  Program,  NCRC  shall  be  entitled  to  an
undivided one and one half percent (1.5%) interest in the Ruby Gold project.  No shares of Company stock have been or will be issued in connection with
this agreement, and the entire EB-5 funding is expected to be non-dilutive to shareholders.
On July 19, 2011, the NCRC Expansion Amendment, which includes the Mining Designation and pre-approval of the Ruby Gold project as a qualified EB-5
project, was formally approved by USCIS.
30
Table of Contents
 
The Ruby Property
 
On September 27, 2010, the Company executed an option-to-purchase agreement with RDC, a California partnership, for the acquisition of the Ruby Mine
(the “Ruby Mine”) in Sierra County, California. The purchase price is $2,500,000, which was to be paid in stages extending to December 30, 2012. Terms of
the Ruby agreement provide for an initial option period of 5 months that expired on January 31, 2011, at which time we elected to extend the option for a
second 5 month period, expiring on June 30, 2011.  On June 1, 2011, the Company exercised its option to purchase the Ruby Mine and made a final option
payment of $85,000 to open escrow.  On July 1, 2011, escrow was closed and the acquisition of the Ruby Mine was completed. During the preceding option
period and as of the closing date, the Company has made payments totaling $510,000 to RDC, consisting of $360,000 cash and 10,000,000 shares of
common  stock  valued  at  $150,000.    These  payments  were  credited  towards  the  purchase  price,  thereby  reducing  the  outstanding  principal  due  to
$1,990,000.  In addition, in compliance with the agreement dated September 27, 2010, as amended on January 26, 2011, the Company issued warrants to
RDC that gives them the option, until December 31, 2015, of purchasing up to 10,000,000 shares of stock at two cents ($0.02) per share, and in compliance
with a second amendment to the Option Agreement dated April 22, 2011, the Company issued warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2,000,000
shares of the Company’s common stock at the exercise price of ten cents ($0.10) per share.  These later warrants are valid until May 1, 2016.
On the transaction closing date of July 1, 2011, the Company issued a promissory note to RDC for $1,990,000 plus 3% interest per annum.  The note was
due on or before December 30, 2012.  Pursuant to an amendment executed on December 12, 2012, the note maturity was extended to June 30, 2013, and
monthly mortgage payments in the first quarter of 2013 were reduced to $10,000 per month.  In consideration of said extension, the Company made a
$50,000 principal payment on December 27, 2012. Pursuant to a subsequent amendment executed on March 28, 2013, the note maturity has been extended
to December 30, 2015.  Monthly mortgage payments are $15,000 per month during the second quarter of 2013, and $20,000 per month from July 1, 2013
through December 30, 2015. A $1 million dollar balloon payment is due by December 30, 2013, representing 40% of the first five visas sold through the EB-5
Program.  The interest rate on the Note is 6% per annum as of April 1, 2013, and will increase to 8% per annum on January 1, 2015.
As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding balance due on the note is $1,901,579. During 2012 the Company issued an additional 2,000,000 5-year warrants to
RDC in consideration for reducing the Company’s monthly mortgage payments on the Ruby Mine property. Said warrants give RDC the right to purchase up
to 2,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at the exercise price of nine cents ($0.09) per share.  As of the date of this prospectus, the Company
remains current in its obligations, and all monthly payments have been made on time. The note is collateralized with all of the assets associated with the
Ruby Mine.
  
Upon the close of the transaction and the transfer of title on July 1, 2011, and as previously set forth in the purchase agreement, the Company acquired all of
the real and personal property associated with the Ruby Gold Mine, all of the shares of Ruby Gold, Inc., a private California corporation, and $171,618 in
reclamation bonds securing the permits at the Ruby Mine. Subsequent to the close of the transaction, Ruby Gold, Inc. became a wholly-owned subsidiary of
North Bay Resources Inc.  The Company has also assumed the reclamation liabilities on the Ruby Mine, for which the $171,618 in reclamation bonds are
pledged.  In addition, a $2,500 liability from a pre-existing shareholder loan that was outstanding as of the closing date has been paid and extinguished.  As
of December 31, 2012, interest accrued to the Reclamation Bond has increased its current value to $172,499.
It is expected that the aggregate total of warrants related to this transaction will be dilutive to shareholders by adding up to 14,000,000 shares onto our
outstanding  share  total  in  the  event  that  all  the  warrants  are  exercised.  The  actual  dilution  is  dependent  upon  whether  or  not  any  of  the  warrants  are
exercised prior to their expiration dates.
 
Operational funding for the project of up to $7.5 million is expected to be provided through the federal EB-5 Program described previously.  It is expected that
this funding will be non-dilutive, as no shares of Company stock will be issued to EB-5 investors.  The EB-5 funding will be debt, which must be repaid from
mining operations over five years and at an interest rate of no more than 6%.  In the interim, if the Company has not generated enough revenue from claim
sales and joint-ventures to meet our commitments, we believe we can rely on loans and our equity credit line established by way of our Securities Purchase
Agreement with Tangiers to meet our obligations.
 
The Ruby purchase agreement includes the subsurface mineral rights to 2 patented claims comprising 435 acres, and 30 unpatented claims comprising
approximately  1,320  acres.    All  of  the  unpatented  claims  in  the  property  package  are  in  good  standing  through  August  31,  2013  with  both  the  BLM  in
Sacramento  and  Sierra  County  in  Downieville,  CA.  Annual  BLM  claim  fees  are  currently  $10,640  per  year.    Sierra  County  property  taxes  are  currently
$26,220 per year. As of December 31, 2012 and the date of this report, all BLM fees and Sierra County property taxes have been paid and are current.  The
Ruby Mine is permitted(3) for underground exploration, small scale development and small scale production.
31
Table of Contents
Type
Claim Name
Patented
Guatemala
  Patented
Extension Placer Mining Claim
Wisconsin Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Wisconsin Extension Placer Mining Claim   Unpatented
  Unpatented
Garnet Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Ruby Quartz Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Diamond Quartz Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Sapphire Placer Mining Claim
Gold Channel Placer
  Unpatented
  Unpatented
Black Channel Placer
  Unpatented
Topaz Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Irene Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Opal Placer Mining Claim
Ruby Lode No. 7
  Unpatented
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 8
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 16
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 17
Ruby Lode No. 18
  Unpatented
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 19
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 20
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 27
  Unpatented
Ruby Lode No. 28
Entry Lode Mining Claim
  Unpatented
  Unpatented
Entry Extension Lode Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Golden Bear 1 Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Golden Bear 2 Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Golden Bear 3 Placer Mining Claim
Golden Bear 4 Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
  Unpatented
Golden Bear 5 Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Golden Bear 6 Placer Mining Claim
Golden Bear 7 Placer Mining Claim
  Unpatented
Acres(1)
147     
288     
 
180 
159 
 
 
75 
 
20 
 
20 
 
2 
150 
 
 
60 
 
160 
 
140 
 
160 
20 
 
 
20 
 
20 
 
20 
20 
 
 
20 
 
20 
 
20 
 
20 
20 
 
 
20 
 
20 
 
20 
 
20 
20 
 
 
20 
 
20 
20
Good Until(2)
- 
- 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014 
September 1, 2014
Golden Bear 8 Placer Mining Claim
Unpatented
20
September 1, 2014
(1) The sum total of the acreage of the unpatented claims is 1,506 acres.  However, as some placer claims overlap lode claims, the true acreage of the
unpatented claim area is known to be approximately 1,320 acres, for a total property extent of approximately 1,755 acres including the subsurface patented
claim area.
 
 (2) September 1, 2014 represents the “Good Until” date of the Ruby unpatented claims. In order to maintain a mining claim in California in good standing, the
claim holder must perform annual work having a minimum cost of $100 or, alternatively, pay to the U.S. Bureau of Land Management (”BLM”) an annual
maintenance fee of $140.  Patented claims have no “Good Until” date, and instead are only subject to local and state taxes.  As of September 1, 2013,
$10,640 was paid to maintain the unpatented claims, and $26,220 was paid in property taxes to maintain the unpatented and patented claims in good
standing.
 
 (3)  The current Plan of Operations, effective as of 2001, was formally renewed by United States Forest Service in February 2011. The Plan of Operations is
now effective through December 31, 2018. The Waste Discharge Order must be reviewed and approved by the Water Quality Control Board prior to the
commencement of mining operations, along with the Annual Fee for Waste Discharge Requirements for 2013, which was paid to the State Water Resources
Control Board in December 2012.  The Reclamation Permit has been renewed through April 2018.  In September 2011 the Company filed an updated
Reclamation Plan with Sierra County and the California Department of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation.  This updated Reclamation Plan was
formally approved in December, 2011, and is effective through April, 2018. A Reclamation Bond of $172,499 is also in place.
32
Table of Contents
 
The Ruby Mine
 
The Ruby Mine is an underground placer and lode mine located between Downieville and Forest City, in Sierra County, California.  It is in the Alleghany-
Downieville mining district, situated in the Sierra Nevada foothills south of the Yuba River.
 
In June 2010, the Company retained Mr. C. Gary Clifton, P. Geo., to visit the Ruby Mine in the Sierra County area of California to inspect its infrastructure and
general conditions, assess its mineralization, and determine its potential to resume economic mining operations.  Mr. Clifton holds degrees in Geology and
Geochemistry from Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia, with post-graduate studies in Geochemistry at UC Berkeley and Oregon State University. As a
Registered  Professional  Geologist,  Mr.  Clifton  has  almost  40  years  of  experience  with  several  major  mining  and  petroleum  companies,  and  as  an
independent  consultant  in  mining  exploration  and  exploration  management,  mineral  property  evaluation,  and  mining  geology.  He  has  conducted  and
managed exploration and evaluation programs for a wide variety of mineral commodities in the United States, Australia, and the Middle East. Mr. Clifton is
currently President of Western Resource Group LLC, and is a Qualified Person as defined by National Instrument 43-101.
 
Mr. Clifton has no family or other relationship with any past or present Company officer, director, or affiliate, and he has no family or other relationship with
any past or present principal or affiliate of RDC. The Company has not issued nor is it obligated to issue any of its stock in connection with Mr. Clifton’s
engagement, and to the best of our knowledge Mr. Clifton does not own any shares of the Company.
The following information has been reviewed for technical accuracy by Mr. C. Gary Clifton, P. Geo, and who is the Qualified Person as defined by National
Instrument 43-101 for the Ruby Project.
 
Location, Access, Physiography, and Climate
 
The Ruby Mine is located in southwestern Sierra County, in the northern part of the Sierra Nevada Foothills, Northern California. It lies approximately 25 air
miles northeast of Grass Valley/Nevada City and is serviced by paved roads. Highway 49 passes through Downieville in the northern part of the area. The
Pliocene Ridge road crosses the central part of the area and eventually merges with the Henness Pass road. There are paved spur roads to the town of
Alleghany and the village of Forest City. The remaining few miles to the various mine sites are accessed by high quality, well maintained gravel roads.
 
The property is situated in the Sierra Nevada physiographic province and lies along the western slope of the Sierra Nevada Mountain range, at elevations
varying  from  2,500  feet  in  the  canyons  to  more  than  6,000  feet  on  the  ridge  crests.  Regional  physiographic  conditions  generally  consist  of  gently  to
moderately rolling terrain, and steep sided plateaus with deeply incised streams and rivers.
 
The annual temperature varies between 10 and 100 degrees Fahrenheit. The annual precipitation varies between 50 and 70 inches, which falls principally
as snow during the months of January, February and March.
 
Regional native vegetation typically includes pine, cedar and fir trees, manzanita, black oak, brush and native grasses. Commercial stands of second growth
pine and Douglas Fir are sufficient to satisfy mine timber requirements, and there is ample water available.  Rock Creek is the nearest year-round stream and
water source to the site, which crosses the northern portion of the property generally east to west. The north fork of Oregon Creek (a seasonal drainage) also
crosses the southern portion of the property from northeast to southwest.
33
Table of Contents
 
Property Description
 
The Ruby Property covers approximately 1,755 acres, consisting of the subsurface mineral rights of two patented claims totaling approximately 435 acres
and 30 unpatented claims containing approximately 1,320 acres. The mine encompasses at least four distinct underground river channels and three known
lode gold veins.
 
The Ruby property comprises two contiguous claim groups; the Ruby and the Golden Bear (aka Carson Camp), both of which include lode and placer
claims. The Ruby claims combine three past-producing gold mines, which are the Ruby, the Bald Mountain Extension, and the Wisconsin. The Golden Bear
claims comprise several former producing mines as well, which are the Golden Bear, the Ireland, and the Cincinnati. Collectively, the Ruby and Golden Bear
claims have produced in excess of 250,000 ounces of gold in a mining history dating from the 1850's.
The property covers one and one-half miles of strike length along the Eastern Melones Fault, the major structure along which many of the gold deposits of
the Mother Lode are localized. The property also encompasses an estimated 4 miles of partially mined and unmined auriferous Tertiary channels.  The Ruby
is located on the northern extension of the historic Mother Lode system, as evidenced in the map below that shows the location of the Alleghany-Downieville
mining district in relation to the overall Mother Lode.
34
Table of Contents
35
Table of Contents
 
The most recently active mining areas include the Ruby Portal and Lawry Shaft locations. RDC maintains a Plan of Operations (dated February 1, 2001) for
its mining operations on public lands in the Tahoe National Forest, administered by the United States Forest Service (USFS). As of the date of this
prospectus, the Plan of Operations has been approved for renewal through December 31, 2018.  Current access roads to the site include Henness Pass
Road, Sierra County Road 401, Forest Service Road 401-2, and Forest Service Road 30, along with a variety of small unimproved dirt connector roads. The
site is primarily surrounded by public national forest lands administered by the USFS, with privately owned parcels adjacent to the northwest and northeast
property boundaries. The privately owned parcels are designated for use as rural land, timberland, or mineral land.
 
History of Exploration, Development, and Production
 
Gold was originally discovered in the Alleghany-Downieville district in 1849, during the early days of the California Gold Rush. Since that time the district has
produced at least 2.35 million ounces of lode gold from the vein deposits and at least 440,000 ounces of placer gold from the Tertiary channel deposits (not
including an unknown amount of production from placer workings around Alleghany). Much of this production occurred intermittently, during relatively short
periods of intense mining activity, separated by longer periods of minimal production when political and/or economic factors were unfavorable.
 
The  history  of  the  Ruby  claim  area  dates  from  the  1850's,  when  placer  gold  occurrences  were  followed  upstream  from  the  North  Yuba  River  to  the
headwaters of Slug Canyon where rich deposits of gold were discovered in a Tertiary gravel deposit. By the 1860's several mines were developing the
gravels of a buried river system within the boundaries of the present Ruby property at the headwaters of nearby Rock Creek. These mines included the the
Golden Bear and the Guatemala. The Ruby portal was collared in December, 1880 to access the central portion of this rich river system. Between 1880 and
1889 the Ruby Mine produced 86,500 ounces of gold from three buried river channels.
 
In the early 1930's, C.L. Best, the co-founder of Caterpillar Tractor, acquired the Ruby Mine, and developed the Black channel. Best Mines produced an
estimated 58,000 ounces of gold from the gravels before the government forced closure under War Production Board Order L-208. C.L. Best saved 123
nuggets of $100 value or greater for a personal collection. That collection is presently on display at the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History.
 
After the Second World War, the cost of labor and supplies rose rapidly, while the price of gold remained frozen at $35 an ounce. The mine was not re-
opened by Best and it was sold after Best's death in 1951. RDC acquired a lease on the Ruby Mine in 1959 and bought the property outright in 1966.
Lessees intermittently worked the gravels of the Black channel from the Lawry shaft until the mid-1970's.
 
In the late 1970's the Ruby Mine was leased to Alhambra Mines of Sparks, Nevada. During that same period, the Golden Lion Mining Corp. attempted to
drive a decline to access the Cincinnati channel, which had previously been discovered in the quartz workings of the Cincinnati vein.
 
The Brush Creek Mining and Development Company, Inc. (“Brush Creek”) acquired the Ruby in 1990.  From 1990 through 1995, Brush Creek rehabilitated
and re-timbered approximately one and one-quarter miles of horizontal haulage tunnel supports and a 210 foot vertical shaft for access and mine safety,
constructed a new wash plant and quartz mill, built underground roads for use by diesel loaders, installed a hoist and constructed a new sixty-foot steel head
frame over the Lawry Shaft at the Ruby Mine, installed a complete underground ventilation system and electrical system at the Lawry Shaft, constructed a
new waste water treatment system for use at the mill site, and modified and enlarged the structures at the mill site.  According to their SEC filings, Brush
Creek’s  total  investment  in  the  Ruby  was  $4,554,575  as  of  June  30,  1997,  including  $2,251,714  of  development  costs,  and  $1,975,525  of  mining
equipment.  Production during this period was limited.  From December 1992 until July 1993 an estimated 7,300 tons of mineralized material was mined,
resulting  in  the  recovery  of  approximately  200  ounces  of  gold.    Brush  Creek  stated  that  these  preliminary  results  were  too  small  to  be  a  reliable
representative sample of the expected placer grades.  In 1994, approximately 400 tons were mined from the Lawry channel, at an average grade of 0.2
ounces per ton.  By 1995, mining operations were suspended, and except for limited periods of sporadic activity over the next few years, the mine was put on
care and maintenance. Brush Creek briefly resumed operations in 1998, driving a development tunnel in the south Lawry Shaft workings. Due to low metal
prices, the property was eventually forfeited and returned to RDC, who has maintained the property and permits since 1998.
36
Table of Contents
 
Plant, Equipment, Permits, and Site Infrastructure
 
Site  inspections  conducted  during  June  and  July,  2010  by  C.  Gary  Clifton,  a  certified  professional  geologist  (P.Geo.)  retained  by  the  Company  as  an
independent consulting geologist to inspect and assess the Ruby Mine, and by management in September, 2010, confirmed that the Ruby is in excellent
condition, and has been well maintained despite having not been operation since 1998.  The equipment currently on-site at the Ruby was mostly purchased
in the period between 1990 and 1995 when the mine was last in production, and is therefore between 15 and 20 years old.  The equipment, including the
wash plant and mill facilities, has been confirmed to be in good working order, though some minor upgrades are expected to be needed once operations
resume.
The equipment, fixed assets, and infrastructure in place include a 1,000 yard per day placer wash plant, 50-ton per day quartz mill, 6,000 feet of tracked
haulage, and related support equipment needed for underground mining operations.  A second exit, the Lawry Shaft, almost 2 miles from the main portal, can
provide  natural  ventilation  for  much  of  the  underground  workings.  Surface  buildings  and  facilities  include  a  lumber  mill,  machine  shops,  offices,  and
accommodations.  The property also features an excellent system of roads, is accessible via paved highway from Reno or Sacramento, has abundant water
and timber available for mining purposes, and has PG&E power available on-site.
 
Permits in place include a Plan of Operations, a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment, a Water Order, and a Reclamation Plan secured by over $172,499
in Reclamation Bonds. The current Plan of Operations, effective as of 2001, was formally renewed by United States Forest Service in February 2011. The
Plan of Operations is now effective through December 31, 2018. The Waste Discharge Order must be reviewed and approved by the Water Quality Control
Board prior to the commencement of mining operations, along with the Annual Fee for Waste Discharge Requirements for 2012, which was paid to the State
Water Resources Control Board in December 2011.  The Reclamation Permit has been renewed through April 2018. In September 2011 the Company filed
an updated Reclamation Plan with Sierra County and the California Department of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation.  This updated Reclamation
Plan was formally approved in December, 2011, and is effective through April, 2018. A Reclamation Bond of $172,499 is also in place.
 
Skilled underground hard-rock and placer miners with considerable experience in the local ground conditions reside in the area and will provide a valuable
resource in the present and future development of the Ruby.
 
Recent Geological Assessment Work
 
The Ruby Mine is an underground mine that is known to have produced over 250,000 ounces of gold since the 1850’s, but which currently has no known
estimates of proven reserves.
 
Geological assessment work carried out by Mr. Gary Clifton P.Geo., during the summer of 2010, including extensive research to evaluate the resource maps
and data from Brush Creek Mining’s operations in the 1990’s and Alhambra Mines in the early 1980’s, has identified 3.03 miles of unmined channel and 0.95
miles of partially mined channel available for mining using the existing infrastructure.  The following table provides the estimates of each channel surveyed
by Mr. Clifton in July, 2010.  In compiling the data, the Pilot Channel is considered the northern extension of the Black Channel and the Mt. Vernon Channel
is a tributary.  In addition, the stretch of Black Channel between the Big Bend and the Lawry Shaft is designated as partially mined, as is one-half of the
stretch of the same channel between the Lawry Shaft and the mined portion of the Pilot Channel at the northern property boundary.  All measurements are in
feet.
Channel
Mined
Partially Mined
Unmined
Total
Bald Mtn
Deep Rock Creek
Cincinnati
Black and Pilot
Mt. Vernon
Bald Mtn Extension
Totals (miles)
7,500 
5,500 
-- 
2,000 
-- 
2,750 
3.36
-- 
-- 
1,500 
3,500 
-- 
-- 
0.95
-- 
2,000 
4,500 
3,250 
3,000 
3,250 
3.03
7,500 
7,500 
6,000 
8,750 
3,000 
6,000 
7.34
37
Table of Contents
 
Additional channels as well as lode deposits in quartz veins are known to exist on the property.  These will require additional development and no attempt
has been made as of yet to estimate the amount of gold they may contain.
 
During the 2010 summer program, 35 samples were collected by Mr. Clifton from the Lawry Shaft workings and sent to American Assay Laboratories Inc. in
Sparks, NV for fire assay analysis. The samples, each weighing approximately 1 kilogram, were collected at 10-foot intervals at the gravel-bedrock interface
at 5 locations (A through E) within tunnels and crosscuts.  At location C, samples C9 through C12 returned several high values, including 45.5 grams (1.45
ounces) and 15.05 grams (0.48 ounces) per metric ton (tonne) gold, as per the table below. This represents a 30-foot wide zone of placer gold-enriched
sediments in which 3 of the 4 samples are highly anomalous.  This zone is considered mining width.  Having delineated a 30-foot wide zone with a limited
35-sample  set,  we  believe  this  indicates  that  gold-rich  gravels  are  relatively  abundant,  easily  identified,  and  present  in  existing  workings  ready  to  be
exploited.
SAMPLES
A1     
A2     
A3     
A4     
B1     
B2     
B3     
B4     
B5     
B6     
B7     
C1     
C2     
C3     
C4     
C5     
C6     
C7     
C8
Dry
Weight
lbs
1     
2     
1     
2     
2     
2     
2     
1     
2     
2     
2     
3     
2     
2     
2     
3     
2     
2     
2
Au
Fire
ppb
4 
4 
3 
11 
12 
8 
14 
72 
61 
9 
4 
5 
3 
3 
4 
7 
20 
7 
14
C9     
C10     
C11     
C12     
D1     
D2     
D3     
D4     
D5     
E1     
E2     
E3     
E4     
E5     
E6     
E7
2     
2     
2     
2     
2     
3     
3     
3     
3     
3     
2     
3     
2     
3     
3     
3
15050 
18 
45500 
785 
453 
6 
49 
12 
12 
23 
12 
8 
8 
15 
10 
25
38
Table of Contents
 
Regional Geology
 
The geology of the region consists of Mesozoic and Paleozoic metavolcanic rock, Paleozoic Calaveras Formation rocks (phyllite, schist, with thin beds of
metachert), and Silurian slate with subordinate chert, conglomerate and sandstone. The Mesozoic era occurred between approximately 65 and 248 million
years before present (MYBP). The Paleozoic era occurred between approximately 248 and 543 MYBP. The Silurian period was part of the Paleozoic era,
and occurred between 417 and 443 MYBP.
 
Local Geology
 
The Alleghany-Downieville gold mining district is situated in the northern pan of the Sierra Foothills Metamorphic Belt, to the west of the Sierra Nevada
Batholith. The district forms the northern continuation of the Mother Lode System, a major, north-northwesterly trending metallogenic province that extends for
a distance of 160 miles and has produced over 125 million ounces of gold.
 
Most of the gold mines within the Mother Lode System are localized along the Melones Fault, a steep, easterly dipping crustal-scale suture that extends from
Mariposa County in the south to Plumas County in the north. This structure marks the boundary between several tectonic terrains. In the northern part of the
foothills belt, the structure defines the contact of continentally derived sediments of the Paleozoic Shoo Fly Complex to the east, with generally younger
oceanic  and  volcanic  island  arc  rocks  of  the  Western  Assemblage  to  the  west.  In  the  south,  the  structure  marks  the  boundary  between  the  Calaveras
Complex, an Upper Paleozoic sedimentary sequence of deep water, oceanic affinity to the east with rocks of the Western Assemblage to the west.
39
Table of Contents
 
Geology of the Ruby Property
The  Ruby  Property  covers  one  and  one-half  miles  of  strike  length  along  the  Eastern  Melones  Fault,  the  major  structure  along  which  many  of  the  gold
deposits of the Mother Lode are localized. The property also encompasses an estimated 4 miles of unmined auriferous Tertiary channels.  The Ruby is
considered part of the northern extension of the historic Mother Lode system.
 
The locus of the Melones Fault coincides with a discontinuous zone of intensely sheared and variably altered serpentinite, commonly associated with more
massive gabbroic rocks. These rocks are believed to represent part of an ophiolite suite. At the latitude of the Alleghany-Downieville district, the Melones
Fault zone is up to 4 miles wide. At this location, the fault zone is occupied by a serpentinite-hosted melange of ophiolitic rocks, blueschist to greenschist-
grade oceanic sediments and mafic volcanics, as well as complexly deformed, amphibolite-grade Paleozoic rocks
 
Mineralization and Deposit Type
 
The  primary  mineralization  at  the  Ruby  is  gold.  The  primary  deposit  type  consists  of  gold-bearing  Tertiary-age  channels,  as  exemplified  by  the  Bald
Mountain  and  Bald  Mountain  Extension  channels,  both  of  which  have  been  among  the  most  prolific  gold  producers  in  the  Alleghany-Downieville
district.  Younger intervolcanic channels also formed rich placer gold deposits where the younger river system eroded and redeposited the auriferous gravels
of the older channels. Examples of this type of younger channel include the Black channel in the vicinity of the Big Bend in the Ruby Mine and the Deep
Rock Creek channel, which reworked extensive stretches of the Bald Mountain channel.
 
Distinct  concentrations  of  placer  gold  have  also  been  associated  with  the  existence  of  quartz  gold  deposits.  Some  of  the  most  productive  quartz  gold
deposits in this area were discovered in the bedrocks while mining the placer channels. The quartz veins in this region typically extend to thousands of feet
in  depth,  and  are  noted  for  rich  shoots  often  containing  spectacular  pockets  of  Gold-in-Quartz.  The  Ruby  is  known  to  contain  quartz  vein  deposits,  as
exemplified by the Wolf Vein near the Bald Mountain Channel.
40
Table of Contents
Ruby Mine Mining Plan
 
The Ruby mining plan anticipates that much of the first season will be engaged in determining the exact locations of the targeted channels with exploration
drifting (tunneling) and establishing Development Headings in these channels.
 
The Deep Rock Creek Project will lag behind the Lawry Shaft Project since the new tunnel and winze will not be completed until late in Year 1.
 
The initial work will concentrate on rehabilitating the Ruby Tunnel, renovating the Ruby Mill, improving the infrastructure, and getting the Ruby Mine facilities
and equipment into good working order. The Company began rehabilitation of the Ruby Tunnel in October, 2011. This work is expected to be completed in
the third quarter of 2013. As of December 31, 2012, construction and renovation costs directly related to the Ruby Tunnel rehab and excluding permitting and
regulatory expenses totaled $446,646.
 
The Pilot and Mount Vernon Channel targets are projected to lie in the near vicinity of the existing Lawry Shaft workings, so active exploration tunneling
("drifting") with air-powered slushers and trackless loaders ("LHD's") is expected to be underway shortly after mining operations begin.
 
Construction of the 1,500 foot Deep Rock Creek Project access tunnel can also begin once mining operations commence. This tunnel will be a tracked
haulageway. The rate of progress will be determined by the amount of time required to complete the maintenance program in the Ruby Tunnel beyond the
"Daylight Turn" where the Deep Rock Creek Access Tunnel begins. This maintenance will also be required prior to constructing the Big Bend Raise to the
Black Channel workings. This maintenance work is expected to be completed in the third quarter of 2013.
 
The mining plan anticipates a "herring bone" drift pattern for development of the channels. A central tunnel (known as a "drift") will be driven following the gut
(deepest part) of the channel. This drift will be continued until the end of the channel is reached and the length of the resource has been defined. Regularly
spaced crosscuts (known as "crosscut drifts") will be driven out on each side of the central drift to determine the width of the channel.
 
The material mined from these development drifts will be washed in the placer plant. Careful records of the gold recovery will also provide a grade for the
material "blocked out" in this process, thereby developing a proven resource to be mined in the production phase of the mining plan.
 
The Ruby Mine typically experiences considerable snow fall, and a decrease in activity is planned for during the winter months of Year 1. It is expected that
the Ruby will operate year-round once the operation is well established.
 
Operational Considerations
 
The  southern  working  area,  the  Deep  Rock  Creek  Project,  is  accessible  by  the  Ruby  Tunnel,  which  is  equipped  with  30  lb.  rail  and  4"  Victaulic  steel
compressed air pipe. The northern area, the Lawry Shaft Project, will be mined by LHD's from the existing tunnel system.
 
On the north end, entry to the mine is through the Lawry Shaft which has a steel headframe and a complete hoist house and hoisting facilities for men and
materials. There are two LHD's with 1 yd. buckets underground. There is a 40 hp. fan and a secondary ventilation fan with fan line as well as water and
compressed air lines and electrical service underground. Electricity in this area is provided by PG&E and a 150 kw diesel generator providing backup power.
A 250 cfm electric compressor located on the surface provides compressed air.
 
The south end of the mine is accessible by a portal. Electricity is provided by 250 kw and 55 kw diesel generators and compressed air by a 750 cfm diesel
compressor. There is a 40 hp. ventilation fan located underground, electric and diesel trammers, ore cars and flat cars. The site has a shop with an electric
overhead hoist on a track and various tools, mill buildings, a 4,500 gallon diesel tank with containment basin under cover, a 1,000 yard-per-day placer gravel
recovery plant and a 50 ton hard rock quartz recovery plant.
 
The north and south ends of the mine are connected underground, which facilitates natural ventilation and provides an exit at both ends.
41
Table of Contents
 
The north end has a 2 story bunkhouse which can provide accommodations, a trailer which can also be used for accommodations, and an office. The
adjacent cook shack will accommodate several more people. There is a 40' by 70' steel shop building on a concrete slab, a 10,000 gallon double-walled
diesel tank, and other buildings. Electricity in this area is provided by PG&E.
 
The property contains Douglas fir trees which can be used for mine timber. The Forest Service has marked trees for cutting, and there is a bandsaw lumber
mill on the property. Several thousand board feet of milled mine timbers are currently onsite.
 
The property is serviced throughout by a system of good dirt roads and oiled roads, with paved roads to the property from Highway 49. The property has a
great deal of flat and useable areas available, and there is ample working room around the shops and other buildings.
 
The mine has rock drills, slushers and tuggers, additional fans and pumps, both air and electric powered, and much miscellaneous equipment, tools, and
supplies. The mine also has a Peterbilt water truck, International flatbed truck, Oshkosh 4x4 dump truck, and Hyster equipment trailer. There is a large dump
facility as well as ponds for water storage and ample process water that exits from the Ruby Tunnel.
 
Description of Mining Process
 
Although the grades encountered in the ancient river channels of the Alleghany District are extremely high relative to most placer deposits elsewhere in the
world, underground mining costs are also much higher than the cost of open pit or dredge methods employed in most present-day placer operations. This
cost  reality,  together  with  the  erratic  distribution  of  the  gold,  requires  that  selective  mining  methods  based  on  strict  grade  control  be  utilized  in  order  to
achieve a profitable operation.
 
A cost effective underground mining operation is accomplished by a two-phase process:
 
(a) Development occurs on the advance by drifting upstream or downstream along the axis of the channel, with crosscuts driven every fifty to one hundred
feet. The muck from these workings is slushed to passes that lead to the main haulage level within the bedrock below the channels. This production is
accompanied by face and rib sampling and by bulk testing of the muck from the development headings. Each round is quantitatively analyzed to map out the
grade distribution of the gold. This work is followed by;
 
(b) Selective mining (“breasting”) during the retreat, using the drift as the main haulage-way and leaving pillars of lower grade material. This is facilitated by
careful mine planning based on the geometry of the channel and the grade distribution ascertained from the development phase.
 
Description of the Recovery Process
 
The mined gravel, or muck is transported from the mine along the tracked haulageway to the mill and dumped into the ore bin directly above the gravity
separation washing plant.  The wash plant is a closed-circuit system which recycles the wash water.  The gravel is scraped onto a feed belt which elevates
and dumps the material into the scrubber (trommel -- a large, inclined metal cylinder).  Water is added and the scrubber is rotated in a clockwise direction at
twelve revolutions per minute to thoroughly wash the gravel.  Retaining rings inside the scrubber catch the larger gold nuggets.  The washed gravel is
discharged through slots in the final section of the scrubber that serve as a sizing screen. All plus 3/4 inch material is rejected to the coarse material belt
which moves the reject gravel to the stacker belt for transport.
 
The remaining minus 3/4 inch material and excess water falls onto the walking bottom sluice box. This sluice box is a gravity separation device which
utilizes Hungarian riffles mounted on a moving rubber belt to trap all high specific gravity material. The riffle bed rotates up the grade through the sized
material and water, cycling completely every twenty minutes while continually dumping the heavy concentrate into the live bottom sluice box.
42
Table of Contents
 
All  lighter  material  not  trapped  in  the  Hungarian  riffles  is  washed  off  the  discharge  end  of  the  walking  bottom  sluice  box  and  over  a  1/8  inch  vibrating
dewatering screen.  The dry plus 1/8 inch, minus 3/4 inch material is vibrated onto a skid plate that loads directly onto the stacker belt for transport to the
waste dump.  The minus 1/8 inch material and water is discharged into the dewatering sand screw.
 
The live bottom sluice box utilizes a cam-operated jigging action within its bed to further concentrate, grade and separate all gold and other high specific
gravity material. The trapped gold and heavy concentrate is cleaned from the box once a day and transported to the gold room for final cleanup.
 
The lighter material not concentrated within the bed is washed out of the live bottom sluice box with the excess water and discharged into the dewatering
sand screw.  The coarser material is dried by the dewatering sand screw and dumped onto the stacker belt.  The finer waste material is discharged with the
wash water to the primary settling pond. The wash water continues to the second settling pond from which it is pumped back to the scrubber at the head of
the system.  Water discharging from the tunnel is piped to the head of the system by gravity as needed for make up water.
 
A backhoe is used as required to bail the fine settled material from the primary settling pond to dry before transport to the waste dump.
43
Table of Contents
 
QA/QC Protocols
 
The Company has not determined its QA/QC protocols as a matter of policy, and relies on its joint venture partners and outside consultants to provide these
protocols on a project-specific basis.
 
Canadian Properties
 
Below is a description of the properties (or mining/mineral/placer claims) currently owned by the Company which are currently under contract for exploration
and development with joint-venture partners, previously under contract with joint-venture partners, or else prospective for future joint-ventures.   Our mining
claims  convey  the  mineral  or  placer  rights  for  mining-related  purposes  only,  and  while  our  rights  allow  us  to  use  the  surface  of  a  claim  for  mining  and
exploration activities, our claims do not convey any other surface, residential or recreational rights to the Company.  Additionally, our right to extraction is not
absolute, as any mechanized extraction work on claims in British Columbia requires additional permits and possibly conversion of our claims to mining
leases, the approval of which is not guaranteed.
 
For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  paid  the  Province  of  British  Columbia  an  aggregate  of  $68,536  USD  in  registration  and  claim
maintenance fees to maintain our properties in good standing.  For the year ended December 31, 2011, these fees totaled $72,495 USD.
 
The Company actively manages its claims on a daily basis through the British Columbia MTO system, and at times elects to reduce costs by paying annual
fees incrementally as permitted by British Columbia regulations, allowing non-strategic claims to lapse, and occasionally reducing the aggregate size of a
particular claim area or letting it lapse altogether to further reduce carrying costs.  Therefore, the costs stated below to maintain a property in good standing is
the maximum required on an annualized basis, and in many instances the actual realized expense may be less than indicated below.
 
Unless otherwise noted, all dollar amounts related to claim fees paid to the Province of British Columbia are in Canadian dollars (CDN).
 
Principal Canadian Properties
The following table shows the Company’s principal target properties in British Columbia, Canada, which in aggregate comprise 110 claims that cover 36,996
acres (14.978 hectares).  The Company owns additional claims throughout British Columbia, but most of these others have not as yet been aggregated into
identifiable properties, are currently not considered material, or are expected to expire on their termination dates and no longer held.  As of December 31,
2012, our total holdings are 234 claims encompassing 76,404 acres (30,933 hectares).  This is a snapshot in time, and the number may be quite different six
months or one year from now. The Company has an active exploration program in place, which on a daily basis will add new claims, drop or reduce the size
of others, and maintain the rest.  The Company is comfortable with maintaining a stated minimum of 150 mineral and placer claims covering an aggregate of
60,000 acres on an annualized basis.  All of our claims are under constant review, and may be decreased or further increased at any time, depending on the
re-evaluation of our present holdings, and the availability of new opportunities in the future as other claims of merit become available for acquisition.
Properties are labeled as such when individual claims that are either contiguous with each other or in close proximity can be aggregated and identified with
a known mineral or placer resource. As of December 31, 2012, the total cash cost to acquire the properties listed below is $16,311, consisting of $6,436 in
staking fees paid to the Province of British Columbia, and $9,875 paid in 2006 to an individual to acquire the Monte Cristo.  If every claim is maintained for
the next year, the projected expense would be a minimum of $81,265.  In keeping with Company practices, some non-strategic claims may be allowed to
lapse, and possibly re-staked afterwards, resulting in a considerable saving from the maximum projected annualized cost.  As well, any of these properties
that become the subject of options or joint-ventures with other companies will see their projected maintenance costs transferred to the prospective partner
company for the duration of the contract. The table below shows the cash acquisition cost of each property and the annualized projected cost (or carrying
cost) of maintaining the properties in good standing.  All dollar amounts in this table are expressed in Canadian dollars, and the actual expense to the
Company in terms of US dollars, when actually paid, can be as much as 10% lower or higher, depending on the foreign currency exchange rate on the day
any payment is recorded.
44
Table of Contents
Property Name
ARGO GOLD
BOULEAU CREEK GOLD
CHERRY GOLD
MT. WASHINGTON/CONNIE HILL
CORONATION GOLD
FAWN***
GOLD HILL PROJECT
LOUGHBOROUGH GOLD
LYNX GOLD
MONTE CRISTO*
NEW ESKAY CREEK
PINE RIVER VANADIUM
RACHEL GOLD
TULAMEEN PLATINUM
FRASER RIVER PROJECT
Total
Area (hectares)
   463
   1,900
   1,138
   2,629
   604
   407
   1,920
   288
   622
   333
   2,400
   330
   337
   231
   413
   14,015
Acquisition Cost
$ 185
   760
   480
   1,052
   242
   163
   1,173
   115
   249
   9,875
   832
   132
   135
   92
   826
 $ 16,311
Minimum Work
Requirement
(Annualized)**
$ 2,315
   9,500
   5,690
   13,145
   3,020
   2,035
   9,600
   1,440
   3,110
   6,660
   12,000
   1,650
   1,685
   1,155
   8,260
 $ 81,265
Exploration
Expenditures To
Date
$ -
   12,926
   -
   -
   10,732
   -
   -
   -
   -
   18,082
   -
   -
   -
   -
   59,268
 $ 101,008
*With the exception of the Monte Cristo which was acquired from another party, as described below, all of the Company’s properties in British Columbia were
acquired as a result of the direct staking of located claims by Company personnel and payment of the statutory registration fees to the Province of British
Columbia.
** If no work is performed by the anniversary date due, a claim may be maintained in good standing by paying a Cash In Lieu of Work Fee (“CIL Fee”) to the
Ministry of Mines equal to twice the annual minimum work requirement.
*** As of the date of this prospectus, the Fawn property has been sold to New Gold, Inc for a cash price of $166,675 USD.
Prior to July 1, 2012, the registration fee for staking new claims in British Columbia was $0.40 per hectare for a mineral claim, and $2.00 per hectare for a
placer claim.  On July 1, 2012, registration fees for newly-staked claims were raised to $1.75 per hectare for a mineral claim, and $5.00 per hectare for a
placer claim. The initial term of any claim staked in British Columbia is one year.  As of July 1, 2012, this term may be extended for up to 10 years at a time by
filing a statement of work showing minimum expenditures on a mineral claim of $5 per hectare per year for the first 2 years, $10 per hectare per year for year
3 and 4, $15 per hectare per year for years 5 and 6, and $20 per hectare per year for each year thereafter. For a placer claim, the minimum expenditure is $20
per hectare. If work is not performed on the subject claims, the registrant can pay a CIL Fee to British Columbia equal to twice the minimum work expenditure
due to maintain the claim in good standing.
The Company owns a 100% undivided interest in the mineral rights underlying these properties, the surface of which is owned by the Province of British
Columbia, also known as Crown Land. Our registered claims convey to us the mineral rights for mining-related purposes only, and while our rights allow us
to use the surface of a mineral claim for mining and exploration activities, our claims do not convey any residential or recreational rights to the Company.
All of the properties described below are without known proven or probable reserves, and are exploratory in nature.
45
Table of Contents
 
Canadian Property Descriptions
 
The  Fawn  Property is  situated  on  the  Nechako  Plateau  of  central  British  Columbia,  approximately  120  kilometres  southwest  of  Vanderhoof  and  180
kilometres west of Quesnel.  The property covers 407 hectares (1,005 acres).  It includes the Buck claims 6 kilometres to the east, and the Malaput E-W
claims 3 kilometres to the southeast.
46
Table of Contents
 
As documented in British Columbia government records (MINFILE), previous exploration by prior claim holders on the Fawn Property has consisted of soil
geochemistry, magnetometric surveys, trenching and limited drilling. A total of 2,469 metres of drilling in 13 holes has been completed on the property with
the best assays reported of 1.08 grams per tonne gold and 23.3 grams per tonne silver over 10.2 metres (Source: MINFILE 093F 043).
 
On the Buck claims, previous exploration consisting primarily of soil geochem and geophysics has outlined a 3,500 metre long silver-lead-zinc anomaly.  A
primary area of interest is known as the Christmas Cake showing, where a 45 centimetre chip sample has assayed 542 grams per tonne silver, 7.38% zinc,
and 2.25% lead  (Source: MINFILE 093F 050).
 
The Fawn Property was the subject of a joint-venture with Silver Quest Resources Ltd (TSX-V: SQI) (“Silver Quest”) from October 15, 2009, until December
17, 2011, when it was terminated.
 
As of the date of this prospectus, the Fawn property has been sold to New Gold, Inc for a cash price of $166,675 USD.
Coronation Gold is located near Memphis Creek, 6 kilometres northeast of Slocan in southeastern British Columbia.  The property covers 604 hectares
(1,493 acres and includes five other past-producing mines; the Colorado, the Homestake, the V&M, the Sapphire, and the Senator mines.
47
Table of Contents
  
British Columbia government records show that the primary mineralization on the Coronation claims consists of gold, silver, zinc, and lead.  Past-production
records on file in British Columbia for the Colorado, Homestake, V&M, and Senator mines are as follows:
 
Colorado:  Intermittent mining for the periods 1904 to 1915 and 1967 to 1969 produced a total of 67 tonnes, yielding 2188 grams per tonne silver, 2.5 per cent
lead, and 5.6 per cent zinc (Source: BC MINFILE 082FNW161).
 
Homestake: At the Homestake (formerly known as the Hamilton), intermittent production from 1903 to 1915 totaled 33 tonnes of ore, yielding 115,299 grams
of silver, 93 grams of gold and 1921 kilograms of lead. Production as the Homestake from 1968 to 1971 totaled 330 tonnes, yielding 861,491 grams of silver,
7370 grams of gold, 440 kilograms of lead and 503 kilograms of zinc (Source: BC MINFILE 082FNW213).
 
V&M: At the V&M mine, which includes the Get There Eli vein, 11 tonnes ore shipped in 1901 is documented as yielding 124 grams of gold and 21,554
grams of silver.  Production of about 9 tonnes of ore in 1938 from the Get There Eli yielded 124 grams of gold and 15,925 grams of silver. 3 tonnes of ore
mined in 1955 from the V&M yielded 93 grams of gold, 12,338 grams of silver, 23 kilograms of lead and 8 kilograms of zinc.  In 1988, Yukon Minerals
Corporation conducted soil and rock sampling, and geological mapping in the area. A sample from the Get-There-Eli adit assayed 16.8 grams per tonne gold
and 549 grams per tonne silver over 0.5 metre on a quartz-pyrite vein (Source: BC MINFILE 082FNW191)
 
Senator:  The Senator mine, which includes the Midnight vein, produced 20 tonnes of ore in 1906 and 1907, yielding 43,420 grams of silver and 436 grams
of gold. In 1939 and 1940, production totaled 13 tonnes of ore, yielding 187 grams of gold and 17,947 grams of silver.  In 1988, Yukon Minerals Corporation
conducted soil and rock sampling, and geological mapping in the area. A sample from the Senator adit assayed 6.1 grams per tonne gold and 1080 grams
per tonne silver over 0.3 metre on a quartz-pyrite vein (Source: BC MINFILE 082FNW164).
The Coronation was the subject of a joint-venture with Lincoln Resources Inc. (“Lincoln”), a private Nevada corporation from August 6, 2009, until October 6,
2011, when it was terminated..
In July 2012 the Company conducted an exploration program at Coronation Gold under the supervision of Mr. Dan Oancea, P.Geo. Prospecting, sampling
and a short geophysical survey were undertaken over two prospective parts of the property. Samples were collected from mineralized host rocks and vein
materials. Seven of these samples were sent to ALS Chemex Labs in Vancouver for analysis, and the most significant assays have been reported as follows:
·  C05 (0.36 kg sample): 1.53 g/t gold, and 265 g/t silver;
·  C07 (0.10 kg sample): 25.9 grams g/t gold, and 2,590 g/t per tonne silver;
·  C08 (0.26 kg sample): 17.45 g/t gold, and 479 g/t per tonne silver.
The Company considers these results to be entirely consistent with previous assessments as well as the historical ore grades from the 6 past-producing
mines on the property, all of which are in close proximity. Accordingly, we believe Coronation Gold to be a property of merit that justifies further follow up
work. We intend to engage a new joint-venture partner to fund continued exploration.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
Fraser River Project is located along the Fraser River, 3 kilometres northwest of the village of Lytton in south-central British Columbia. The property covers
413 hectares (1,020 acres) on both sides of an area known as the Van Winkle Bar.  As documented in British Columbia Open File 1986-7 and BC MINFILE
092ISW078, platinum and iridium are known to occur in the black sands of Van Winkle Bar.
48
Table of Contents
 
 
In February 2009, the Company through our then-prospective joint venture partner, Mr. Bill Morgan, discovered visible gold during the first phase of test
excavations 400 metres northwest of the Van Winkle Bar along an old river channel. Prior to this there were no substantive indications of gold mineralization
in the Fraser River deposit.
49
Table of Contents
 
One cubic yard of material (the approximate equivalent of 2 metric tons) was excavated, processed, reduced to 750 grams of concentrate, and divided into
three  250  gram  (0.25  kg)  samples,  These  samples  were  sent  to  Acme  Analytical  Laboratories  Ltd.  in  Vancouver,  BC  for  analysis.    Acme  Analytical
Laboratories Ltd., an ISO 9001:2000 company, follows a strict regime of internal Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) protocols, including blanks,
duplicates,  and  standard  reference  materials  inserted  in  the  sequences  of  client  samples  to  provide  a  measure  of  background  noise,  accuracy  and
precision.  The assay results showed the concentrate samples averaged 564 grams per tonne gold and 4.45 grams per tonne platinum, as per the following
table:
ACME ANALYTICAL LABORATORIES LTD.
Date
Job Number:
Number of Samples:
Project:
Received:
3
8-April-09
VAN09000829
Van Winkle
16-Mar-09
Sample
VW-1
VW-2
VW-3
Average
Method
  Analyte
  Unit
  MDL
  Type
  Sand
  Sand
  Sand
Au
GM/T
G6
 
 
    0.17
    
    620.21
    541.74
    530.42
    564.12
Pt
GM/T
G6
   
   
      0.01
 
      3.59
      4.37
      5.38
      4.45
Pd
GM/T
G6
   
   
      0.01
 
      0.03
      0.04
      0.03
      0.03
Subsequent to the completion of the initial test phase, an outreach to the local Lytton First Nations council was rebuffed. Mr. Morgan subsequently withdrew
from the project, and further work was suspended.  Any further work is contingent on the approval of the Lytton First Nations by way of treaty agreements with
the Province of British Columbia.
In October 2011, the Company signed a Memorandum of Understanding with PWC to engage in a joint-venture on the Company’s Fraser River Platinum
project. Under the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding, a definitive agreement will be signed within 60 days of formal permit approval by the British
Columbia Ministry of Mines and the local First Nations governments. On June 24, 2012, a mining permit was issued by the Ministry of Mines, and operations
were initiated but a definitive agreement was never signed with PWC, and the Company continues to control 100% of the property.
 
During the first week of March, 2012, an exploration and soil sampling program on the Fraser River property was conducted under the supervision of Ms.
Agathe Bernard, B.Sc. to further block out and assess the deposit area. The sampling occurred at the margins along a boulder area that runs north to south,
with each sample consisting of 0.3 cubic yards of material. The samples were collected and shipped to ALS Labs in Vancouver for analysis, and the assay
results received from the first 7 samples analyzed were as follows:
SAMPLE
DESCRIPTION
PS12-VW1-120312
PS12-VW2-120312
PS12-VW3-120312
PS12-VW4-120312
PS12-VW5-120312
PS12-VW6-120312
PS12-VW7-120312
AVERAGE
Au
(g/t)
   2.36
   0.11
   0.493
   1.625
   3.26
   5.68
   2.59
   2.303
Pt
(g/t)
0.008
   0.025
 
   0.005
 
   0.206
   0.427
   0.096
nil 
 
nil
50
Table of Contents
 
The Company notes that these samples were all unconcentrated, consisting only of raw in-place bank material. As such, these raw samples represent what
would be expected from one bank cubic yard of gravel.
Pursuant to the issuance of a mining permit on June 24, 2012, the Company began operations at the Fraser River Project on October 23, 2012, to begin the
excavation of test pits. Operations were suspended for the winter in December, 2012, and are expected to resume in the second quarter of 2013.
 
On June 24, 2013, the Company executed a definitive joint-venture agreement for mining operations on the Company’s 100%-owned Fraser River Project
near Lytton, British Columbia, with Solid, a private company domiciled in British Columbia and based in Houston, BC. The terms of the agreement call for
Solid to provide all equipment, personnel, and related expenditures required to initiate and sustain mining operations at the Fraser River Project JV.  The
Company  will  be  responsible  for  maintaining  the  property  in  good  standing  and  securing  the  permits  required  for  mining  operations  to  proceed.    The
Company will retain 100% ownership of the property, and will be paid a 20% NSR on all metals recovered from operations, with Solid retaining 100% of the
net profits following payment of the aforementioned NSR.  Solid will be deemed the project operator, and will be responsible for the day-to-day operations.
The Gold Hill Project is located due west of the village of Salmo in southeastern British Columbia, and presently covers 1,920 hectares.
 
With the exception of patented claims known as Crown Grants shown on the map below, the Company owns a 100% undivided interest in the mineral rights
underlying the property, the surface of which is owned by the Province of British Columbia, also known as Crown Land.  The green areas on the claims map
are the patented claims (Crown Grants) that are owned by other parties and not part of the property.
 
The property is known to contain gold and silver mineralization as evidenced from the production records from the past-producing Gold Hill mine.  Production
records at the Gold Hill mine show a total of 19 tonnes of ore were mined in 1932, 1934, and 1942 from which 560 grams of gold and 1,027 grams of silver
were recovered (Source: MINFILE 082FSW204).
51
Table of Contents
In  2008,  the  Company  entered  into  a  joint-venture  agreement  with  Hidalgo  Mining  International  Inc.  ("Hidalgo")  to  explore  and  develop  the  Gold  Hill
Project.  This joint venture was terminated in October 2009.
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  new  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
 
Bouleau Creek Gold is a road-accessible property covering 1,900 hectares and is located 26 kilometres west of Vernon in southeastern British Columbia.
 
With the exception of tenures 578838 and 579151, the Bouleau Creek Property was acquired by the direct staking of claims by the Company and payment of
the  required  registration  fees  to  the  Province  of  British  Columbia.  Tenures  578838  and  579151  were  gifted  to  the  Company  by  Speebo,  Inc.,  a  private
company controlled by our Chief Executive Officer, Perry Leopold. 
As documented in British Columbia MINFILE 082LSW069, Bouleau Creek features gold and silver mineralization over an area of approximately 1,000 by
600 metres. The northern portion of the property above Bouleau Creek includes the Siwash prospect, which is documented in BC MINFILE 082LSW046 as
an area of gold and silver mineralization that extends over an area measuring 3,000 by 750 metres.
52
Table of Contents
 
In October 2011, a Pilot HMC (“Heavy Mineral Concentrates”) Geochemical program of the Bouleau Creek Gold property was conducted on behalf of the
Company by Billiken Gold Ltd of Enderby, BC.  Over 2300 pounds of sample material were collected, and subsequently processed and cataloged into 36
samples.  The samples were sent to ALS Chemex in Vancouver for analysis, who reported the following assay results:
SAMPLE
DESCRIPTION
NB-35
NB-36
NB-37
NB-38
NB-39
NB-40
NB-41
NB-42
NB-43
NB-44
NB-45
NB-46
NB-47
NB-48
NB-49
NB-50
NB-51
NB-52
NB-53
NB-54
NB-55
NB-56
NB-57
NB-58
NB-60*
NB-61
NB-62
NB-63
NB-64
NB-65
NB-66
NB-67
NB-68
NB-69
NB-70
NB-71
kg
Weight
 
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.10
   0.12
   0.10
   0.10
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.10
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.10
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.10
   0.12
   0.56
   0.10
   0.10
   0.12
   0.50
   0.54
   0.10
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
   0.12
Au
g/t
     0.475
     0.558
     0.177
     0.377
     0.301
     1.82
     0.223
   
     0.048
     0.131
     0.032
     0.007
     0.145
     0.123
     0.507
     0.369
     0.322
     0.03
     0.864
     0.256
     0.407
     0.529
     0.826
     2.09
     95.6
     0.097
     0.455
     0.212
   
   
     0.192
     0.035
     0.335
     0.333
     0.346
     0.312
<0.005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<0.005 
<0.005
*All of the samples were analyzed by conventional fire assay (Au-AA23), with the exception of sample NB-60. Due to the presence of visible gold, a metallic
screen assay (Au-SCR21) was performed on sample NB-60, where the final prepared pulp is passed through a 100 micron (Tyler 150 mesh) stainless steel
screen to separate the oversize fractions. Any +100 micron material remaining on the screen is retained and analyzed in its entirety by fire assay with
gravimetric finish and reported as the Au(+)fraction result, which for sample NB-60 was reported as 95.6 grams per tonne gold.  The Au(-)fraction (minus the
oversize fractions) assayed 0.24 g/t gold, for a total of 0.77 g/t gold when all fractions were combined and averaged.  Excluding the nugget effect from sample
NB-60, the average fire assay of all 36 samples came in at 0.37 g/t gold.
The Company intends to do a follow up exploration program during the 2013 season. The Company also intends to engage a joint-venture partner to fund
further development of the project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
53
Table of Contents
The Tulameen Platinum Project covers 231 hectares (571 acres) and is located along the Tulameen River in the Cascade Mountains of southwestern British
Columbia, approximately 150 kilometres northeast of Vancouver.
 
As documented in BC MINFILE 092HNE128, this occurrence is hosted in the dunite-rich core of the Early Jurassic Tulameen Ultramafic Complex, a zoned
Alaskan-type intrusive complex. Mineralization occurs in a serpentine breccia zone containing fragments of dunite/peridotite cemented by a matrix of
serpentine. The zone is 180 metres long, up to 155 metres wide and lies mostly north of the river, on either side of the creek. Platinum occurs in elevated
values in the breccia and in the surrounding dunite/peridotite.
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
54
Table of Contents
 
The Rachel Property is located approximately 17 kilometres northwest of the village Salmo in southeastern British Columbia, and covers 337 hectares (832
acres).
As documented in British Columbia government records, the Rachel is known to contain gold, silver and lead mineralization.  In 1980, Kimberley Gold Mines
removed 14 tonnes of ore from the adit, yielding an average assay of 66.64 grams per tonne gold, 271.5 grams per tonne silver, and 9.42 per cent lead
(Source: MINFILE 082FSW299).
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
55
Table of Contents
 
The Monte Cristo Property is located in a wide section of the Lillooet River Valley, approximately 31 kilometers northwest of the north end of Harrison Lake in
south-central British Columbia.  It covers 333 hectares (820 acres).
 
The  Company  owns  a  100%  undivided  interest  in  the  placer  rights  underlying  the  property,  the  surface  of  which  is  owned  by  the  Province  of  British
Columbia, also known as Crown Land. Subsequent to the acquisition, British Columbia created a reserve that does not allow any further staking of placer
claims.  However, as our claims were pre-existing, our placer rights have been grandfathered and remain valid for as long as we continue to maintain the
property in good standing.  The property is also adjacent to an Indian reservation, and any exploration or development work will require the approval of the
local First Nations council.
 
The Monte Cristo Property was acquired in August 2006 by way of purchase from a private individual.  Consideration paid was $9,750 USD cash and
130,000 shares of common stock, plus a 2% NSR.  
 
 
As documented in BC MINFILEs 092GNE019 and 092GNE013, the mineralization of the property consists of precious metal bearing sands that cover a 400
to 800 meter wide section of the Lillooet River valley. These post-Pleistocene sands contain gold and platinum in submicron sized particles. In 1970, a 1.4
kilogram sample of sand, taken at least a meter below surface, assayed 2.47 grams per tonne gold, 4.80 grams per tonne silver, 2.77 grams per tonne
platinum, and 2.71 grams per tonne palladium.
56
Table of Contents
 
On February 14, 2012, an exploration and sampling program on the Monte Cristo property was conducted under the supervision of Ms. Agathe Bernard,
B.Sc.. The initial goal of the work program was to verify the presence of submicron size metals in the sand material along the Lillooet River, which was
previously indicated by work conducted in 1970 by G.L. Kirwin, B.Sc., and J.M. Ashton, P.Eng., as documented in BC Assessment Report 2589. Instead, the
crew unexpectedly found an abundance of visible gold, with some particles as large as one millimeter.
 
The first 17 samples of black sand were concentrated on site using a Keen concentrator and reduced in volume by approximately 20 to 1000 times to
concentrate the fine part of the sample. The concentration was supervised by Ms. Bernard, and the samples were sent to ALS Labs in Vancouver for
analysis. The assay results are reported as follows:
SAMPLE
DESCRIPTION
Weight
kg
PS17-120216
PS01-120215
PS02-120215
PS03-120215
PS04-120215
PS05-120215
PS06-120215
PS07-120215
PS08-120215
PS09-120215
PS10-120215
0.12
   0.04
   0.06
   0.04
   0.08
   0.16
   0.12
   0.02
   0.02
   0.08
0.06
Au
g/t
 
   75.3
    NSS*
   79.8
 
   71.7
 
 
   5.66
   3.32
 
   27.4
 
   65.3
 
   71.3
 
 
   9.47
0.76
Ag
Au
g/t (diluted)**     g/t
 
   3.77
    NSS
   3.99
 
   3.59
 
 
   0.28
   0.17
 
   1.37
 
   3.27
 
   3.57
 
 
   0.47
20.2
    NSS
 
   0.06
    nil
 
 
    nil
 
    nil
23
   1.84
2.18
4.13
Pt
0.012
Ag
g/t (diluted)**     g/t
    nil
 
   1.01
    NSS
    NSS
    nil
 
   0
    nil
    nil
 
 
    nil
 
    nil
    nil
    nil
 
    nil
    nil
 
    nil
1.15
   0.09
0.11
0.21
Pd
0.003
g/t
 
    NSS
0.002
   0.001
   0.005
   0.003
   0.003
   0.006
   0.004
   0.002
0.04
0.09
0
nil
0.003
PS11-120215
PS12-120216
PS13-120516
PS14-120216
PS15-120516
PS16-120216
0.08
   0.14
   0.04
   0.06
   0.1
   0.08
1.76
   112.5
   60.8
   8.94
   114
   74.8
0.09
   5.63
   3.04
   0.45
   5.7
   3.74
nil
    nil
    nil
    nil
nil
    nil
    nil
    nil
0.005
0.067
nil
    nil
 
    nil
    nil
0.004
   0.003
   0.004
nil
 
 
    nil
    nil
0.24
0.01
65.1
3.26
* NSS is non-sufficient sample size
** As the samples were concentrated, only the very fine and heavy particulate were analyzed. This magnifies the values from real concentration 20 to 1000
times. The estimated diluted values indicate what would be expected from a raw bank cubic yard of material prior to concentration processing.
 
In January 2012, prior to the above described work program, the Company amended its aforementioned Memorandum of Understanding with PWC to
include a joint-venture on the Monte Cristo property.  As of the date of this prospectus, a definitive agreement has not yet been executed. Under the terms of
the Memorandum of Understanding, a definitive agreement will be signed within 60 days of formal permit approval by the British Columbia Ministry of Mines
and the local First Nations governments.  Said permits have been applied for, but as of the date of this prospectus these milestones have not yet been
achieved, and there is no guarantee that such approvals will be forthcoming, or that the joint-venture will be successful.
57
Table of Contents
 
The  Mt.  Washington/Connie  Hill  Property  is  located  on  Vancouver  Island,  approximately  15  kilometres  northwest  of  Courtenay  in  southwestern  British
Columbia, and presently covers 2,629 contiguous hectares (6,493 acres). The property extends from Constitution Hill and Wolf Lake southwest towards
Mount Washington, and includes several zones of mineralization for 10 kilometres along Murex Creek to Mt. Washington, including the Lupus, Ideal, Murex,
Oyster, and the southern portion of the Domineer deposits at Mount Washington. 
 
As documented in British Columbia government records, the property is known to contain gold, silver zinc, copper, and lead mineralization.  A sample of the
zone material taken from the Lupus showing across 0.90 metres assayed 4.42 grams per tonne gold, 20.57 grams per tonne silver, 0.60% zinc, 0.15%
copper, 1.59% lead and 0.01% arsenic (Source: MINFILE 092F 308).
58
Table of Contents
 
The Murex zone is on the northeast slope of Mt. Washington, and represents an area of mineralization covering approximately 700 by 700 metres, with an
estimated depth of 175 metres. It has been previously tested by a number of diamond-drill holes by several previous operators, with a 4 metre section of core
assaying 4.08 per cent copper, 32.91 grams per tonne silver and 6.31 grams per tonne gold. A total of five zones have been identified within the Murex
deposit, labeled Zones A, B, C, D, and E. Drilling on the Murex by Noranda in 1988 yielded significant intercepts, as follows (Sources: MINFILE 092F 206,
BC Assessment Report 30010):
·  NMX-88-17 yielded 0.25m. @ 3.7 g/t gold, 46 g/t silver and 9.7% copper from 196.5 to 197.21 m. from a massive sulphide vein in Zone A
·  NMX-89-25 yielded 4.0 m. @ 6.5 g/t gold, 30 g/t silver and 4.1% copper from 29 to 33m., including: 1.0 m. @ 21 g/t gold, 71 g/t silver and 9.3% copper from
29 to 30 m. in a massive sulphide vein in basalt with pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and pyrite
·  NMX-89-26 yielded 6.5 m. @ 0.23 g/t gold, 7.3 g/t silver and 1.1% copper from 16.2 to 22.7 m. in a siliceous basaltic breccia with pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite
The Oyster zone is situated approximately 3 km north of Mt. Washington. Drilling and sampling documented in a 2008 NI 43-101 Technical Report by the
previous operator, Bluerock Resources, documents a 43 centimetre section of core that assayed 2.78 grams per tonne gold, 6.86 grams per tonne silver, and
0.07% copper (Sources: MINFILE 092F 365, BC Assessment Report 30010).
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
 
The  Argo  Gold  Property  is  located  10  kilometres  west  of  the  south  end  of  Tatlayako  Lake,  approximately  168  miles  northwest  of  Vancouver,  British
Columbia.  It covers 463 hectares (1,144 acres) and includes ten reverted crown grants.
 
The mineralized area of economic interest covers several square kilometres immediately south of Ottarasko Creek. The strike length is estimated as being at
least 3 kilometres long, and is up to 300 metres in width. The target prospects are known as the Langara, the Standard, and the Argo.
59
Table of Contents
 
As documented in British Columbia government records, the Argo property is known to contain gold and silver mineralization.  On the Standard occurrence,
mineralization is traceable for 75 metres over a width of 1 to 2 metres, with assays at 15 grams per tonne gold and 20.6 grams per tonne silver over 2
metres  (Source: BC MINFILE 092N 037).
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
The Loughborough Gold Property is located on the east side of Loughborough Inlet, approximately 140 miles northwest of Vancouver, British Columbia, and
covers 288 hectares (711 acres).
The property is known to contain gold, silver, and copper mineralization.  Production records at the past-producing Loughborough Gold mine from 1935 to
1939 show that 114 ounces of gold, 457 ounces of silver, and 185 pounds of copper were produced from 122 tons mined and milled (Source: MINFILE 092K
048).
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
60
Table of Contents
 
The Lynx Gold Property covers 622 hectares (1,536 acres) and is located approximately 75 miles southeast of Vernon in southeastern British Columbia.
 
 
The  property  is  known  to  contain  gold  and  silver  mineralization.    One  drill  intersection  of  the  vein  assayed  3.77  grams  per  tonne  gold  over  0.6
metres.    Another  intersection  assayed  28.52  grams  per  tonne  gold,  13.4  grams  per  tonne  silver  and  0.01  per  cent  copper  across  1.07  metres  (Source:
MINFILE 082LSE055).
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
61
Table of Contents
 
Cherry Gold is a road-accessible property that covers 1,138 hectares (2,811 acres) located 9 kilometres east of Cherryville in southeastern British Columbia.
 
 
The property is known to contain gold, silver, and lead mineralization, as documented in BC MINFILE 082LSE063.
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
62
Table of Contents
 
Pine River Vanadium covers 330 hectares (815 acres) and is located in the Pine River Valley of north-central British Columbia, approximately 700
kilometres northeast of Vancouver and about 600 kilometres northwest of Edmonton, Alberta.  While its location is remote, the property has excellent
infrastructure with regard to both transportation and energy.  A paved highway passes through and alongside the claims, which also runs parallel with the
Pine River.  The B.C. Railway crosses on the opposite side of the valley as does the Peace River Power transmission line. Natural gas and oil pipelines also
follow the highway through the valley.
 
With the exception of tenures 623083, the Pine River Property was acquired by the direct staking of claims by the Company and payment of the required
registration fees to the Province of British Columbia.  Tenure 623083 was gifted to the Company by Speebo, Inc., a private company controlled by our Chief
Executive Officer, Perry Leopold.  
 
Sampling documented in BC MINFILE 093O 009 has defined a vanadium-bearing zone with a length of 200 metres and an estimated true width of 100
metres.
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
63
Table of Contents
 
New  Eskay  Creek  is  located  in  northwestern  British  Columbia,  approximately  70  kilometres  north  of  Stewart,  and  consists  of  2,400  hectares  (5,927
acres).    Road  access  is  provided  by  the  Eskay  Creek  Mine  Road,  which  extends  from  the  Stewart-Cassiar  Highway  at  Bob  Quinn  Lake  and  traverses
through the western portion of the Company’s claims before it reaches the Eskay Creek Mine.
According to British Columbia government records documented in BC MINFILE 104B 008, the major geological structure at Eskay Creek is known to trend to
the north-northeast.  This trend runs through the New Eskay Creek property, which to date remains unexplored.
 
The  Company  has  no  plans  at  the  present  time  to  explore  the  property  independently,  and  intends  to  engage  a  joint-venture  partner  to  fund  the
project.  There is no guarantee the Company will be successful in this effort.
64
Table of Contents
 
Employees
 
We have one full-time employee who is our CEO and Chairman, Mr. Perry Leopold. Mr. Leopold devotes 40 plus hours to the Company each week. We
believe we have good relations with all of our employees and do not have any unionized workers.
 
Competition
 
As metal prices continue to increase and demand grows, we expect new companies to form and compete with the already numerous junior and developed
mining, exploration and production companies in existence.  Some of these companies may be more efficient in locating new claims, which could impede
our business plan.  As well, some of these companies may be better funded, or more successful in attracting joint-venture partners, and thereby diminish our
ability to execute our business plan.
 
Government Regulation
 
With the exception of the Ruby Mine in Sierra County, California, all of our mining claims are in British Columbia, Canada, where we are subject to regulation
by  numerous  federal  and  provincial  governmental  authorities,  but  most  importantly,  by  the  British  Columbia  Ministry  of  Energy,  Mines,  and  Petroleum
Resources.  Our Ruby Mine Project in Sierra County, California, is subject to US regulation by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal
Department of the Interior, the Bureau of Land Management, the US Forestry Service, the US Department of Labor Mine Safety and Health Administration, as
well  as  other  comparable  state  agencies,  such  as  the  California  Department  of  Conservation  Office  of  Mine  Reclamation,  the  California  State  Water
Resources Control Board  and the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health.  At the Ruby, we are also subject to various federal and state
statutes, such as the federal Mine Safety & Health Act of 1977, the federal Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006,  the federal
Comprehensive  Environmental  Response,  Compensation  and  Liability  Act,  also  known  as  the  "Superfund"  law,  the  federal  Clean  Air  Act  ,  the  federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act. Where EB-5 funding has been applied for, offered, or
secured, we are subject to regulation by the US Department of Homeland Security and the USCIS. The acquisition of a prospect in Mexico, or any other
country, will be subject to similar regulatory agencies requirements by various agencies in each country.  In all cases, the failure or delay in making required
filings and obtaining regulatory approvals or licenses will adversely affect our ability to carry out our business plan.  The failure to obtain and comply with any
regulations or licenses may result in fines or other penalties, and even the loss of our rights over a prospect. We expect compliance with these regulations to
be a substantial expense in terms of time and cost. Therefore, compliance with or the failure to comply with applicable regulation will affect our ability to
succeed  in  our  business  plan  and  ultimately  to  generate  revenues  and  profits.    We  expect  that  our  operations  will  comply  in  all  material  respects  with
applicable laws and regulations.  We believe that the existence and enforcement of such laws and regulations will have no more restrictive an effect on our
operations than on other similar companies in the resource industry.
 
Seasonality of Business
 
Weather conditions will affect our ability to mine the Ruby once we begin mining operations.  In the winter months, especially January, February, and March,
the roads leading to the property may become impassable because of snow. While we expect to maintain a year-round operation once the Ruby Mine is in
full production, we may experience operational interruptions if our work crews are off-site and unable to reach the mine, or if the delivery of supplies are
postponed, etc.  We expect that any such interruptions will be temporary, although any interruption of a significant duration may have a material effect on our
revenue.
 
Reports to Security Holders
 
Pursuant to the informational requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, we file annual, quarterly and other reports and information with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. You may read and copy these reports, statements, or other information we file at the SEC's public reference room at
100 F Street N.E. Washington D.C. 20549. Our filings will also be available to the public from commercial document retrieval services and the Internet
worldwide website maintained by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission at www.sec.gov.
65
Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You  should  read  the  following  discussion  of  our  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations  in  conjunction  with  the financial  statements  and  the  notes
thereto,  included  elsewhere  in  this  prospectus.    The  following  discussion  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  reflect  our  plans,  estimates  and
beliefs.  Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.  Factors that could cause or contribute to those
differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this prospectus, particularly in the “Risk Factors” section.
 
Overview
 
We  seek  to  acquire,  develop,  and  exploit  natural  resource  properties  with  extensive  reserves  of  precious  metals,  including  gold,  silver,  platinum,  and
palladium, as well as base metals, including copper, zinc, lead and molybdenum. The Company’s business plan is based on the Generative Business
Model, which is designed to leverage our mining properties and mineral claims into near-term revenue streams even during the earliest stages of exploration
and development.  This is accomplished by entering into sales, joint-venture, and/or option contracts with other mining companies, for which the Company
generates revenue through payments in cash, stock, and other consideration.
 
On July 1, 2011 we acquired the Ruby Mine. The Ruby Mine is an underground placer and lode mine located between Downieville and Forest City, in Sierra
County, California.  With the exception of the Ruby Mine, we currently do not control any properties with active or imminent mining operations in the United
States. Operations commenced at the Ruby Mine during Q4 2011 to rehabilitate the Ruby Tunnel and renovate the infrastructure.  This work is still ongoing,
but there is no guarantee that mining operations will begin, or that our mining operations will be successful.
With the exception of the Fraser River Project, we currently do not control any properties with active or imminent mining operations in Canada. Operations
commenced at the Fraser River Project on October 23, 2012, to begin the excavation of test pits, but there is no guarantee that commercial production will
begin, or that our mining operations will be successful.
On November 1, 2011, the Company agreed to an exclusive option on the Taber Mine in Sierra County, California, for a period of up to nine months, during
which  time  the  Company  will  continue  to  conduct  further  due  diligence.    The  consideration  to  be  paid  during  the  term  of  the  option  is  $2,000  per
month.  Should the Company elect to exercise the option, the parties will then enter into a definitive lease agreement, with an optional buyout provision.   As
of the date of this prospectus, the term of the option has expired, and the Company has elected not to renew it.
As  of  Nov  19,  2012,  the  Company  announced  TSX  approval  of  a  previously  announced  option  agreement  with  Caribou  King  Resources  Ltd.  on  the
Company's Willa Claims in southeastern British Columbia.  Under the agreement, Caribou may earn up to a 100% interest in the Willa Claims by making
aggregate payments to North Bay of $232,500 USD in cash and issuing 1,000,000 shares of Caribou common stock. Of the aggregate payments, $7,500 in
cash and 500,000 shares are due upon receipt of regulatory acceptance of the Agreement by the TSX Venture Exchange, which is now effective, $50,000
cash and 500,000 shares are due upon the first anniversary of the Agreement, and a $175,000 cash payment is due upon the second anniversary of the
Agreement. In addition to the consideration received, North Bay shall be granted a royalty equal to 2% of net smelter returns ("NSR"). At any time up to the
commencement of commercial production, Caribou may purchase one-half of the royalty (i.e., 1%) in consideration of $1,000,000 USD payable to North Bay,
such that North Bay will then retain a 1% royalty.
 
As  of  December  31,  2011,  the  Company  has  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (“MOU”)  with  Devlin's  Bench  Mining  Ltd  and  P.  Wright  Contracting  Ltd
(“PWC”) to engage in a joint-venture on the Company’s Fraser River Platinum project.  Subsequent to December 31, 2011, the MOU was amended to
include a second joint-venture on the Company’s Monte Cristo property.  As of the date of this prospectus, a definitive agreement has not yet been executed.
Under the terms of the MOU, a definitive agreement will be signed within 60 days of formal permit approval by the British Columbia Ministry of Mines and the
local First Nations governments.  A mining permit for the Fraser River Project was issued on June 25, 2012, but as of the date of this prospectus a definitive
agreement with PWC has not yet been signed.  As of the date of this prospectus, the Company continues to own and control 100% of the project. In the
interim, the Company has engaged PWC as an independent contractor to initiate mining operations.
66
Table of Contents
On June 24, 2013, the Company executed a definitive joint-venture agreement for mining operations on the Company’s 100%-owned Fraser River Project
near Lytton, British Columbia, with Solid Holdings Ltd. (“Solid”), a private company domiciled in British Columbia and based in Houston, BC. The terms of
the agreement call for Solid to provide all equipment, personnel, and related expenditures required to initiate and sustain mining operations at the Fraser
River Project JV.  The Company will be responsible for maintaining the property in good standing and securing the permits required for mining operations to
proceed.    The  Company  will  retain  100%  ownership  of  the  property,  and  will  be  paid  a  20%  net  smelter  royalty  (“NSR”)  on  all  metals  recovered  from
operations, with Solid retaining 100% of the net profits following payment of the aforementioned NSR.  Solid will be deemed the project operator, and will be
responsible for the day-to-day operations.
With the exception of the Ruby Mine and the Fraser River Project, we currently do not control any properties with active mining operations. The Ruby Mine
has  begun  pre-production  operations  to  rehabilitate  the  Ruby  tunnel  and  the  Fraser  River  Project  has  begun  initial  test  pit  excavations,  but  there  is  no
guarantee yet that commercial production of gold can commence.
 
As of June 30, 2013, our total holdings are 198 claims encompassing 43,709 acres (17,696 hectares). This is a snapshot in time, and the number may be
quite different six months or one year from now. The Company has a very active exploration program in place, which on a daily basis will add new claims,
drop or reduce the size of others, and maintain the rest.   All of our claims are under constant review, and may be decreased or further increased at any time,
depending on the constant re-evaluation of our present holdings, and the availability of new opportunities in the future as other claims of merit become
available for acquisition. Our mineral property acquisition costs are capitalized, and our mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred.  When
it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the costs incurred to
develop such property are capitalized. To date the Company has not established any reserves on its claims.  Our acquisition of any mining claim in British
Columbia conveys the mineral or placer rights for mining-related purposes only, and while our rights allow us to use the surface of a claim for mining and
exploration  activities,  our  mineral  claims  do  not  convey  any  other  surface,  residential  or  recreational  rights  to  the  Company.    Additionally,  our  right  to
extraction is not absolute, as any mechanized extraction work on claims in BC requires additional permits and possibly conversion of our claims to mining
leases, the approval of which is not guaranteed.  Based on the limitations of our claims and unproven reserves, all capitalized costs on our claims in British
Columbia were expensed as of June 30, 2013.
 
As of June 30, 2013 and June 30, 2012, cash gains from claim sales totaled $113,499 and $4,500, respectively.  As per GAAP, these revenues have been
classified as “Other Income”. Top-line revenue is reserved for when we begin actual mining operations and begin generating revenue from mine production.
 
We  currently  generate  revenue  from  claim  sales  and  joint-venture  agreements.    When  we  sell  a  claim,  we  capture  near-term  revenue,  but  forego  any
possibility of a future revenue stream.  When we enter into a joint-venture, we receive near-term revenue as well as a commitment for future revenue, but
since the joint-venture partner has the option to withdraw at any time, we cannot project revenue from a joint-venture into the future.  However, should a joint-
venture partner withdraw, we still retain control of the asset, and can therefore enter into another joint-venture with another partner, develop the property
ourselves, or else elect to sell the claims.
 
We expect to generate near-term revenue growth through claim sales and joint-venture activities. However, there is no assurance that the Company can
successfully secure new joint-venture partnerships on terms that are satisfactory to the Company.
 
We expect to generate long-term revenue from our acquisition of the Ruby Mine, through the acquisition of additional mines, and by the development of our
properties, either independently or through joint-venture partners, into operating mines.  There is no assurance that these efforts will be successful, or that the
projects will be economically viable.
 
Going Concern
 
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated modest revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends
and  is  unlikely  to  pay  dividends.  The  continuation  of  the  Company  as  a  going  concern  is  dependent  upon  the  continued  financial  support  from  its
shareholders,  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  obtain  necessary  equity  financing  to  continue  operations  and  to  determine  the  existence,  discovery  and
successful exploration of economically recoverable reserves in its resource properties, confirmation of the Company’s interests in the underlying properties,
and  the  attainment  of  profitable  operations.  The  Company  has  had  very  little  operating  history  to  date.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  do  not
include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the
Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
67
Table of Contents
 
We  have  experienced  recurring  net  losses  from  operations,  which  losses  have  caused  an  accumulated  deficit  of  $14,851,172  as  of  June  30,  2013.  In
addition, we have a working capital deficit of $3,446,084 as of June 30, 2013. We had a net loss of $1,375,324 for the six months ended June 30, 2013, and
net losses of $2,119,706 and $1,045,749 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These factors, among others, raise substantial
doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to generate profits and are unable to continue to obtain financing to meet our working
capital requirements, we may have to curtail our business sharply or cease operations altogether. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon
our  ability  to  generate  sufficient  cash  flow  to  meet  our  obligations  on  a  timely  basis  to  retain  our  current  financing,  to  obtain  additional  financing,  and,
ultimately, to attain profitability. Should any of these events not occur, we will be adversely affected and we may have to cease operations.
 
As of December 31, 2012 the accumulated deficit attributable to CEO stock awards, including previous management and valued according to GAAP, totals
$2,558,535  since  inception  in  2004.  As  of  December  31,  2012  the  accumulated  deficit  attributable  to  CEO  compensation  is  $884,474  in  deferred
compensation.  This reflects the total amounts unpaid as per the management agreement with The PAN Network dating back to January 2006, less any
amounts actually paid or forgiven since 2006.  These totals are non-cash expenses which are included in the accumulated deficit since inception.  Actual
CEO compensation paid in cash over the course of the seven years since 2006 has consisted of $10,000 in 2006, $50,764 in 2007, $23,139 in 2008,
$29,979 in 2009, $21,988 in 2010, $90,000 in 2011, and $116,000 in 2012.  These cash expenditures are also included in the accumulated deficit.
 
The ongoing execution of our business plan is expected to result in operating losses over the next twelve months. Management believes it will need to raise
capital through loans or stock issuances in order to have enough cash to maintain its operations for the next twelve months. There are no assurances that we
will be successful in achieving our goals of obtaining cash through loans, stock issuances, or increasing revenues and reaching profitability.
 
In view of these conditions, our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to meet our financing requirements, and to ultimately
achieve  profitable  operations.  Management  believes  that  its  current  and  future  plans  provide  an  opportunity  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  The
accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the
amounts and classification of liabilities that may be necessary in the event we cannot continue as a going concern.
 
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
 
Revenue Recognition
 
The company has recognized no mining revenue to date. In the future mining revenue will be recognized according to the policy described below.
 
Revenue is recognized when the following conditions are met:
 
(a) persuasive evidence of an arrangement to purchase exists;
(b) the price is fixed or determinable;
(c) the product has been delivered; and
(d) collection of the sales price is reasonably assured.
 
Under the terms of concentrate sales contracts with third-party smelters, final prices for the gold, silver, zinc, copper and lead in the concentrate are set based
on the prevailing spot market metal prices on a specified future date based on the date that the concentrate is delivered to the smelter. The Company records
revenues under these contracts based on forward prices at the time of delivery, which is when transfer of legal title to concentrate passes to the third-party
smelters. The terms of the contracts result in differences between the recorded estimated price at delivery and the final settlement price. These differences
are adjusted through revenue at each subsequent financial statement date.
 
Mineral Property Costs
 
Mineral property acquisition costs are capitalized upon acquisition. Mineral property exploration and development costs are expensed as incurred. When it
has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven, proved, probable, inferred, or possible
reserves, the costs incurred to develop such property are capitalized. To date the Company has not established any proven or probable reserves on its
mineral properties.
68
Table of Contents
 
The Company reviews long-lived assets for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not
be recoverable. If the review indicates that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable, the potential impairment is measured based on a
projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate that is considered to be commensurate with the risk inherent in the Company's current business
model. For purposes of recognition and measurement of an impairment loss, a long-lived asset is grouped with other assets at the lowest level for which
identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. 
 
Income Taxes
 
The Company utilizes the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based
on the differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of the assets and liabilities, and are measured using enacted tax rates that will be
in effect when the differences are expected to reverse.
 
The Company adopted the provisions of the FASB interpretation related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which seeks to reduce the diversity in
practice associated with the accounting and reporting for uncertainty in income tax positions.  The Company believes it does not have any uncertain tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in its income tax returns.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company adopted the FASB standard related to fair value measurement at inception. The standard defines fair value, establishes a framework for
measuring fair value and expands disclosure of fair value measurements. The standard applies under other accounting pronouncements that require or
permit fair value measurements and, accordingly, does not require any new fair value measurements. The standard clarifies that fair value is an exit price,
representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such,
fair value is a market-based measurement that should be determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability.
As a basis for considering such assumptions, the standard established a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair
value as follows.
Level 1. Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
 
Level 2. Inputs, other than quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
 
Level 3. Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
The  Company  values  its  derivative  instruments  related  to  embedded  conversion  features  and  warrants  from  the  issuance  of  convertible  debentures  in
accordance with the Level 3 guidelines. For the six month period ended June 30, 2013, the following table reconciles the beginning and ending balances for
financial instruments that are recognized at fair value in these consolidated financial statements. The fair value of embedded conversion features that have
floating conversion features and tainted common stock equivalents (warrants and convertible debt) are estimated using a Binomial Lattice model. The key
inputs to this valuation model as of June 30, 2013, were: Volatility of 116%, inherent term of instruments equal to the remaining contractual term, quoted
closing stock prices on valuation dates, and various settlement scenarios and probability percentages summing to 100%.
Balance at
December 31,
New
Level 3 –
Derivative liabilities from:
Conversion features – embedded derivative
Conversion features – tainted equity
Warrants – tainted equity
$
   
   
  $
2012
82,237    $
208,971     
205,619     
496,827    $
Issuances
166,808    $
-     
-     
166,808    $
Conversions
(83,114)   $
(39,177)    
-     
(122,291)   $
Changes in
Fair Values
47,034    $
176,838     
334,673     
558,545    $
Balance at
June 30, 2013  
 
 
212,965 
346,632 
540,292 
1,099,889
Changes in the unobservable input values would likely cause material changes in the fair value of the Company’s Level 3 financial instruments. The
significant unobservable input used in the fair value measurement is the estimation for probability percentages assigned to future expected settlement
possibilities. A significant increase (decrease) in this distribution of percentages would result in a higher (lower) fair value measurement.
69
Table of Contents
 
The following table presents assets that were measured and recognized at fair value as of December 31, 2012 and the year then ended on a recurring basis:
Description
   Available For Sale Securities
 Totals
$
  $
Level 2
Level 1
12,550    $
12,550    $
The following table presents assets that were measured and recognized at fair value as of June 30, 2013:
Description
   Available For Sale Securities
 Totals
$
  $
Level 2
Level 1
15,000    $
15,000    $
-    $
       -    $
-    $
       -    $
Level 3
Level 3
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
Unrealized
Total
Loss
12,500 
12,500
Unrealized
Total
Loss
10,050 
10,050
The Company had no other assets or liabilities valued at fair value on a recurring or non-recurring basis as of June 30, 2013 or December 31, 2012.
Stock Based Compensation
 
Beginning  January  1,  2006,  the  Company  adopted  the  FASB  standard  related  to  stock  based  compensation.  The  standard  requires  all  share-based
payments to employees (which includes non-employee Directors), including employee stock options, warrants and restricted stock, be measured at the fair
value of the award and expensed over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period). The fair value of common stock options or warrants granted
to employees is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model by using the historical volatility of comparable public companies.
The calculation also takes into account the common stock fair market value at the grant date, the exercise price, the expected life of the common stock option
or warrant, the dividend yield and the risk-free interest rate.
 
The Company from time to time may issue stock options, warrants and restricted stock to acquire goods or services from third parties. Restricted stock,
options or warrants issued to other than employees or directors are recorded on the basis of their fair value, which is measured as of the date required by the
Emerging Issues Task Force guidance related to accounting for equity instruments issued to non-employees. In accordance with this guidance, the options
or warrants are valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model on the basis of the market price of the underlying equity instrument on the “valuation
date,” which for options and warrants related to contracts that have substantial disincentives to non-performance, is the date of the contract, and for all other
contracts is the vesting date. Expense related to the options and warrants is recognized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the period over which
services  are  to  be  received  or  the  vesting  period.      As  of  June  30,  2013,  no  options  or  warrants  have  been  issued  for  compensation  and  none  are
outstanding.    As  of  June  30,  2013,  16.5  million  warrants  have  been  issued  and  are  outstanding  in  connection  with  the  Ruby  Mine  Purchase  Option
Agreement executed on September 27, 2010.
 
Beneficial Conversion Feature
From  time  to  time,  the  Company  may  issue  convertible  notes  that  may  have  conversion  prices  that  create  an  embedded  beneficial  conversion  feature
pursuant to the Emerging Issues Task Force guidance on beneficial conversion features. A beneficial conversion feature exists on the date a convertible
note is issued when the fair value of the underlying common stock to which the note is convertible into is in excess of the remaining unallocated proceeds of
the  note  after  first  considering  the  allocation  of  a  portion  of  the  note  proceeds  to  the  fair  value  of  any  attached  equity  instruments,  if  any  related  equity
instruments  were  granted  with  the  debt.  In  accordance  with  the  guidance,  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  beneficial  conversion  feature  is  recorded  as  a  debt
discount with a corresponding amount to additional paid in capital. The debt discount is amortized to interest expense over the life of the note using the
effective interest method.
 
Deferred Financing Costs
Deferred financing costs include debt issuance costs primarily incurred by the Company as part of Convertible Note transactions. Deferred financing costs as
of June 30, 2013 was $11,781 net of amortization of $16,540. This includes a commission paid to Carter Terry & Company, a registered broker-dealer,
consisting  of  $10,000  in  cash  and  85,000  restricted  Rule  144  shares  of  common  stock  valued  at  $5,620  on  the  date  of  issuance.    This  amount  was
capitalized to Deferred Financing Costs and amortized over the term of the note. Amortization is provided on a straight-line basis over the terms of the
respective debt instruments to which the costs relate and is included in interest expense.  The difference between the straight line and effective interest
methods is immaterial due to the short term nature of the convertible notes.
70
Table of Contents
 
Accounting for Derivative Instruments
All  embedded  derivatives  within  convertible  debt  have  been  recorded  on  the  balance  sheet  at  fair  value  based  on  the  lattice  model  calculation.  These
derivatives, including embedded derivatives in the Company’s convertible notes which have floating conversion prices based on changes to the quoted price
of  the  Company’s  common  stock  and  common  stock  equivalents  tainted  as  a  result  of  the  derivative,  are  separately  valued  and  accounted  for  on  the
Company’s balance sheet. Fair values for exchange traded securities and derivatives are based on quoted market prices. Where market prices are not
readily available, fair values are determined using market based pricing models incorporating readily observable market data and requiring judgment and
estimates.
Lattice Valuation Model
The  Company  valued  the  conversion  features  in  their  convertible  notes  and  tainted  warrants  using  a  lattice  valuation  model,  with  the  assistance  of  a
valuation consultant. The lattice model values these instruments based on a probability weighted discounted cash flow model. The Company uses the model
to  develop  a  set  of  potential  scenarios.  Probabilities  of  each  scenario  occurring  during  the  remaining  term  of  the  instruments  are  determined  based  on
conversion prices relative to current stock prices, historic volatility, and estimates on investor behavior. These probabilities are used to create a cash flow
projection over the term of the instruments and determine the probability that the projected cash flow will be achieved. A discounted weighted average cash
flow for each scenario is then calculated and compared to the discounted cash flow of the instruments without the compound embedded derivative in order to
determine a value for the compound embedded derivative.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.  The Company accounts for goodwill and
intangibles under ASC Topic 350, Intangibles – Goodwill and Other, which does not permit amortization, but requires the Company to test goodwill and other
indefinite-lived assets for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist.
Income/Loss Per Share of Common Stock
 
Basic net loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted earnings per share include
additional dilution from common stock equivalents, such as stock issuable pursuant to the exercise of stock options and warrants. Common stock equivalents
are not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share when the Company reports a loss because to do so would be anti-dilutive for the periods
presented.  As of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, there were 52,131,637 and 47,532,822 common stock equivalents outstanding, respectively.
Results of Operations for the Three months Ended June 30, 2013 Compared to Results of Operations for the Three months Ended June 30, 2012
Gains from Other Income.  For the three months ended June 30, 2013 and June 30, 2012, the Company’s  other income related to mineral claim sales and
joint-ventures was $0 and $0, respectively. The Company has spent $20,721 and $ 28,756 in British Columbia mineral property costs during each respective
period in order to generate cash flows, consisting of claim registration, maintenance fees, and exploration expenses.  This decrease is primarily attributable
to the prior sale of certain claims in British Columbia that slightly reduced our carrying costs.
Operating Expenses.  For the three months ended June 30, 2013 and June 30, 2012, the Company had operating expenses of $325,675 and $250,748,
respectively. The decrease in operating expenses for the three months ended June 30, 2013, was due primarily to a decrease in Ruby Mine development
costs during the early spring months.
 
Net Loss. For the three months ended June 30, 2013, we had a net loss of $784,903, and for the three months ended June 30. 2012 we had a net loss of
$355,916. The increase in net loss that we incurred during the three months ended June 30, 2013 was due to primarily to a non-cash charge for derivative
liabilities.
Results of Operations for the Six months Ended June 30, 2013 Compared to Results of Operations for the Six months Ended June 30, 2012
Gains from Other Income.  For the six months ended June 30, 2013 and June 30, 2012, the Company’s  other income related to mineral claim sales and joint-
ventures was $113,499 and $4,500, respectively. This increase is primarily attributable to the completion of transactions that were previously pending. The
Company  has  spent  $44,390  and  $51,791  in  British  Columbia  mineral  property  costs  during  each  respective  period  in  order  to  generate  cash  flows,
consisting of claim registration, maintenance fees, and exploration expenses.  This decrease is primarily attributable to the sale of certain claims in British
Columbia that slightly reduced our carrying costs.
71
Table of Contents
 
Operating Expenses.    For  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2013  and  June  30,  2012,  the  Company  had  operating  expenses  of  $507,621  and  $557,259,
respectively. The decrease in operating expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2013, was due primarily to a decrease in Ruby Mine development costs
during the winter months.
 
Net Loss. For the six months ended June 30, 2013, we had a net loss of $1,375,324, and for the six months ended June 30. 2012 we had a net loss of
$895,168. The increase in net loss that we incurred during the six months ended June 30, 2013 was due to primarily to a non-cash charge for derivative
liabilities.
 
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared to Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2011
 
Gains from Other Income.  For the twelve months ended December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, the Company’s  other income related to mineral claim
sales and other income from joint-ventures in British Columbia was $37,000 and $103,500, respectively. The Company has spent $68,536 and $72,495 in
mineral property acquisition and maintenance costs during each respective period in order to generate cash flows, consisting primarily of British Columbia
claim registration and maintenance fees. 
 
Operating  Expenses.   For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  had  operating  expenses  of  $1,124,691,  which  included  general  and
administrative expenses of $339,524 and mining property costs of $591,926.  Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2011 were $891,920,
which included general and administrative expenses of $345,451 and mining property costs of $265,137.  Our increase in operating expenses was mainly
from development and construction costs at the Ruby Mine, and exploration expenditures incurred in British Columbia.
 
Net Loss.  For the year ended December 31, 2012, we had a net loss of $2,119,706.  Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $1,045,749. 
The increase in our net loss was attributed primarily to development and construction costs at the Ruby Mine, and increased charges for interest expense
and derivative liabilities.
72
Table of Contents
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan.
Since its inception, the Company has been funded primarily by its founders, board members, employees and persons related to or acquainted with these, the
sale of securities, and the issuance of debt. To remedy the current deficiency in our liquidity position, we will raise funds through our equity credit line
established with Tangiers Investors, LP (see Exhibit 10.0 under Item 15 herein), additional equity offerings, strategic agreements with partner companies,
and debt. We currently have no external sources of liquidity and internal sources (revenue from sales) are very limited. Excluding management fees, which
are often deferred as-needed, the Company has required approximately $7,000 per month to maintain its mineral claims in British Columbia in good standing
and pay general administrative expenses.   We believe these expenses can be maintained at present levels for the foreseeable future.  Going forward, as a
fully-reporting company, we estimate it will cost an additional $2,500 to $5,000 per month in SEC compliance fees, consisting primarily of accounting, legal,
and edgarization fees.  The Company believes it can generate enough revenue from claim sales and joint-ventures to cover these costs, and we believe we
can rely on our equity credit line established with Tangiers or loans to make up for any revenue shortfall.  If we cannot generate sufficient revenue or raise
additional funds through equity, we may not be able to maintain our mineral claims or make timely filings with the SEC.
The Company also plans on generating revenue through mining once commercial operations begin on any of its properties.  Towards this end, the Company
has acquired the Ruby Mine Property (the “Ruby Mine”) in Sierra County, California. The purchase price was $2,500,000, of which $510,000 in cash and
stock was paid as of the closing date of July 1, 2011, and the remaining $1,990,000 is a seller-financed mortgage, which accrued interest at 3% per annum
until June 30, 2013. Pursuant to a mortgage modification agreement dated March 19, 2013 and executed on March 28, 2013, the term of the mortgage has
been extended to December 30, 2015, interest on the outstanding principal will accrue at 6% per annum as of April 1, 2013, and interest will increase to 8%
per annum on January 1, 2015. In addition, a one-time $160,000 extension fee has been added to the outstanding principal due on the note. In the first
quarter of 2013, our mortgage on the Ruby Mine property required us to make payments of $10,000 per month during the 3 month period from January 1,
2013 through June 30, 2013. Monthly mortgage payments as of April 1, 2013 are $15,000 per month during the second quarter of 2013, and $20,000 per
month beginning July 1, 2013 through December 2015.  A $1 million dollar balloon payment is due by December 30, 2013, representing 40% of the first five
visas sold through the EB-5 Program.  The balance due on the mortgage, including the aforementioned $160,000 extension fee, is $1,901,579 as of June 30,
2013.  As of the date of this prospectus, all required payments have been made, and we are current in our obligations. The Company expects to satisfy the
mortgage and retire the note upon receipt of funding from overseas investors through the federal EB-5 Program.  The Ruby project was formally approved as
an EB-5 project by USCIS in July, 2011, and as of the date of this prospectus the final phase of the funding overseas is pending.  The Company expects to
complete the funding in the near-term, but until that time the Company believes it can rely on loans and our equity credit line established with Tangiers to
make up for any revenue shortfall.  If we cannot generate sufficient revenue or raise additional funds through equity, loans, or EB-5, we may not be able to
maintain our mortgage on the Ruby Mine.
 
As of June 30, 2013, total current assets were $137,394, which consisted of $137,394 cash.  As of December 31, 2012, total current assets were $42,008,
which consisted of $42,008 cash.
 
As of June 30, 2013, total other assets were $2,644,078, which consisted primarily of our Ruby Mine claims, plant and equipment, and Ruby reclamation
bonds.  As of December 31, 2012, total other assets were $2,634,220, which consisted primarily of our Ruby Mine claims, plant and equipment, and Ruby
reclamation bonds.  The increase is primarily due to an increase in available cash reserves.
As of June 30, 2013, total current liabilities were $3,833,478, which consisted primarily of $947,474 in deferred compensation, $370,162 in debt obligations,
$1,099,889 in derivative liabilities, and the current portion of the Ruby Mine mortgage of $1,170,933.  As of December 31, 2012, our total current liabilities
were $3,884,381, and consisted primarily of $884,474 in deferred compensation, $608,193 in loans, $496,827 in derivative liabilities, and the balance due
on the Ruby Mine mortgage of $1,774,822.
As of June 30, 2013, total long-term liabilities were $1,082,488, which consisted of the long-term portion of the Ruby Mine mortgage of $730,646, and the
asset retirement obligation at the Ruby Mine of $5,747.  As of December 31, 2012, our total long-term liabilities were $5,584, and consisted entirely of our
asset retirement obligation.
We had a working capital deficit of $3,446,084 as of June 30, 2013, and a working capital deficit of $3,842,373 as of December 31, 2012.  The decrease is
due primarily to a reclassification of certain debt as long-term liabilities.
During the six months ended June 30, 2013, operating activities used cash of $481,283 as compared to the six months ended June 30, 2012 where we used
cash of $454,524 in operating activities.  The increase is due primarily to an extension expense on the Ruby Mine mortgage.
73
Table of Contents
 
Cash flows from financing activities represented the Company’s principal source of cash for the six month period ended June 30, 2013. Cash flows from
financing activities during the six month period ended June 30, 2013, and June 30, 2012, were $528,005 and $435,024, respectively, and consisted primarily
of proceeds from loans and the issuance of stock.
Recent Material Developments
Commitments and Contingencies
During the second quarter of fiscal 2013, the Company discovered it had offered and sold certain shares of common stock without registration under the
Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”), as amended, during the period from October 24, 2011 through April 25, 2013.  Pursuant to Section 10(a)(3) of the
Securities Act, by the time our prospectus had been in use for 9 months from the effective date of January 24, 2011, the balance sheet date of the audited
financial statement contained in our prospectus was more than 16 months old, and had not been refreshed to present our current financial statements within
said  prospectus.  This  inadvertent  technical  failure  to  update  our  prospectus  according  to  Section  10(a)(3)  of  the  Securities  Act  may  have  caused  our
prospectus to no longer be effective as of October 24, 2011. As a result, purchasers of these securities may have the right to rescind their purchases for an
amount equal to the purchase price paid for the securities, plus interest from the date of purchase, limited to the unregistered shares purchased from the
original seller and still held by the original purchaser. The federal Securities Act requires that any claim for rescission be brought within one year of the
violation. The time periods within which claims for rescission must be brought under state securities laws vary and may be two years or more from the
transaction date. As of the date of this prospectus, approximately 10 million shares of our outstanding common stock are subject to possible rescission. The
maximum potential liability as of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012 was $600,489 and $367,490, respectively. These amounts include interest at 10%
per annum from the date of the respective purchases.  Due to the shares being redeemable by the holder since their inception, the shares are required to be
classified outside of permanent equity on the balance sheet. Since redemption is uncertain and outside of the Company’s control the shares are classified
within the mezzanine section of the balance sheet at their respective redemption values. Any differences between the cash received and the redemption
value was recorded to additional paid in capital. Interest of 10% is being accrued on the values and is recorded through additional paid in capital consistent
with the appropriate accounting guidance covering the accounting treatment of mezzanine instruments.
Restatements
The basis of the following should be read in conjunction with the information set forth in the Company’s audited financial statements for the period ended
December 31, 2012 and our unaudited financial statements for the three months ended March 31, 2013.
On February 6, 2013, pursuant to a comment letter issued by the Staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") relating to the Form 10-Q for
Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2012 ("Form 10-Q") filed by the Company on November 9, 2012, management of the Company, after discussions with
the  Board  of  Directors,  the  Company's  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  and  the  Staff  of  the  SEC,  concluded  that  the  previously-issued
consolidated financial statements for the Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2012 contained in the Company's Form 10-Q (the "Financial Statements")
should no longer be relied upon.  The discussions with the Staff of the SEC concerned the capitalization of certain costs to improve the Ruby Mine, including
tunnel/infrastructure and access road improvements.  These costs had been capitalized on the Company's balance sheet. The Commission has clearly
stated in a comment letter received on February 5, 2013, that "It is our position that once you acquired the Ruby property with the intent to explore it and, if
determined to be feasible, ultimately extract minerals, these types of improvement activities are considered exploration stage activities, and their costs should
be  expensed  unless  the  improvements  have  alternative  future  use."    After  extensive  consultation  with  our  auditors  and  the  SEC,  we  concluded  that  it
necessary to make revisions to comply with the Commission's position, and to file our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 with restated
audited December 31, 2011 financial statements and unaudited restatements of the quarters ended March 31, 2012, June 30, 2012, and September 30, 2012
to  remove  the  aforementioned  capitalized  development  costs  from  our  Consolidated  Balance  Sheets  and  expense  them  in  full  on  our  Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
These restatements also reclassify as temporary equity certain issuances of unregistered common stock issued during the time period from October 24, 2011
through June 30, 2013 and which may be deemed to be redeemable. These shares have been moved to the mezzanine portion of our balance sheet at their
redemption values.
Recent Developments
On February 6, 2013, the Company announced that it has executed an amendment to the terms of the Company's existing equity line of credit with Tangiers
Investors, LP which renewed the term by another 3 years and increased the commitment amount from $5 million to $10 million.
On April 4, 2013 the Company announced that an initial National Instrument 43-101 Technical Report and Resource Estimate on the Ruby Mine has been
released and published on our website.
74
Table of Contents
 
On April 30, 2013, the Company announced that operations at the Ruby Mine have resumed after the winter layover.
On June 6, 2013 the Company announced that it has signed an agreement a private US investor for an advance sale of up to 2,120 ounces of specimen gold
production from the Ruby Mine. The agreement provides that up to 2,120 ounces of specimen gold from the Ruby Mine will be purchased in advance of
production at a 10% discount of the then-current spot price of gold. The Company has received a $150,000 advance cash payment on the first 120 ounces,
priced at $1,250 per ounce based on the current spot price of gold at the time of the agreement. Subsequent tranches to sell up to 2,000 additional ounces in
advance of production will be prepaid based on current spot prices, with final settlement based on the spot price of gold at the time of production and
delivery. The Company also announced that the Company has entered into an offtake agreement with Metalor USA ("Metalor") for the refining of the Ruby
Mine's production of fine gold, to be processed on site and delivered to Metalor as dore bars. Metalor has agreed to pay the Company the then-current spot
price of gold on the day of delivery, less a small refinery charge and prepaid shipping charges, for all gold delivered to its refinery facility in Los Angeles,
CA.  Funds from the advance sale of specimen gold will be used to complete the Ruby Tunnel rehab project now underway, and to initiate the expected start
of mining operations later this summer
On June 12, 2013, the Company announced that it has entered into a joint-venture agreement on the Company's 100%-owned Fraser River Project near
Lytton, British Columbia, with Solid Holdings Ltd., a private company based in Houston, BC.  On June 24, 2013, the Company executed a definitive joint-
venture agreement for mining operations on the Company’s 100%-owned Fraser River Project near Lytton, British Columbia, with Solid, a private company
domiciled  in  British  Columbia  and  based  in  Houston,  BC.  The  terms  of  the  agreement  call  for  Solid  to  provide  all  equipment,  personnel,  and  related
expenditures required to initiate and sustain mining operations at the Fraser River Project JV.  The Company will be responsible for maintaining the property
in good standing and securing the permits required for mining operations to proceed.  The Company will retain 100% ownership of the property, and will be
paid a 20% NSR on all metals recovered from operations, with Solid retaining 100% of the net profits following payment of the aforementioned NSR.  Solid
will be deemed the project operator, and will be responsible for the day-to-day operations.
On July 24, 2013, the Company renegotiated and executed Amendment No. 3 to the Securities Purchase Agreement (“Amendment No. 3”) with Tangiers,
dated October 7, 2009.  This Amendment No. 3 makes said Securities Purchase Agreement irrevocable in all aspects by removing any and all provisions
that might allow for an investment decision to be made on the part of Tangiers after the transaction is completed and a new registration statement becomes
effective.  The Amendment No. 3 also contains a general release whereby Tangiers irrevocably and unconditionally releases the Company of and from all
claims against the Company within the reasonable scope of the Amendment No. 3 known to Tangiers, including the right to rescind its purchases pursuant to
the Amendment No. 3.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
 
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
 
Disclosures about Reclassification Adjustments out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
In February 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an accounting standards update which added new disclosure requirements for
items reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income. The update required entities to disclose additional information about reclassification
adjustments, including changes in accumulated other comprehensive income balances by component and significant items reclassified out of accumulated
other comprehensive income. The update became effective for us in the first quarter of 2013. This update had no material impact on our financial statements.
Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment
In July 2012, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which provided, subject to certain conditions, the option to perform a qualitative, rather than
quantitative, assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying
amount. The update became effective for us in the first quarter of 2013. This update had no material impact on our financial statements.
75
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY
Our principal offices are located at 2120 Bethel Road, Lansdale PA 19446. The property is a suite containing approximately 600 square feet on a 5.5-acre
complex owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer. The property is provided by way of a management agreement with The PAN Network, which
bundles the office space along with other general administrative services, including the services of our Chief Executive Officer, with a commitment of $18,000
per month.  The term of the agreement is one year, and automatically renews annually on January 1 of each year unless otherwise terminated by either
party.  Any fees unpaid automatically accrue to deferred compensation.  The PAN Network maintains fire and casualty insurance on the property in an
amount deemed adequate by management. We believe our current location is adequate for our current business and will serve our near term needs for office
space.
Our ownership interest in each of our mining properties is described above under “Description of Business.”
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
In  August  2009,  the  Board  of  Directors  approved  and  the  Company  executed  a  management  agreement  with  The  PAN  Network,  a  private  business
management and consulting company wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.  The agreement is in consideration of $18,000 per month,
and calls for PAN Network to provide (a) office and board room space, including reception, utilities, landline phone/fax, computers, copiers, projectors, and
miscellaneous services; (b) financial services, including accounting, corporate filing and bookkeeping; (c) project and administrative services; (d) resource
targeting,  acquisition,  development  and  management  services;  (e)  marketing  services,  communications,  marketing  materials  management,  and  writing
services; (f) strategic planning, milestone management and critical path analysis; and (g) online services, including web site hosting, web site design, web
site  maintenance,  and  email  services.      The  agreement  includes  Mr.  Leopold’s  salary  of  $15,000  per  month,  which  will  accrue  entirely  to  deferred
compensation during any period in which the commitment remains unpaid.  The term of the agreement is one year, and automatically renews annually on
January 1 each year unless otherwise terminated by either party.
 
There are no other related party transactions other than the above listed transaction.
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Our Common Stock is currently traded on OTCQB, under the symbol NBRI.
 
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the high and low bid prices of the Company's Common Stock traded on the OTCBB and OTCQB for
the fiscal years ended December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, and as of the date of this prospectus. The quotations are split-adjusted and reflect inter-
dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and may not represent actual transactions.
Fiscal Year 2013
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter (through September 10, 2013)
Fiscal Year 2013
First Quarter
Second Quarter (thru May 15, 2013)
Fiscal Year 2012
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Fiscal Year 2011
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
$
  $
  $
$
  $
$
  $
  $
  $
$
  $
  $
  $
Common Stock
High
Low
0.13    $
0.12    $
0.095    $
Common Stock
High
0.13    $
0.07    $
Low
Common Stock
High
Low
0.14    $
0.10    $
0.11    $
0.074    $
0.09    $
0.22    $
0.21    $
0.19    $
High
Low
0.03 
0.03 
0.048
0.03 
0.03
0.075 
0.052 
0.055 
0.041
0.026 
0.073 
0.12 
0.07
Holders.  As of the date of this prospectus, our common stock was held by approximately 1,587 shareholders of record.
 
Dividends.  We have never declared or paid a cash dividend. There are no restrictions on the common stock or otherwise that limit our ability to pay cash
dividends if declared by the Board of Directors. We do not anticipate declaring or paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
76
Table of Contents
The Securities Enforcement and Penny Stock Reform Act of 1990
The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted rules that regulate broker-dealer practices in connection with transactions in penny stocks. Penny
stocks are generally equity securities with a price of less than $5.00 (other than securities registered on certain national securities exchanges or quoted on
the NASDAQ system, provided that current price and volume information with respect to transactions in such securities is provided by the exchange or
system). Our shares are currently subject to the penny stock rules.
 
A purchaser is purchasing penny stock which limits the ability to sell the stock. The classification of penny stock makes it more difficult for a broker-dealer to
sell  the  stock  into  a  secondary  market,  which  makes  it  more  difficult  for  a  purchaser  to  liquidate  his/her  investment.  Any  broker-dealer  engaged  by  the
purchaser for the purpose of selling his or her shares in us will be subject to Rules 15g-1 through 15g-10 of the Securities and Exchange Act. Rather than
creating a need to comply with those rules, some broker-dealers will refuse to attempt to sell penny stock.
 
The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from those rules, to deliver a standardized risk
disclosure document prepared by the Commission, which:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
contains a description of the nature and level of risk in the market for penny stocks in both public offerings and secondary trading;
contains a description of the broker’s or dealer’s duties to the customer and of the rights and remedies available to the customer with
respect to a violation to such duties or other requirements of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended;
contains a brief, clear, narrative description of a dealer market, including “bid” and “ask” prices for penny stocks and the significance of the
spread between the bid and ask price;
contains a toll-free telephone number for inquiries on disciplinary actions;
defines significant terms in the disclosure document or in the conduct of trading penny stocks; and
contains such other information and is in such form (including language, type, size and format) as the Securities and Exchange
Commission shall require by rule or regulation.
The broker-dealer also must provide, prior to effecting any transaction in a penny stock, to the customer:
the bid and offer quotations for the penny stock;
the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction;
the number of shares to which such bid and ask prices apply, or other comparable information relating to the depth and liquidity of the
market for such stock; and
•
monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account.
In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from those rules; the broker-dealer must make a
special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written acknowledgment of the
receipt  of  a  risk  disclosure  statement,  a  written  agreement  to  transactions  involving  penny  stocks,  and  a  signed  and  dated  copy  of  a  written  suitability
statement. These disclosure requirements have the effect of reducing the trading activity in the secondary market for our stock. Thus, stockholders may have
difficulty selling their securities.
 
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
None.
Transfer Agent
Our transfer agent is Colonial Stock Transfer Co., Inc., 66 Exchange Place, Salt Lake City, UT  84111, phone number (801) 355-5740.
77
Table of Contents
Issuer purchase of equity securities
There were no issuer purchases of securities during the period covered by this report.
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The Company accrued or paid compensation to the Chief Executive Officer for services rendered to the Company in all capacities during the fiscal years
shown  in  the  Summary  Compensation  Table  below.  Deferred  compensation  accrued  in  2012  and  2011  was  $100,000  and  $126,000.    These  amounts
represent the total deferred compensation of $216,000 expensed during each period, less $116,000 and $90,000 actually paid or settled in 2012 and 2011,
respectively, as per the management agreement with The PAN Network, a private business management and consulting company wholly-owned by the
Company’s Chief Executive Officer.  The agreement is in consideration of $18,000 per month.  The agreement includes Mr. Leopold’s base salary of $15,000
per month, and accrues entirely to deferred compensation during any period in which the commitment remains unpaid, which would be $216,000 in total
deferred compensation annualized if no payments were made during the year.
 
Overview
 
The  following  is  a  discussion  of  our  program  for  compensating  our  named  executive  officers  and  directors.  Currently,  we  do  not  have  a  compensation
committee, and as such, our Board of Directors is responsible for determining the compensation of our named executive officers.
 
Compensation Program Objectives and Philosophy
 
The primary goals of our policy of executive compensation are to attract and retain the most talented and dedicated executives possible, to assure that our
executives are compensated effectively in a manner consistent with our strategy and competitive practice.
 
The Board of Directors considers a variety of factors in determining compensation of executives, including their particular background and circumstances,
such as their training and prior relevant work experience, their success in attracting and retaining savvy and technically proficient managers and employees,
increasing our revenues, broadening our product line offerings, managing our costs and otherwise helping to lead our Company through a period of rapid
growth.
 
In the future, we expect that our Board of Directors will form a compensation committee charged with the oversight of executive compensation plans, policies
and  programs  of  our  Company  and  with  the  full  authority  to  determine  and  approve  the  compensation  of  our  chief  executive  officer  and  make
recommendations with respect to the compensation of our other executive officers. We expect that our compensation committee will continue to follow the
general approach to executive compensation that we have followed to date, rewarding superior individual and Company performance with commensurate
cash compensation.
 
Elements of Compensation
Our compensation program for the named executive officers consists primarily of base salary and a non-qualified deferred compensation plan. There is no
retirement plan, long-term incentive plan or other such plans, although Mr. Leopold’s agreement has a bonus plan, subject to the Board’s discretion. The
Company  is  an  exploration  stage  company  with  limited  revenue.  As  such,  we  have  not  yet  obtained  a  consistent  revenue  stream  with  which  to  fund
employee salaries and bonus plans. The base salary we provide is intended to equitably compensate the named executive officers based upon their level of
responsibility, complexity and importance of role, leadership and growth potential, and experience.
 
Base Salary
We have deferred salary compensation for our CEO, Mr. Perry Leopold.   Mr. Leopold’s services are provided under an agreement with PAN Network, a
private business management and consulting company wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.  The agreement is in consideration of
$18,000 per month.  The agreement includes Mr. Leopold’s base salary of $15,000 per month, and accrues entirely to deferred compensation during any
period in which the commitment remains unpaid. Although the Company has had an accumulated deficit in the previous year of operations, Mr. Leopold’s
salary  is  set  pursuant  to  an  agreement  that  the  Company  has  entered  into  with  the  PAN  Network.  Our  named  executive  officers  receive  base  salaries
commensurate with their roles and responsibilities. Base salaries and subsequent adjustments, if any, are reviewed and approved by our Board of Directors
annually, based on an informal review of relevant market data and each executive’s performance for the prior year, as well as each executive’s experience,
expertise and position. The base salaries paid to our named executive officers are reflected in the Summary Compensation Table below.
78
Table of Contents
 
Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation
The  Company  has  adopted  an  unfunded  Non-Qualified  Deferred  Compensation  Plan  to  recognize  unpaid  compensation  owed  to  our  Chief  Executive
Officer  Under this Plan, the Company is not required to reserve funds for compensation, and is only obligated to pay compensation when and if funds are
available.  Any amounts due but unpaid automatically accrue to deferred compensation. The Plan has the option to be renewed annually at the discretion of
the Company. While unfunded and non-recourse, for compliance with GAAP this is disclosed as an accrued expense on the balance sheet.  As of December
31, 2012 and 2011, the outstanding balance of the Plan is $884,474 and $784,474, respectively.  There is no accrued interest associated with the Plan.
 
In  2007,  2008,  and  2009,  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  was  awarded  restricted  stock  bonuses  in  recognition  of  the  Company’s  inability  to  provide  cash
compensation. These restricted stock bonuses were in addition to, and not in lieu of, the deferred base salary compensation.  The value of common shares
was based on the market closing price on the day of issuance. The value of preferred shares was valued according to the closing price of the common stock
the preferred shares were convertible into on the day of issuance, plus the value of the control premium from voting rights assigned to certain preferred share
issuances. The valuations of these issuances are shown below:
Date
2/12/2007
    2/9/2007
12/21/2007
12/16/2008
8/11/2009
Type of Stock
Preferred (I)
Common
Common
Common
Preferred (A) (G)
Number of
 Shares
100 
250,000 
10,000,000 
2,500,000 
4,100,000
$
 $
 $
 $
 $
Value
101,000 
31,250 
900,000 
50,000 
253,785
There were no stock awards or bonuses of any kind to our Chief Executive Officer in 2011, or 2012.  In 2011, Mr. Leopold elected to reduce the amount of
deferred compensation owed to him by $180,000 through the issuance of 2,000,000 shares of common stock.  The transaction is considered a purchase, and
shares were valued as of the closing market price on the day of issuance.  On July 25, 2012, all 100,000 outstanding shares of the Series G Convertible
Preferred that were previously issued to Mr. Leopold in August 2009 were cancelled at the request of and consent of Mr. Leopold, the sole shareholder of the
class. Subsequent to the cancellation of said shares, a Certificate of Elimination of the Series G Convertible Preferred Stock was filed with the Secretary of
State of the State of Delaware to eliminate entirely the Series G Convertible Preferred stock designation from our Articles of Incorporation.
 
Employment Agreements
During  2009,  the  Board  of  Directors  approved  and  the  Company  executed  a  management  agreement  with  The  PAN  Network,  a  private  business
management and consulting company wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.  The agreement is in consideration of $18,000 per month,
and  calls  for  PAN  to  provide  (a)  office  and  board  room  space,  including  reception,  utilities,  landline  phone/fax,  computers,  copiers,  projectors,  and
miscellaneous services; (b) financial services, including accounting, corporate filing and bookkeeping; (c) project and administrative services; (d) resource
targeting,  acquisition,  development  and  management  services;  (e)  marketing  services,  communications,  marketing  materials  management,  and  writing
services; (f) strategic planning, milestone management and critical path analysis; and (g) online services, including web site hosting, web site design, web
site  maintenance,  and  email  services.  The  agreement  includes  Mr.  Leopold’s  salary  of  $15,000  per  month,  which  will  accrue  entirely  to  deferred
compensation during any period in which the commitment remains unpaid.  The term of the agreement is one year, and automatically renews annually on
January 1 each year unless otherwise terminated by either party.
 
Retirement Benefits
Currently, we do not provide any Company sponsored retirement benefits to any employee, including the named executive officers.
 
Prerequisites
Historically, we have not provided our named executive officers with any perquisites and other personal benefits. We do not view perquisites as a significant
element of our compensation structure, but do believe that perquisites can be useful in attracting, motivating and retaining the executive talent for which we
compete. It is expected that our historical practices regarding perquisites will continue and will be subject to periodic review by our Board of Directors.
 
The following table sets forth the compensation paid to our chief executive officer for each of our last two completed fiscal years. No other officer received
compensation greater than $100,000 for either fiscal year.
79
Table of Contents
Name and Position
Perry Leopold
Chief Executive Officer
 
(1)
Summary Compensation Table
Stock Awards ($)
Compensation ($)
All Other
Year
2012
2011
Salary ($) (2)
Bonus ($)
180,000     
180,000
-     
-
(1)
-     
-
(3)
36,000     
36,000
Total ($)
216,000 
216,000
The values shown in this column represent the dollar amount recognized for financial statement reporting purposes with respect to the 2012 and 2011
fiscal years for the aggregate grant date fair value of stock awards granted in such periods in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718.
The base salary for Mr. Leopold is included in the management agreement with The PAN Network of $18,000 per month, all of which accrues to
deferred compensation in the event it is unpaid when due each month.
All Other Compensation includes additional consideration due to the management contract with The PAN Network, which is wholly-owned by Mr.
Leopold.  This agreement is for $18,000 per month, which includes Mr. Leopold’s base salary of $15,000 per month.
(2)
(3)
COMPENSATION OF DIRECTORS
The following table sets forth with respect to the named director, compensation information inclusive of equity awards and payments made in the year ended
December 31, 2012.
Director Compensation for Year Ended December 31, 2012
Fees Earned
or Paid in
Cash
($)
($)
Stock
Awards
Option
Awards
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan
Compensation
Nonqualified
Deferred
Compensation
Earnings
All Other
Compensation
($)
($)
($)
--     
-
--     
--
Name
Perry Leopold
Fred Michini
———————
(1) Mr. Leopold did not receive any compensation in his capacity as director for the Company in the year ended December 31, 2012.
 
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
 
We did not have a compensation committee during the year ended December 31, 2012. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012, none of our
executive officers served on the Board of Directors of any entities whose directors or officers serve on our Board of Directors.
 
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-end.
--     
--
--     
--
--     
--
--     
--
-- 
-
($)
Total
($)
There were no outstanding equity awards to our executive officers in the most recent fiscal year ended December 31, 2012.
Standard Director Compensation Arrangement
We do not have a standard compensation arrangement for directors.
Stock Option Exercised
There were no stock options exercised on common shares in fiscal year 2012, with respect to the named executives listed in the Summary Compensation
Table.
Expense Reimbursement
We will reimburse our officers and directors for reasonable expenses incurred during the course of their performance.
80
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Contents
Unaudited Financial Statements for the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2013
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Financial Statements (audited)
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2012 and 2011
 
Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, and the period from inception  (June 18, 2004) through
December 31, 2012
Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit) from inception (June 18, 2004) through December 31, 2012
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, and the period from inception  (June 18, 2004) through
December 31, 2012
Notes to Financial Statements
81
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
UNAUDITED CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
AS OF JUNE 30, 2013 AND DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Page
82
117
118
119
120-127
128
129-164
ASSETS
   Current Assets
   Cash
   Total Current Assets
 
   Other Assets
   Available For Sale Securities
   Prepaid Expenses
   Certificates of Deposit
   Deferred Financing Costs, net
   Mining Claims – Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of accumulated depreciation
   Reclamation Bond – Fraser River
   Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
   Liabilities
   Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - Related Party
   Accrued Expenses – Ruby Mine
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of discounts of $176,990 and $166,307, respectively)
   Advance Gold Sales (net of discounts of $14,754 and $0, respectively)
   Deferred Gain
   Derivative Liability
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
   Total Current Liabilities
 
   Long-Term Liabilities
   Convertible notes payable , net of current portion
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage, net of current portion
   Asset Retirement Obligation
   Total Long-Term Liabilities
   Total Liabilities
 
Commitments & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption, stated at estimated redemption value, 10,217,486 and 4,517,601   shares
outstanding at June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, respectively
Total Commitments & Contingencies
 
   Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
   Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value, 100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued and outstanding at June
30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, respectively
 
   Convertible Preferred stock, Series A, $0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares authorized, 4,000,000 and
4,000,000 shares issued and outstanding at June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, respectively
 
   Common stock, $0.001 par value, 250,000,000 shares authorized, 103,264,544 and 97,485,130  shares issued
and outstanding at June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, respectively
   Additional Paid-In Capital
   Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss)
   Deficit Accumulated During Exploration Stage
   Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENICES,  & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
$
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
$
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
  $
$
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
June 30, 2013
137,394    $
137,394
15,000     
55,000     
172,706     
11,781     
1,797,499     
587,092     
5,000     
2,644,078     
2,781,472    $
30,012    $
947,474     
2,906     
60,189     
370,162     
151,913     
-     
1,099,889     
1,170,933     
3,833,478
346,095     
730,646     
5,747     
1,082,488     
4,915,966    $
600,489    $
600,489
-
4,000
December 31,
2012
(restated)
42,008 
42,008 
 
 
12,550 
- 
172,499 
14,471 
1,797,488 
635,212 
2,000 
2,634,220 
2,676,228
56,617 
884,474 
12,250 
41,363 
608,193 
- 
9,835 
496,827 
1,774,822 
3,884,381 
 
 
- 
- 
5,584 
5,584 
3,889,965
367,490 
367,490
-
4,000
103,265     
12,018,974     
(10,050)    
(14,851,172)    
(2,734,983)    
2,781,472    $
97,485 
11,805,636 
(12,500)
(13,475,848)
(1,581,227)
2,676,228
82
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
UNAUDITED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE THREE AND SIX MONTH PERIODS ENDING
JUNE 30, 2013 AND 2012 (RESTATED)
AND THE PERIOD FROM
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
3 months ended
3 months ended
June 30, 2012
6 months ended
6 months ended
June 30, 2012
Since inception
(June 18, 2004 -
June 30, 2013
June 30, 2013
(restated)
June 30, 2013)
-    $
-     
-
4,800     
80,732     
179,639     
24,060     
-     
76     
36,368     
325,675     
(325,675)
-     
-     
120     
(98,321)    
(359,114)    
-     
-     
-     
(1,913)    
-     
-     
(459,228)    
-     
-     
(784,903)
(restated)
-    $
-     
-
6,000     
72,701     
139,036     
26,185     
-     
76     
6,750     
250,748     
(250,748)
-     
-     
(120)    
(105,048)    
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
(105,168)    
-     
-     
(355,916)
-    $
-     
-
4,800     
161,728     
226,540     
48,120     
-     
163     
66,270     
507,621     
(507,621)
-    $
-     
-
6,000     
166,286     
307,150     
52,370     
-     
203     
25,250     
557,259     
(557,259)
113,499     
-     
244     
(405,900)    
(576,640)    
-     
-     
-     
-     
1,094     
-     
(867,703)    
-     
-     
(1,375,324)
4,500     
-     
425     
(167,787)    
-     
-     
-     
-     
(175,047)    
-     
-     
(337,909)    
-     
-     
(895,168)
- 
- 
- 
 
 
316,800 
9,322,675 
1,898,891 
207,353 
145,995 
919 
316,702 
12,209,335 
(12,209,335)
 
341,243 
309,649 
1,716 
(1,312,859)
(963,473)
(137,000)
(47,185)
(62,095)
(2,222)
1,094 
(97,109)
(1,968,241)
(14,177,576)
(673,596)
(14,851,172)
$
Revenues
Revenue
Cost of Revenue
Gross Profit
 
Operating Expenses
Commissions & Consulting Fees
General & Administrative Costs
Mining Property Costs
Depreciation Expense
Impairment Expense
Accretion Expense
Professional Services
Total Operating Expenses
Net Operating Loss
Other Income (Expenses)
Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
Other Income from Mineral Claims
Interest Income
Interest Expense
Gain/Loss on Derivative Liability
Loss on Conversion of Debt
Bad Debt Expense
Loss on Settlement
Other Expense
Other Income
Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
Net Other Income (Expenses)
      Loss From Continuing Operations
      Loss From Discontinued Operations
Net Loss
    Accretion of Discount on Redeemable
Common Stock
    Excess Cash Received Compared to
Redeemable Amount of Stock
    Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common
Shareholders
      Unrealized (Loss)/Gain on Available For
Sale Securities
Total Comprehensive Loss
 
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Loss per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
Diluted Net Loss per Share
$
$
(489)
(6,836)
(14,701)
(21,442)
-     
(12,337)
-     
(5,453)
-     
(21,298)
-     
(7,978)
(44,217)
974 
(44,246)
(797,729)
(368,205)
(1,411,323)
(924,588)
(14,938,661)
(7,500)    
(805,229)
-      
(368,205)
2,450     
(1,408,873)
-      
(924,588)
(10,050)
(14,948,711)
112,522,912     
(0.01)   $
99,296,795     
(0.00)   $
108,542,908     
(0.01)   $
98,712,344       
(0.01)
112,522,912     
(0.01)   $
99,296,795     
(0.00)   $
108,542,908     
(0.01)   $
98,712,344       
(0.01)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
Preferred Stock
Series
Series
I
A
Series
G
Series
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Common Stock
Series I
Amount   Shares   Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Stockholders’
Deficit
OCI
Deficit
Total
-
-
-
-  $
-  $
-  $
-
-  $
-  $
-  $
-  $
-    1,200
-    1,200
-
-
-    320,000
320
(1,520)
-    320,000
320
(1,520)
-
-
-  $
-
-
-  $
-
-
-
-
-
83
Table of Contents
Series A
Shares
-
1,200,000
1,200,000
Inception
6/18/2004   
Founder's
Shares
issued
Shares
issued for
merger
Common
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    200,000
200
4,800
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(95,587)
-
-
5,000
(95,587)
-  $ 2,400  $
-  $
-    840,000  $
840  $
1,760  $
-  $
(95,587) $
-  $
(90,587)
-
-
-
-
-
12,127
12
180,213
-
-
-
-
-
-    121,491
121    2,586,046
-
-
-
-
-
180,225
-
2,586,167
-
517,700
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-  $ 2,400  $
-
-
-  $
-    102,643
103
517,597
-
-
-
-
-
-
(1,816,896)
-
(1,816,896)
-   1,076,261  $ 1,076  $3,285,616  $
-  $ (1,912,483) $
-  $
1,376,609
84
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Preferred Stock
Series
Series
I
A
Series
G
Series
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Common Stock
Series I
Amount   Shares   Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Stockholders’
Deficit
OCI
Deficit
Total
-
-
Stock
issued for
cash
  
Net loss for
year
  
Balance at
12/31/2004  2,400,000   
 
   
Common
Stock
issued to
convert
debt
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
  
Net loss for
year
  
Balance at
12/31/2005  2,400,000
-
-
-
-
Table of Contents
Series A
Shares
-
Common
Stock
issued to
convert
debt
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Expenses
paid by
shareholder  
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2006   2,400,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-   1,202,000    1,202    2,206,398
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-   1,309,000    1,309    1,543,191
-
-
-
-
-
164,371
-
-
-  $ 2,400  $
-  $
-   3,587,261  $ 3,587  $7,199,576  $
-  $ (7,416,720) $
-  $
(211,157)
-
-
-
(5,504,237)
-
(5,504,237)
-
-
-
-
2,207,600
-
1,544,500
-
164,371
Table of Contents
85
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Beneficial
Conversion
Preferred Stock
Series
Series
Series
Series
Series A
Shares
G
I
A
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Common Stock
Series I
 Amount   Shares
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Amount
Total
Stock
  
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
Stockholders’
Deficit
Features on
notes
payable
Common
Stock
issued to
convert
debt
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued as
interest on
loan
Preferred
Shares
issued for
services
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
62,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    1,350,000    1,350    120,150
-
-
-
-
-
-
-   10,575,000    10,575    959,425
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,000
10
1,490
-
-
-
100
-
-
-
-
-    101,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
62,000
-
121,500
-
970,000
-
1,500
-
101,000
-
-
-
-
(2,000)
70,623
Common
Stock
issued for
conversion
of preferred
shares
Shares
bought
back and
retired
Expenses
paid by
shareholder  
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2007
-
-
Shares  
Rounding of
shares due
to stock split  
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
Contribution
from
investor
Mark to
market AFS
securities
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2008
-
-
-
-
-
(2,400,000)
-
-    (2,400)
-
-    1,200,000    1,200
1,200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(200,000)
(200)
(1,800)
-
-
-
-
-
-
70,623
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100  $ 2,400  $
-  $
-   16,522,261  $16,522  $8,513,664  $
-  $ (8,907,591) $
-  $
(377,405)
-
-
(1,490,871)
-
(1,490,871)
Table of Contents
86
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Preferred Stock
Common Stock
Series
Series
Series
Series
Series
A
G
I
A
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series I
Amount
Shares
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Total
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Stockholders’
Deficit
OCI
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
26
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    5,500,000    5,500
224,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100  $
-
-
-
-
-  $
-
-
-
-
-  $
-    2,275,000    2,275
7,725
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
230,000
-
-
10,000
10,000
-
22,780
22,780
(328,478)
-
(328,478)
-   24,297,287  $24,297  $8,755,889  $
-  $ (9,236,069) $
22,780  $
(433,103)
Table of Contents
87
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Preferred Stock
Series
Series
Series
Series A
Shares
Series G
Shares
I
A
G
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series I
Amount
Common Stock
Shares    Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Total
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
Stockholders’
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
-    2,500,000    2,500
27,250
4,000,000   100,000
-    4,000
100
-
-
-    249,685
-
-
-
-
-
-   21,800,000    21,800    151,200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29,750
-
253,785
-
173,000
-
187,500
-
(22,780)
(22,780
Common
Stock issued
for services
Preferred
Stock issued
for services
Common
Stock issued
for cash
Common
Stock issued
for deferred
compensation  
Loss realized
on AFS
securities
Stock
payable for
commitment
fee on equity
offering
Net loss for
year
Table of Contents
Common
Stock
issued for
commitment
fee on
equity
offering
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
Discount on
convertible
notes from
beneficial
conversion
-   10,000,000    10,000    177,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(115,310)   115,310
-
-
-
-
-
(786,979)
-
(786,979
Balance at
12/31/2009
4,000,000   100,000
100  $ 4,000  $
100  $
-   58,597,287  $58,597  $9,246,214  $115,310  $(10,023,048) $
22,780  $
(598,827
88
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Preferred Stock
Series
Series
Series
Common Stock
Series A
 
Shares
Series G
Shares
I
A
G
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series I
Amount
Shares   Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Total
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
Stockholders’
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
-    6,589,147    6,589    108,721    (115,310)
-
-
-
-
-
-    5,000,000    5,000
45,000
-
-
-
-
-
50,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    107,406
-
-
-
107,406
-
-
-
-
-
-   10,000,000    10,000    140,000
-
-
-
150,000
features
and
attached
warrants
Common
Stock
issued for
Ruby Mine
Purchase
Option
Warrants
issued for
Purchase
Option –
Ruby Mine
-
-
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2010   4,000,000   100,000
-
-
Table of Contents
Common
Stock issued
for cash
Common
Stock issued
for convertible
debt
conversion
Common
Stock issued
for services
Common
Stock issued
for settlement
of services
Common
Stock issued
for deferred
compensation  
Common
Stock issued
for directors
compensation
Discount on
convertible
notes from
beneficial
conversion
feature
Term
Extension of
Ruby
warrants
Warrants
issued for
Purchase
Option –
Ruby Mine
Stock
payable for
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    149,896
-
-
-
-
-
(287,345)
-
-
149,896
(287,345
100  $ 4,000  $
100  $
-   80,186,434  $80,186  $9,797,237  $
-  $(10,310,393) $
-  $
(428,870
89
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Common Stock
Preferred Stock
Series
A
Amount
Series
I
Series G
Shares  
Shares
Series
G
Amount
Series A
Shares
Series I
Amount   Shares
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Amount
Stock
  
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
Stockholders’
Deficit
Total
-
-
-
-
-
-    9,433,985    9,434
758,566
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    4,459,092    4,459
169,393
-
42,857
43
2,957
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
550,000
550
61,545
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    2,000,000    2,000
178,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
111,112
111
9,889
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70,568
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2,519
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
219,940
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
768,000
-
173,852
-
3,000
-
62,095
-
180,000
-
10,000
-
70,568
-
2,519
-
219,940
warrant
exercise
Excess cash
received
compared to
redeemable
amount for
stock
Interest on
redeemable
stock
Net loss for
year
(restated)
Balance at
12/31/2011
(restated)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    25,000
-
-
25,000
-
-
-
-     -
-
-
-     -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
974
(247)
-
-
-
-
-
-
974
(247
-
-
(1,045,749)
-
(1,045,749
4,000,000   100,000   100
$4,000   $ 100   $
-
96,783,480  $96,783  $11,271,341  $25,000  $(11,356,142) $
-
$41,082
Table of Contents
90
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
FOR THE PERIOD
(Continued)
Preferred Stock
Common Stock
Series A
Shares
Series G
Shares
Series I
Amount   Shares
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Amount
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Stockholders’
Deficit
OCI
Deficit
Total
Series
Series
Series
I
A
G
Shares
Amount
Amount
-   (100,000)
-
-
(100)
-
-
-
100
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
116,650
117
10,543
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
85,000
85
5,525
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
500,000
500
24,500    (25,000)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
49,795
-
-
-
(12,500)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
321,002
-
-
-
321,002
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
175,047
-
-
-
175,047
Cancellation
of Series G
Preferred
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
deferred
financing
costs
Common
Stock
issued for
stock
payable
Mark to
market AFS
securities
Settlement
of Derivative
Liability
Discount on
convertible
notes from
beneficial
conversion
feature and
attached
warrants
Warrants
issued for
modification
of payment
terms on
mortgage
payable
Accretion of
discount on
redeemable
common
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(29,516)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(22,701)
-
-
-
(2,119,706)
-
(2,119,706
4,000,000
-
100  $ 4,000  $
-   $
-    97,485,130  $ 97,485  $11,805,636  $
-   $(13,475,848)  $
(12,500)  $ (1,581,227
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
stock
Interest on
redeemable
common
stock
Net loss for
period
Balance at
12/31/2012
(restated)
Common
Stock
issued for
convertible
debt
conversion   
Mark to
market AFS
securities
Settlement
of Derivative
Liability
Accretion of
discount on
redeemable
common
stock
Interest on
redeemable
common
stock
Net loss for
period
Balance at
6/30/2013
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-    5,779,414
5,780
127,046
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
122,291
-
-
-
-
-
132,826
-
2,450
-
-
122,291
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(14,701)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(21,298)
-
-
-
(1,375,324)
-
(1,375,324
4,000,000
-
100  $ 4,000  $
-   $
-   103,264,544  $103,265  $12,018,974  $
-     (14,851,172)  $
(10,050)  $ (2,734,983
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
91
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
UNAUDITED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE SIX MONTH PERIODS ENDING
JUNE 30, 2013 AND 2012 (RESTATED)
AND THE PERIOD FROM
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH JUNE 30, 2013 (Unaudited)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net Loss
Adjustments to reconcile Net Loss
 to net cash used in operations:
Gain on option payments received – non-cash
Gain on sale of claims
Gain on sale of claims – non-cash
Common Stock issued for services
Common Stock issued to director for services
Common Stock issued for mining exploration
 stage property
Warrants issued to modify payment terms of note
Preferred Stock issued for bonus
Loss on conversion of debt and deferred
 compensation
Loss on AFS securities “other than temporary”
Loss on settlement - Common Shares issued
Bad debt expense
Gain realized on transfer of AFS – securities
Amortization of discount on debt
Amortization of deferred financing cost
Amortization of gold advances discount
Change in derivative liability
Common Stock issued as interest on loan
6 Months Ended
June 30, 2013
6 Months Ended
June 30, 2012
(restated)
(895,168)   $
Since inception
(June 18, 2004 to
June 30, 2013)
(14,851,172)
$
(1,375,324)   $
-     
(58,499)    
(55,000)    
-     
-
-     
-     
-
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
155,182     
16,540     
1,913
576,640     
-
-     
-     
-     
4,000     
-
-     
175,047     
-
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
128,369     
-     
-
-     
-
(135,985)
(241,333)
(55,000)
5,123,677 
10,000
351,400 
175,047 
253,785
2,150,513 
106,985 
62,095 
48,167 
(9,875)
731,140 
32,179 
1,913
963,473 
1,500
Depreciation Expense
Accretion Expense
Impairment Expense
Extension Expense for Ruby mortgage
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
Prepaid Expenses
Other assets
Accrued expenses – related party
Accrued expenses
Accounts Payable
Other current assets
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Cash paid for purchase of fixed assets
Cash received from sales of claims
Cash paid for claims acquired
Cash paid for Ruby Purchase
Cash paid for purchase of Taber Mine Option
Net Cash Provided by/Used in Investing Activities
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Proceeds from sale of redeemable common stock
Proceeds from sale of common stock
Advances - Gold
Cash paid for deferred financing costs
Contributions from related party
Warrants exercised, shares not yet issued
Debt Repayments
Shares re-purchased and retired
Borrowings on convertible debt
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash increase (decrease) for period
Cash at beginning of period
Cash at end of period
Supplementary Cash Flow Information:
Cash Paid for Interest
Cash Paid for Taxes
Non-Cash Investing & Financing Activities:
Common Stock issued For conversion of preferred shares
Common Stock issued For conversion of debt and accrued salary
Warrants issued for purchase option - Ruby Mine
Term extension of Ruby Mine warrants
Stock Issued for purchase option - Ruby Mine
Discount from beneficial conversion feature and warrants attached to convertible notes
payable
Transfer of available for sale securities to relieve accrued salary
Accrued salary relieved for shares issued
Common and preferred shares issued as founders shares
Capitalized costs for Ruby Mine purchase option transferred to fixed assets and mineral
assets upon acquisition
Note payable for Ruby Mine acquisition
Liabilities assumed with Ruby Mine acquisition
Revision to Asset Retirement Obligation
Common stock issued for conversion of convertible debt
Equity draw on redeemable common stock applied towards note principal owed
Common Stock issued for deferred financing costs
Debt discount due to derivative liability
Cancellation of preferred shares
Settlement of Derivative liability
Discount on gold advance
Unrealized gain/(loss) on AFS
Accretion on Discount of Redeemable Common Stock
Excess Cash Received Compared to Redeemable Common Stock
Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
$
  $
  $
  $
  $
$
  $
  $
  $
$
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
48,120     
163     
-     
160,000
-     
-     
(3,218)    
63,000     
15,808     
(26,608)     
-     
(481,283)
-     
48,664     
-     
-     
-     
48,664
197,000     
-     
150,000     
(13,850)    
-     
-     
(146,242)    
-     
341,097     
528,005     
95,386     
42,008     
137,394
-     
-     
       
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
132,826    $
-    $
-    $
148,713    $
-    $
122,291    $
16,667    $
2,450    $
14,701    $
-    $
21,298    $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
92
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
NOTE 1                                GENERAL ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS
52,370     
203     
-     
-
982     
-     
(14,380)    
44,000     
11,359     
38,694     
-     
(454,524)
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-
116,964     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
(31,940)    
-     
350,000     
435,024     
(19,500)    
129,888     
110,388
-     
-     
       
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
321,022    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
76    $
-    $
25,336    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
21,442    $
-    $
7,978    $
207,353 
919 
145,995 
160,000 
 
(29,018)
9,910 
(1,842) 
1,263,593 
69,957 
24,067 
(29,316)
(3,459,873)
 
(12,459)
241,333 
(16,311)
(361,093)
(4,000)
(152,530)
 
488,464 
1,522,700 
150,000 
(38,350)
244,994 
25,000 
(363,920)
(2,000)
1,722,909 
3,749,797 
137,394 
- 
137,394 
 
- 
- 
 
2,400 
253,912 
369,837 
2,519 
150,000
498,976 
12,838 
279,999 
3,040
801,442 
1,990,000 
174,118 
166,790 
306,678 
25,536 
5,610 
284,920 
100 
172,086 
16,667 
(10,050) 
44,217 
974 
44,246
The  Company  was  incorporated  in  the  State  of  Delaware  on  June  18,  2004  under  the  name  Ultimate  Jukebox,  Inc.    On  September  4,  2004,  Ultimate
Jukebox, Inc. merged with NetMusic Corporation, and subsequently changed the Company name to NetMusic Entertainment Corporation.  On March 10,
2006, the Company ceased digital media distribution operations, began operations as a natural resources company, and changed the Company name to
Enterayon, Inc.  On January 15, 2008, the Company merged with and assumed the name of its wholly-owned subsidiary, North Bay Resources Inc.  As a
result of the merger, Enterayon, Inc. was effectively dissolved, leaving North Bay Resources Inc. as the remaining company.
The Company’s business plan is based on the Generative Business Model, which is designed to leverage our mining properties and mineral claims into
near-term revenue streams even during the earliest stages of exploration and development. This is accomplished by entering into sales, joint-venture, and/or
option contracts with other mining companies, for which the Company generates revenue through payments in cash, stock, and other consideration.
The Generative Business Model is our short term plan to leverage properties until funding is adequate to implement our long term plan. The Company’s long
term plan is to locate and extract gold and silver from current exploration stage properties. This will be done through utilizing joint-ventures and other funding
that is available to develop properties until they reach the production stage. Once in the production stage, the Company plans on extracting gold, silver, and
other profitable by-products, and selling them to smelters. The Company has not currently begun this stage of the business plan.
NOTE 2                                GOING CONCERN
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated modest revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends
and is unlikely to pay dividends. The Company has accumulated losses since inception equal to $14,851,172 as of June 30, 2013. These factors raise
substantial doubt regarding the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent
upon the continued financial support from its shareholders, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary equity financing to continue operations and to
determine  the  existence,  discovery  and  successful  exploration  of  economically  recoverable  reserves  in  its  resource  properties,  confirmation  of  the
Company’s interests in the underlying properties, and the attainment of profitable operations. The Company has had very little operating history to date.
These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification
of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
NOTE 3                                SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The following accounting policies should be read in conjunction with the information set forth in the Company’s audited financial statements for the year
ended December 31, 2012 filed within form 10-K/A on August 1, 2013.
Reclassifications
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. There was no material effect to the consolidated financial
statements as result of these reclassifications.
Redeemable common stock
The Company classifies redeemable common stock as temporary equity for certain issuances of unregistered common stock issued during the time period
from October 24, 2011 through June 30, 2013 and which may be deemed to be redeemable. These shares have been moved to the mezzanine portion of our
balance sheet at their redemption values.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Ruby Gold, Inc. All significant inter-company
accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
93
Table of Contents
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid debt instruments and other short-term investments with a maturity of three months or less, when purchased, to be
cash equivalents. There were no cash equivalents at June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012. The Company maintains cash and cash equivalent balances
at one financial institution that is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation up to $250,000.
Reclamation Bonds
The Company holds its reclamation bonds on the Ruby Mine in the form of one-year Certificates of Deposit that automatically rollover annually on their
anniversary dates.  These funds are held in reserve to guarantee the Company's Asset Retirement Obligation. The Company also has a reclamation bond of
$5,000 for the Fraser River Project, which is held in safe keeping by the British Columbia Ministry of Energy and Mines.
Marketable Securities
The  Company  accounts  for  its  marketable  securities,  which  are  available  for  sale,  in  accordance  with  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)
guidance regarding accounting for certain investments in debt and equity securities, which requires that available-for-sale and trading securities be carried at
fair value. Unrealized gains and losses deemed to be temporary on available-for-sale securities are reported as other comprehensive income (“OCI”) within
shareholders’ deficit. Realized gains and losses and declines in value deemed to be other than temporary on available-for-sale securities are included in
“(Gain) loss on short- and long-term investments” and “Other income” on our statements of operations. Trading gains and losses also are included in “(Gain)
loss on short-term and long-term investments.” Fair value of the securities is based upon quoted market prices in active markets or estimated fair value when
quoted market prices are not available. The cost basis for realized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities is determined on a specific identification
basis. We classify our available-for-sale securities as short- or long-term based upon management’s intent and ability to hold these investments. In addition,
throughout  2009,  the  FASB  issued  various  authoritative  guidance  and  enhanced  disclosures  regarding  fair  value  measurements  and  impairments  of
securities which helps in determining fair value when the volume and level of activity for the asset or liability have significantly decreased and in identifying
transactions that are not orderly.
Revenue Recognition
The company has recognized no mining revenue to date. In the future mining revenue will be recognized according to the policy described below.
Revenue is recognized when the following conditions are met:
(a)  persuasive evidence of an arrangement to purchase exists;
(b) the price is fixed or determinable;
(c) the product has been delivered; and
(d) collection of the sales price is reasonably assured.
Under the terms of concentrate sales contracts with third-party smelters, final prices for the gold, silver, zinc, copper and lead in the concentrate are set based
on the prevailing spot market metal prices on a specified future date based on the date that the concentrate is delivered to the smelter. The Company records
revenues under these contracts based on forward prices at the time of delivery, which is when transfer of legal title to concentrate passes to the third-party
smelters. The terms of the contracts result in differences between the recorded estimated price at delivery and the final settlement price. These differences
are adjusted through revenue at each subsequent financial statement date.
94
Table of Contents
Mineral Property Costs
Mineral property acquisition costs are capitalized upon acquisition. Mineral property exploration and improvement costs are expensed as incurred. When it
has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven, proved, probable, inferred, or possible
reserves,  the  costs  incurred  to  develop  and  improve  such  property  are  capitalized.  To  date  the  Company  has  not  established  any  proven  or  probable
reserves on its mineral properties.
The Company reviews long-lived assets for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not
be recoverable. If the review indicates that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable, the potential impairment is measured based on a
projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate that is considered to be commensurate with the risk inherent in the Company's current business
model. For purposes of recognition and measurement of an impairment loss, a long-lived asset is grouped with other assets at the lowest level for which
identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets.
 
Purchase Options for Mining Property
Costs associated with acquisitions related to purchase options for mining properties are capitalized when the costs are incurred in accordance with ASC
340.10.  The  costs  are  carried  at  the  amount  paid  and  transferred  to  the  appropriate  asset  account  if  the  option  is  exercised.  If  it  is  determined  that  the
Company will not exercise the option, the option is expensed.
Deferred Gains
Deposits on pending sales of mineral claims are classified as deferred gains until the transaction has been completed.  As of December 31, 2012, a deposit
received of $9,835 on the pending sale of a mineral claim was recognized as a deferred gain. As of June 30, 2013, the transaction was completed, and the
deferred gain has been recognized as income.
Asset Retirement Obligation
The FASB standard on accounting for asset retirement obligation requires that the fair value of the liability for asset retirement costs be recognized in an
entity’s balance sheet, as both a liability and an increase in the carrying values of such assets, in the periods in which such liabilities can be reasonably
estimated. The present value of the estimated future asset retirement obligation (“ARO”), as of the date of acquisition or the date at which mining commences
is capitalized as part of the costs of mineral assets and recorded with an offsetting liability. The asset retirement costs are depleted over the production life of
the mineral assets on a unit-of-production basis.
 
The ARO is recorded at fair value and accretion expense is recognized as the discounted liability is accreted to its expected settlement value. The fair value
of the ARO liability is measured by using expected future cash outflows discounted at the Company’s credit adjusted risk free interest rate.
Amounts incurred to settle plugging and abandonment obligations that are either less than or greater than amounts accrued are recorded as a gain or loss in
current operations.  Revisions to previous estimates, such as the estimated cost to remediate and abandon a mine may require adjustments to the ARO and
are capitalized as part of the costs of mineral assets.
Income Taxes
The Company utilizes the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based
on the differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of the assets and liabilities, and are measured using enacted tax rates that will be
in effect when the differences are expected to reverse.
The Company adopted the provisions of the FASB interpretation related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which seeks to reduce the diversity in
practice associated with the accounting and reporting for uncertainty in income tax positions.  The Company believes it does not have any uncertain tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in its income tax returns.
95
Table of Contents
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company adopted the FASB standard related to fair value measurement at inception. The standard defines fair value, establishes a framework for
measuring fair value and expands disclosure of fair value measurements. The standard applies under other accounting pronouncements that require or
permit fair value measurements and, accordingly, does not require any new fair value measurements. The standard clarifies that fair value is an exit price,
representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such,
fair value is a market-based measurement that should be determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability.
As a basis for considering such assumptions, the standard established a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair
value as follows.
Level 1. Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
Level 2. Inputs, other than quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3. Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
The  Company  values  its  derivative  instruments  related  to  embedded  conversion  features  and  warrants  from  the  issuance  of  convertible  debentures  in
accordance with the Level 3 guidelines. For the six month period ended June 30, 2013, the following table reconciles the beginning and ending balances for
financial instruments that are recognized at fair value in these consolidated financial statements. The fair value of embedded conversion features that have
floating conversion features and tainted common stock equivalents (warrants and convertible debt) are estimated using a Binomial Lattice model. The key
inputs to this valuation model as of June 30, 2013, were: Volatility of 116%, inherent term of instruments equal to the remaining contractual term, quoted
closing stock prices on valuation dates, and various settlement scenarios and probability percentages summing to 100%.
Balance at
December 31,
New
Level 3 –
Derivative liabilities from:
Conversion features – embedded derivative
Conversion features – tainted equity
Warrants – tainted equity
$
   
   
  $
2012
82,237    $
208,971     
205,619     
496,827    $
Issuances
166,808    $
-     
-     
166,808    $
Conversions
(83,114)   $
(39,177)    
-     
(122,291)   $
Changes in
Fair Values
47,034    $
176,838     
334,673     
558,545    $
Balance at
June 30, 2013  
 
 
212,965 
346,632 
540,292 
1,099,889
Changes  in  the  unobservable  input  values  would  likely  cause  material  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  the  Company’s  Level  3  financial  instruments.  The
significant  unobservable  input  used  in  the  fair  value  measurement  is  the  estimation  for  probability  percentages  assigned  to  future  expected  settlement
possibilities. A significant increase (decrease) in this distribution of percentages would result in a higher (lower) fair value measurement.
The following table presents assets that were measured and recognized at fair value as of December 31, 2012 and the year then ended on a recurring basis:
Description
   Available For Sale Securities
 Totals
$
  $
Level 2
Level 1
12,550    $
12,550    $
The following table presents assets that were measured and recognized at fair value as of June 30, 2013:
Description
   Available For Sale Securities
 Totals
$
  $
Level 2
Level 1
15,000    $
15,000    $
-    $
       -    $
-    $
       -    $
Level 3
Level 3
-    $
-    $
-    $
-    $
Unrealized
Total
Loss
12,500 
12,500
Unrealized
Total
Loss
10,050 
10,050
The Company had no other assets or liabilities valued at fair value on a recurring or non-recurring basis as of June 30, 2013 or December 31, 2012.
96
Table of Contents
Stock Based Compensation
Beginning  January  1,  2006,  the  Company  adopted  the  FASB  standard  related  to  stock  based  compensation.  The  standard  requires  all  share-based
payments to employees (which includes non-employee Directors), including employee stock options, warrants and restricted stock, be measured at the fair
value of the award and expensed over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period). The fair value of common stock options or warrants granted
to employees is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model by using the historical volatility of comparable public companies.
The calculation also takes into account the common stock fair market value at the grant date, the exercise price, the expected life of the common stock option
or warrant, the dividend yield and the risk-free interest rate.
 
The Company from time to time may issue stock options, warrants and restricted stock to acquire goods or services from third parties. Restricted stock,
options or warrants issued to other than employees or directors are recorded on the basis of their fair value, which is measured as of the date required by the
Emerging Issues Task Force guidance related to accounting for equity instruments issued to non-employees. In accordance with this guidance, the options
or warrants are valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model on the basis of the market price of the underlying equity instrument on the “valuation
date,” which for options and warrants related to contracts that have substantial disincentives to non-performance, is the date of the contract, and for all other
contracts is the vesting date. Expense related to the options and warrants is recognized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the period over which
services are to be received or the vesting period.   As of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, no options or warrants related to compensation have been
issued, and none are outstanding.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
From  time  to  time,  the  Company  may  issue  convertible  notes  that  may  have  conversion  prices  that  create  an  embedded  beneficial  conversion  feature
pursuant to the Emerging Issues Task Force guidance on beneficial conversion features. A beneficial conversion feature exists on the date a convertible
note is issued when the fair value of the underlying common stock to which the note is convertible into is in excess of the remaining unallocated proceeds of
the  note  after  first  considering  the  allocation  of  a  portion  of  the  note  proceeds  to  the  fair  value  of  any  attached  equity  instruments,  if  any  related  equity
instruments  were  granted  with  the  debt.  In  accordance  with  this  guidance,  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  beneficial  conversion  feature  is  recorded  as  a  debt
discount with a corresponding amount to additional paid in capital. The debt discount is amortized to interest expense over the life of the note using the
effective interest method.
Deferred Financing Costs
Deferred financing costs include debt issuance costs primarily incurred by the Company as part of Convertible Note transactions. Deferred financing costs as
of June 30, 2013 was $11,781 net of amortization of $16,540. This includes a commission paid to Carter Terry & Company, a registered broker-dealer,
consisting  of  $10,000  in  cash  and  85,000  restricted  Rule  144  shares  of  common  stock  valued  at  $5,620  on  the  date  of  issuance.    This  amount  was
capitalized to Deferred Financing Costs and amortized over the term of the note. Amortization is provided on a straight-line basis over the terms of the
respective debt instruments to which the costs relate and is included in interest expense.  The difference between the straight line and effective interest
methods is immaterial due to the short term nature of the convertible notes.
Accounting for Derivative Instruments
All  embedded  derivatives  within  convertible  debt  have  been  recorded  on  the  balance  sheet  at  fair  value  based  on  the  lattice  model  calculation.  These
derivatives, including embedded derivatives in the Company’s convertible notes which have floating conversion prices based on changes to the quoted price
of  the  Company’s  common  stock  and  common  stock  equivalents  tainted  as  a  result  of  the  derivative,  are  separately  valued  and  accounted  for  on  the
Company’s balance sheet. Fair values for exchange traded securities and derivatives are based on quoted market prices. Where market prices are not
readily available, fair values are determined using market based pricing models incorporating readily observable market data and requiring judgment and
estimates.
Lattice Valuation Model
The  Company  valued  the  conversion  features  in  their  convertible  notes  and  tainted  warrants  using  a  lattice  valuation  model,  with  the  assistance  of  a
valuation consultant. The lattice model values these instruments based on a probability weighted discounted cash flow model. The Company uses the model
to  develop  a  set  of  potential  scenarios.  Probabilities  of  each  scenario  occurring  during  the  remaining  term  of  the  instruments  are  determined  based  on
conversion prices relative to current stock prices, historic volatility, and estimates on investor behavior. These probabilities are used to create a cash flow
projection over the term of the instruments and determine the probability that the projected cash flow will be achieved. A discounted weighted average cash
flow for each scenario is then calculated and compared to the discounted cash flow of the instruments without the compound embedded derivative in order to
determine a value for the compound embedded derivative.
97
Table of Contents
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.  The Company accounts for goodwill and
intangibles under ASC Topic 350, Intangibles – Goodwill and Other, which does not permit amortization, but requires the Company to test goodwill and other
indefinite-lived assets for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist.
 
Income/Loss Per Share of Common Stock
Basic net loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted earnings per share includes
additional dilution from common stock equivalents, such as stock issuable pursuant to the exercise of stock options and warrants. Common stock equivalents
are not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share when the Company reports a loss because to do so would be anti-dilutive for the periods
presented.  As of June 30, 2013 and 2012, there were 52,131,637 and 43,145,833 common stock equivalents outstanding, respectively.
The following is a reconciliation of the computation for basic and diluted EPS for the six months ended June 30, 2013 and 2012, respectively:
Net Loss attributable to common shareholders
Weighted-average common shares Outstanding (Basic)
Weighted-average common stock Equivalents
Deduction of stock Equivalents not included due to net loss
Weighted-average common shares Outstanding (Diluted)
Basic and Diluted Net Gain (Loss) per Share
$
   
   
   
   
  $
June 30, 2013
(1,411,323)   $
108,542,908     
52,131,637     
(52,131,637)    
108,542,908     
(0.01)   $
June 30, 2012
(924,588)
98,712,344 
43,145,833 
(43,145,833)
98,712,344 
(0.01)
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. The cost of property, plant and equipment is depreciated using the straight-
line method over the estimated useful life of the asset - periods of approximately 18-28 years for buildings, 3-10 years for machinery and equipment and 3- 5
years for vehicles. Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever in management's judgment conditions indicate a possible loss. Such impairment
tests compare estimated undiscounted cash flows to the recorded value of the asset. If an impairment is indicated, the asset is written down to its fair value
or, if fair value is not readily determinable, an estimated fair value is used based on discounted cash flows. Fully depreciated assets are retained in property,
plant and equipment and accumulated depreciation accounts until they are removed from service. In case of disposals of assets, the assets and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts, and the net amounts after proceeds from disposal are credited or charged to income.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
New Accounting Pronouncements
Disclosures about Reclassification Adjustments out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
In February 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an accounting standards update which added new disclosure requirements for
items reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income. The update required entities to disclose additional information about reclassification
adjustments, including changes in accumulated other comprehensive income balances by component and significant items reclassified out of accumulated
other comprehensive income. The update became effective for us in the first quarter of 2013. The update had no material impact to our financial statements.
Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment
In July 2012, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which provided, subject to certain conditions, the option to perform a qualitative, rather than
quantitative, assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying
amount. The update became effective for us in the first quarter of 2013. The update had no material impact to our financial statements.
98
Table of Contents
NOTE 4                                AVAILABLE FOR SALE SECURITIES
On October 24, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement on its Willa property with Caribou King Resources Ltd. ("Caribou", or “CKR”), a Canadian
issuer  listed  on  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange.    Under  the  terms  of  Agreement,  Caribou  may  earn  up  to  a  100%  interest  in  the  Willa  Claims  by  making
aggregate payments to North Bay of USD $232,500 in cash and issuing 1,000,000 shares of Caribou common stock.  Of the aggregate payments, $7,500 in
cash and 500,000 shares are due upon receipt of regulatory acceptance of the agreement by the TSX Venture Exchange.  Subsequent to TSX approval in
November, 2012, and pursuant to the agreement, the Company received 500,000 shares of CKR stock. These shares were valued at $25,000 based upon
the closing price of CKR stock on the date the shares were received. As of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, the market value of these shares was
$15,000 and $12,550, respectively.
NOTE 5                                RUBY MINE ACQUISITION
On September 27, 2010, the Company executed an option-to-purchase agreement with Ruby Development Company (“RDC”), a California partnership, for
the acquisition of the Ruby Mine (the “Ruby”) in Sierra County, California. The purchase price is $2,500,000, which was to be paid in stages extending to
December 30, 2012, and which has been extended to December 30, 2015 pursuant to an amendment to the agreement signed on March 28, 2013.
On June 1, 2011, the Company exercised its option to purchase the Ruby Mine and made a final option payment of $85,000 to open escrow.  On July 1,
2011, escrow was closed and the acquisition of the Ruby Mine was completed. During the preceding option period and as of the closing date, the Company
has made payments totaling $510,000 to RDC, consisting of $360,000 cash and 10,000,000 shares of common stock valued at $150,000.  These payments
were credited towards the purchase price, thereby reducing the outstanding principal due to $1,990,000.  In addition, in compliance with the agreement dated
September 27, 2010, as amended on January 26, 2011, the Company issued warrants to RDC that gives them the option, until December 31, 2015, of
purchasing up to 10 million shares of stock at two cents ($0.02) per share, and in compliance with a second amendment to the Option Agreement dated April
22, 2011, the Company issued warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock at the exercise price of ten
cents ($0.10) per share.  These later warrants expire on May 1, 2016.
On the transaction closing date of July 1, 2011, the Company issued a promissory note to RDC for $1,990,000.  The note, as amended, is due on or before
December 30, 2015, and accrues interest at 6% per annum as of April 1, 2013, and 8% per annum as of January 1, 2015.  As of June 30, 2013, all monthly
payments have been paid, and the outstanding balance due on the note is $1,901,579, which includes a $160,000 extension fee pursuant to a mortgage
modification amendment executed on March 28. 2013. In addition, a $1 million payment is due on or before December 30, 2013. As of the date of this report,
the  Company  remains  current  in  its  obligations,  and  all  monthly  payments  have  been  made  on  time.  The  note  is  collateralized  with  all  of  the  assets
associated with the Ruby Mine.
Upon the close of the transaction and the transfer of title, as previously set forth in the purchase agreement, the Company acquired all of the real and
personal property associated with the Ruby Gold Mine, all of the shares of Ruby Gold, Inc., a private California corporation, and $171,618 in reclamation
bonds securing the permits at the Ruby Mine. Subsequent to the close of the transaction, Ruby Gold, Inc. became a wholly-owned subsidiary of North Bay
Resources Inc.  The Company has also assumed the reclamation liabilities on the Ruby Mine, for which reclamation bonds are pledged.  In addition, a
$2,500 liability from a pre-existing shareholder loan that was outstanding as of the closing date has been extinguished as of the close of escrow.
All costs related to the acquisition of the property have been capitalized when incurred. All other costs have been expensed when incurred. Cash paid during
the period ended December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010 was equal to $277,006 and $82,994, respectively. Warrants issued during the periods ended
December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2011 were valued at $149,896 and $219,940 respectively. Shares paid as of December 31, 2010 were valued at
$150,000. $2,519 was capitalized to the purchase option during the three months ended March 31, 2011 related to the company’s amendment to extend the
term of the 10,000,000 warrants issued to Ruby Development Company from December 31, 2012 to December 31, 2015. The value of the extension was
calculated using the Black-Scholes model. In addition, $219,940 was capitalized to the purchase option during the six months ended June 30, 2011 related
to the amendment on April 22, 2011 to issue warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock at the exercise
price of ten cents ($0.10) per share.  Said warrants are valid until May 1, 2016. The value of the additional warrants was calculated using the Black-Scholes
model.  On March 6, 2012, the Company issued warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock until March 6,
2017 at the exercise price of nine cents ($0.09) per share, in consideration for reducing the monthly mortgage payments due in January, February, and
March, 2012. The fair value of the warrants of $175,047 was expensed related to this issuance. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model.
99
Table of Contents
Ruby Mine Purchase Price Allocation
The following table summarizes the purchase price allocation for the transaction. The valuation conclusions include three groups: (i) net current tangible
assets, (ii) assumed liabilities, and (iii) goodwill. Individual asset valuations are presented below:
Acquisition Date: 07/01/11
 
Allocation of Purchase
 
Tangible Assets Acquired
 
 
 
 
     Total Tangible Assets
 
Assumed Liabilities
 
 
     Total Liabilities
Net Tangible Assets/Liabilities
Goodwill
Total Net Assets Acquired
Cash/Checking/Savings
Ruby Gold Mine Claims
Ruby Gold Inc. Certificates of Deposit
Property and Equipment
Short Term Notes Payable
Asset Retirement Obligation
Consideration Paid
Cash Paid (Option Agreement & Purchase Agreement) - prior year
Cash Paid (Option Agreement & Purchase Agreement)
Fees Paid Escrow Agent at Closing
Value of Extension of term for 9/27/10 Warrants issued
Note Payable at closing
Warrant (10,000,000 @$0.02 to 9/27/10 - 12/30/12) - prior year
Warrant (2,000,000 @$0.10 to 4/22/11 - 5/1/16)
Due diligence fees paid in cash in prior year
Common Stock valued at $150,000 - prior year
Total Consideration Paid
Price Purchase Allocation
Debit
Credit
5,070     
1,964,279     
171,618     
906,329     
3,047,296
2,873,178       
5,341       
2,878,519
2,500 
171,618 
174,118
-
80,000 
280,000 
2,076 
2,519 
1,990,000 
149,896 
219,941 
4,087 
150,000 
2,878,519
NOTE 6                                PROPERTY, PLANT, EQUIPMENT AND MINERAL CLAIM ASSETS
As of June 30, 2013, and December 31, 2012, components of the Ruby Mine property, plant and equipment and mineral assets were as follows:
100
Table of Contents
Buildings
Machinery and equipment
Vehicles
Total property, plant and equipment
 
Less: impairment expense(2)
Less: accumulated depreciation(3)
 
Property, plant and equipment, net
Mining claims (1)
Asset retirement costs
Total mineral claim assets
Less: accumulated depletion(3)
 
Mining claims, net
$
   
   
   
     
   
   
     
  $
$
   
   
   
     
  $
June 30,
2013
558,885    $
119,389     
240,514     
918,788
(135,810)    
(195,886)
587,092    $
June 30,
2013
1,792,660    $
4,839     
1,797,499     
-     
       
1,797,499    $
December 31,
2012
558,885 
119,389 
240,514 
918,788 
 
(135,810)
(147,766)
 
635,212
December 31,
2012
1,792,660 
4,828 
1,797,488 
- 
 
1,797,488
(1)Upon the completion of the Ruby Mine acquisition on July 1, 2011, the estimated fair value of the mineral rights acquired was fully capitalized.
(2)Following the acquisition of the Ruby Mine on July1, 2011, an evaluation of the equipment inventory determined that some equipment was obsolete
and/or otherwise not in compliance with safety regulations, resulting in an impairment deduction of $135,810.
(3)Depreciation expense totaled $48,120 and $52,370 for the six months ended June 30, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Depletion expense totaled $0 and $0
for the six months ended June 30, 2013 and 2012, respectively
NOTE 7                                FINANCING
On July 1, 2011, upon the acquisition of the Ruby Mine, the Company issued a promissory note to Ruby Development Company (“RDC”) for $1,990,000 plus
3% interest per annum.  The note, as amended, is due on or before December 30, 2015.  Monthly payments are $10,000 per month during Q1, 2012, $15,000
per month during Q2, 2012, and $20,000 per month from July 1, 2013 through December 2015. Pursuant to an amendment executed on March 28, 2013, the
interest rate on the note was increased to 6% as of April 1, 2013, and $160,000 was added to the principal. Said amendment also requires the Company to
pay RDC the greater of $1 million by December 30, 2013 or 40% of the EB-5 funding received until the note is paid off in full.   As of June 30, 2013 and
December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on the note is $1,901,579 and $1,774,822, respectively. As of the date of this report, the Company remains
current in its obligations, and all monthly payments have been made on time. The note is collateralized with all of the assets associated with the Ruby Mine.
On  December  29,  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  two  agreements  ("the  Agreements")  with  Tangiers  Investors  LP,  ("Tangiers")  pursuant  to  which  the
Company received two $25,000 loans from Tangiers.  As the Agreement specifies, loan proceeds will only be used towards expenses related to the Ruby
Mine  Project.    The  Agreement  is  structured  as  a  $25,000  Promissory  Note  (the  “Promissory  Note”),  and  a  $25,000  Convertible  Promissory  Note  (the
“Convertible Note”). The Promissory Note, as amended, has a maturity date of twenty four (24) months from the Effective Date, and an interest rate on the
unpaid principal balance equal to 9.9% per year.  The Company shall make cash payments to Tangiers every two (2) weeks beginning January 1, 2012, at a
minimum of $2,500 against the principal and accrued interest until the Promissory Note has been satisfied. The Company has further authorized Tangiers to
debit this amount directly from any drawdowns made on Company’s existing Equity Line of Credit (“ELOC”) with Tangiers.  As further consideration, Tangiers
shall be entitled to 250,000 5-year warrants to purchase 250,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.115 per share. The value of these
warrants was calculated via the Black-Scholes model and was calculated at $20,568. This value was recorded as a discount on the related note payable.
The $25,000 Convertible Note is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the
holder at a fixed price of $0.08 per share, which was the closing market share price on the Effective Date. Due to the conversion price being equal to the
closing share price on the grant date no beneficial conversion feature resulted from this issuance. The Note has a term of nine (9) months and accrues
interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year.  The Agreement further specifies that there shall be no penalty for prepayment of either the Promissory Note or the
Convertible  Note.  As  of  December  31,  2011  and  2012,  $0  and  $20,568  of  the  discount  was  amortized,  respectively,  and  the  discount  has  been  fully
amortized as of December 31, 2012.  As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on the Note $27,495, which includes $2,495 in accrued interest
as of December 31, 2012. The maturity date on the note was extended in 2012 and is now due on December 28, 2013.  As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding
balance due on the Note is $28,733, which includes $3,733 in accrued interest.
101
Table of Contents
On February 2, 2012, the Company entered into two Convertible Promissory Note Agreements ("the February 2012 Notes", or individually, the “Note”) with
Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to which the Company received an aggregate of $100,000 ($50,000 per Note) as a loan from Tangiers.  Each
Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months.  Each Note accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock,
in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at a fixed price of $0.08 per share.  As further consideration,
Tangiers  shall  be  entitled  to  500,000  5-year  warrants  exercisable  at  $0.13.    The  February  2012  Notes  further  specify  that  there  shall  be  no  penalty  for
prepayment. The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be
$78,296 on the note, and $21,704 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a
discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  The discount was fully amortized as of December 31, 2012.  As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding
balance due on the February 2012 Notes is $113,982, which includes $13,982 in accrued interest.
On  March  15,  2012,  the  Company  entered  into  two  Convertible  Promissory  Note  Agreements  ("the  March  2012  Notes",  or  individually,  the  “Note”)  with
Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to which the Company received an aggregate of $75,000 ($37,500 per Note) as a loan from Tangiers.  Each
Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months.  Each Note accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock,
in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at a fixed price of $0.09 per share.  As further consideration,
Tangiers  shall  be  entitled  to  500,000  5-year  warrants  exercisable  at  $0.09.    The  March  2012  Notes  further  specify  that  there  shall  be  no  penalty  for
prepayment.  The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to
be $34,896 on the note, and $40,104 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a
discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was $9,042 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. As of June 30,
2013, the outstanding balance due on the March 2012 Notes is $84,632, which includes $9,632 in accrued interest. As of June 30, 2013, the remaining
unamortized debt discount was $11,863.
On May 16, 2012, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the May 16, 2012 Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers")
pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The May 16, 2012 Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24)  months,
accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at
the option of the holder at a fixed price of $0.06 per share.  As further consideration, Tangiers shall be entitled to 150,000 5-year warrants exercisable at
$0.07.    The  May  16,  2012  Note  further  specifies  that  there  shall  be  no  penalty  for  prepayment.    The  beneficial  conversion  feature  resulting  from  the
discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $16,241 on the note, and $9,393 on the warrants. The warrants
were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  The discount
was fully amortized as of December 31, 2012. As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding balance due on the May 16 2012 Note is $55,581, which includes $5,581
in accrued interest.
On May 30, 2012, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the May 30 2012 Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers")
pursuant to which the Company received $25,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The May 30, 2012 Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months,
accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at
the option of the holder at a fixed price of $0.06 per share.  As further consideration, Tangiers shall be entitled to 150,000 5-year warrants exercisable at
$0.06.  The May 30 2012 Note further specifies that there shall be no penalty for prepayment.  The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted
conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $10,988 on the note, and $9,380 on the warrants. The warrants were valued
using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  The discount was fully
amortized as of December 31, 2012. As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding balance due on the May 30 2012 Note is $27,695, which includes $2,695 in
accrued interest.
 
On June 19, 2012, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the June 2012 Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers")
pursuant to which the Company received $100,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The June 2012 Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months,
accrues interest at a rate equal to 7% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at
the option of the holder at the lesser of 7 cents or the undiscounted VWAP price on the day prior to conversion, with a floor price of 2 cents.  As further
consideration, Tangiers shall be entitled to 750,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.07, and 750,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.14.  The June 2012
Note  further  specifies  that  there  shall  be  no  penalty  for  prepayment.    The  beneficial  conversion  feature  resulting  from  the  discounted  conversion  price
compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $58,048 on the note, and $41,952 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the
Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was
$18,490 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding balance due on the June 2012 Note is $107,240, which includes
$7,240 in accrued interest. As of June 30, 2013, the remaining unamortized debt discount was $31,161.
102
Table of Contents
On July 11, 2012, the Company issued a $550,000 Promissory Note ("the JMJ Note") to JMJ Financial, ("JMJ", or “the Lender”).  The Principal Sum due to
the  Lender  shall  be  prorated  based  on  the  consideration  actually  paid  by  the  Lender,  plus  an  approximate  10%  Original  Issue  Discount  ("OID")  that  is
prorated based on the consideration actually paid by the Lender as well as any other interest or fees, such that the Company is only required to repay the
amount funded and the Company is not required to repay any unfunded portion of the JMJ Note.  The JMJ Note has a maturity date of twelve (12) months
from the Effective Date of each respective tranche.  If the JMJ Note is repaid within ninety (90) days of the Effective Date, the interest rate shall be zero
percent (0%).  Should the JMJ Note still be outstanding after 90 days, a one-time 5% interest rate will be applied.  In addition, the Lender has the right, at any
time 90 days after the Effective Date, at its election, to convert all or part of the outstanding and unpaid Principal Sum and accrued interest (and any other
fees) into shares of fully paid and non-assessable shares of common stock of the Company. The Conversion Price is the lesser of $0.10 or 70% of the
average of the two lowest closing prices in the 25 trading days previous to the conversion. The cumulative consideration received as of June 30, 2013 and
December 31, 2012 is $257,850 and $113,850, respectively. Due to the floating conversion price the JMJ Note had an embedded derivative. The debt
discount resulting from the derivative was valued on the date of grant to be $111,517 for the issuances during the year ended December 31, 2012. The
additional discount resulting from the derivative valued on the grant date during the six months ended June 30, 2013 was $166,808. These values were
recorded as discounts on debt up to the value of the debt with any excess recorded as a loss ($18,095) and offset to the derivative liability. In addition there
was $28,650 of discount as a result of the principal owed ($286,500) exceeding the cash received ($257,850).  This resulted in a total discount on all notes of
$288,880.  Amortization of the discount was $101,609 for the six months ended June 30, 2013.  As of June 30, 2013, $132,825 (including interest) has been
repaid via conversions to common stock, and the outstanding balance due on the JMJ Note is $174,900, which includes $2,750 in accrued interest. The
unamortized debt discount as of June 30, 2013 was $128,964.
On  August  2,  2012,  the  Company  issued  a  $100,000  Convertible  Promissory  Note  ("the  Tonaquint  Note")  to  Tonaquint,  Inc,  ("Tonaquint",  or  “the
Lender”).  The Tonaquint Note carries a $10,000 original issue discount (the “OID”), as well as $3,000 in transaction fees, such that the initial Principal Sum
due is $113,000.  The interest rate on the Note is 8% per annum. The Tonaquint Note has a maturity date of nine (9) months from the Effective Date, and has
a fixed conversion price of $0.06.  The Note is self-amortizing, such that it may be repaid in cash in three monthly installments of $37,666.67 plus accrued
interest beginning 180 days from the Effective Date.  In lieu of cash payments, the Company may elect to convert the Tonaquint Note to shares at 70% of the
arithmetic average of the three (3) lowest VWAPs of the shares of Common Stock during the ten (10) consecutive Trading Day period immediately preceding
the date of such conversion.  No conversion can occur prior to 180 days from the Effective Date.  In addition, the Company retains the option of pre-paying
the  Tonaquint  Note  at  any  time  at  an  amount  equal  to  125%  of  the  outstanding  principal  and  the  accrued  and  unpaid  interest.    In  connection  with  this
transaction, a commission has been paid to Carter Terry & Company, a registered broker-dealer, consisting of $10,000 in cash and 85,000 restricted Rule
144 shares of common stock valued at $5,620 on the date of issuance.  This amount was capitalized to Deferred Financing Costs and amortized over the
term of the Tonaquint Note. The tainted equity valuation and “OID” totaled $48,272, and $32,231 was amortized during the period ended December 31, 2012.
$58,272 of the value was recorded as a discount on debt and $48,272 was added to the derivative liability. As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding
balance due on this Tonaquint Note was $116,792 which includes $3,792 in accrued interest.  As of June 30, 2013, the outstanding principal of $113,000
plus  $5,358  in  accrued  interest  has  been  paid  in  full  in  three  cash  payments  totaling  $118,358.    Accordingly,  the  debt  has  been  extinguished,  and  the
Tonaquint Note has been retired.  The debt discount was fully expensed with payoff, resulting in an amortization expense of $26,041 during the six months
ended June 30, 2013.
On  October  2,  2012,  the  Company  issued  a  $750,000  Promissory  Note  ("the  Note")  to  Tangiers  Investors,  LP  ("Tangiers",  or  “the  Lender”).    The
consideration will be received by the Company in tranches of $50,000 no less than bi-weekly, by mutual consent.  The Principal Sum due to the Lender shall
be prorated based on the consideration actually paid by the Lender plus any accrued interest, such that the Company is only required to repay the amount
funded and the Company is not required to repay any unfunded portion of the Note. The Note has a maturity date of twenty four (24) months from the Effective
Date of each tranche.  The Note shall accrue interest at a rate of 7% per annum on each $50,000 tranche independently from other tranches.  Unless repaid
in cash, the Lender shall have the right to convert all or part of the outstanding and unpaid Principal Sum and accrued interest into shares of fully paid and
non-assessable shares of common stock of the Registrant. The Conversion Price shall be the undiscounted volume weighted average price (VWAP) on the
day of conversion, subject to a floor price of $0.0129 per share, and a ceiling price of the undiscounted VWAP on the date prior to each tranche received by
the Registrant.  In addition, upon conversion, 125,000 5-year warrants for each $50,000 in Consideration received shall be issued, at an exercise price of
125% of the Conversion Price of each tranche, as applicable.  There is no penalty for prepayment, with prepayment subject to the consent of the Lender.  As
of June 30, 2013, the Company has drawn $346,098 from this facility. This included additional borrowings of $186,097during the six months ended June 30,
2013.  As of June 30, 2013 the outstanding balance due on this Note is $356,235, which includes $10,137 in accrued interest.
103
Table of Contents
The following table summarizes all of the Notes outstanding as of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012:
Mortgage payable – Ruby Mine
Convertible notes:
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 9.9%    
   
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 8%
   
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 7%
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 5%
$
June 30,
2013
1,901,579    $
275,000     
-     
446,097     
172.150
December 31,
2012
1,774,822 
 
275,000 
113,000 
260,000 
126,500
Discount on convertible notes from derivative valuation
Total convertible notes
Total Debt
$
(176,990)    
716,257     
2,611,512
(166,307)
608,193 
2,383,015
NOTE 8                                DERIVATIVE LIABILITIES
On July 11, 2012, the Company borrowed $100,000 requiring principal repayment of $110,000 convertible at the lesser of $0.10 or the average of the two
lowest closing prices in the 25 trading days prior to conversion. This note payable contained an embedded derivative liability due to the conversion feature
not being considered fixed or determinable. The related derivative liability was valued at issuance and the fair value of $98,366 was recorded as a derivative
liability and debit to debt discount.
In addition to this convertible note all other debt and equity instruments (except for preferred stock) convertible to common stock at the discretion of the holder
were  considered  as  a  part  of  the  derivative  liability  due  to  the  tainted  equity  environment.    As  of  July  11,  2012,  these  tainted  instruments  consisted  of
convertible debt outstanding of $375,000 and 20,050,000 warrants. These instruments were valued when they became tainted on July 11, 2012.  The fair
value of the conversion features on the convertible debt of $83,358 was added to the derivative liability and recorded as a part of the loss on the derivative for
the period. The fair value of the warrants was also added to the derivative liability and recorded as a loss on the derivative liability. During the remainder of
2012, the Company issued additional convertible notes totaling $273,000 which were considered tainted upon issuance. The related derivative liability and
debt  discount  recorded  was  valued  at  inception  and  equal  to  $48,272.  All  instruments  with  embedded  derivative  liabilities  or  included  in  the  derivative
liability  due  to  the  tainted  equity  environment  were  re-valued  at  December  31,  2012  with  all  changes  flowing  through  the  gain/loss  on  derivative.  The
derivative liability related to convertible debt was valued at $291,208, and the derivative liability related to warrants was $205,689 as of December 31, 2012.
Prior to December 31, 2012 the Company issued 500,000 shares of common stock for warrants exercised were valued as a part of the tainted equity portion
of the derivative liability. The related derivative was marked to market on the settlement according to the lattice valuation and relieved to additional paid in
capital for $49,795.
During  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2013,  the  Company  issued  additional  convertible  notes  totaling  $341,097,  which  were  considered  tainted  upon
issuance. The related derivative liability and debt discount recorded was valued at inception and equal to $166,808; $18,095 was expensed due to the value
exceeding the debt owed. In addition, the Company retired $251,182 in debt and accrued interest through cash payments and stock conversions, which
resulted in a settlement of derivative liabilities to additional paid in capital of $122,291. All instruments with embedded derivative liabilities or included in the
derivative liability due to the tainted equity environment were re-valued at June 30, 2013, with all changes flowing through the gain/loss on derivative for a
total loss on derivative of $558,545 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The derivative liability related to convertible debt was valued at $559,597, and
the derivative liability related to warrants was $540,292 as of June 30, 2013.
 
The following shows the changes in the derivative liability measured on a recurring basis for the six months ended June 30, 2013.
Derivative Liability at December 31, 2012
Loss on Derivative Liability
Settlement to APIC from Conversion
Additions to Liability for Convertible Debt recorded as debt discount
Additions to Liability for Convertible Debt expensed due to value of derivative exceeding debt
Derivative Liability at June 30, 2013
$
   
   
   
   
  $
496,827 
558,545 
(122,291)
148,713 
18,095 
1,099,889
104
Table of Contents
The following tabular presentation reflects the components of derivative financial instruments on the Company’s balance sheet at June 30, 2013 and
December 31, 2012:
Derivative Liabilities:
Embedded derivative liability in convertible debt
Derivative liability due to tainted equity – convertible debt
Derivative liability due to tainted equity – warrants
Total Derivative Liability
$
   
   
  $
June 30, 2013
212,965    $
346,632     
540,292     
1,099,889    $
December 31,
2012
82,237 
208,971 
205,619 
496,827
NOTE 9                                COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
During the second quarter of fiscal 2013, the Company discovered it had offered and sold certain shares of common stock without registration under the
Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”), as amended, during the period from October 24, 2011 through April 25, 2013.  Pursuant to Section 10(a)(3) of the
Securities Act, by the time our prospectus had been in use for 9 months from the effective date of January 24, 2011, the balance sheet date of the audited
financial statement contained in our prospectus was more than 16 months old, and had not been refreshed to present our current financial statements within
said  prospectus.  This  inadvertent  technical  failure  to  update  our  prospectus  according  to  Section  10(a)(3)  of  the  Securities  Act  may  have  caused  our
prospectus to no longer be effective as of October 24, 2011. As a result, purchasers of these securities may have the right to rescind their purchases for an
amount equal to the purchase price paid for the securities, plus interest from the date of purchase, limited to the unregistered shares purchased from the
original seller and still held by the original purchaser. The federal Securities Act requires that any claim for rescission be brought within one year of the
violation. The time periods within which claims for rescission must be brought under state securities laws vary and may be two years or more from the
transaction date. As of the date of this report, approximately 10 million shares of our outstanding common stock are subject to possible rescission. The
maximum potential liability as of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012 was $600,489 and $367,490, respectively. These amounts include interest at 10%
per annum from the date of the respective purchases.  Due to the shares being redeemable by the holder since their inception, the shares are required to be
classified outside of permanent equity on the balance sheet. Since redemption is uncertain and outside of the Company’s control the shares are classified
within the mezzanine section of the balance sheet at their respective redemption values. Any differences between the cash received and the redemption
value was recorded to additional paid in capital. Interest of 10% is being accrued on the values and is recorded through additional paid in capital consistent
with the appropriate accounting guidance covering the accounting treatment of mezzanine instruments.
The following shows the changes in the redeemable common stock from October 24, 2011 through June 30, 2013.
Cash received for 880,982 shares issued after October 24, 2011
Mark redeemable common stock down to the redeemable amount
Interest on redeemable common stock
Redeemable common stock value at December 31, 2011
Cash and note relief received for 3,636,619 shares issued
Mark redeemable common stock up to the redeemable amount
Interest on redeemable common stock
Redeemable common stock value at December 31, 2012
Cash received for 5,699,885 shares issued
Mark redeemable common stock up to the redeemable amount
Interest on redeemable common stock
Redeemable common stock value at June 30, 2013
$
   
   
  $
   
   
   
  $
   
   
   
  $
89,000 
(974)
247 
88,273 
227,000 
29,516 
22,701 
367,490 
197,000 
14,701 
21,298 
600,489
As of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012, respectively, the Company does not have any outside commitments, and is not currently leasing any office
space.  Office space is provided as part of a management agreement with The PAN Network, a private business management and consulting company
wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer (see Note 13 - Related Party Transactions).  The agreement is renewable annually at the discretion
of both parties. As a result there are no future payments for our lease beyond the current year contract.
The Company is not and has never been involved in any litigation of any nature, and the Company is not aware of any pending or threatened litigation.
105
Table of Contents
EB-5
On July 28, 2010, the Company executed an agreement with ACG Consulting, LLC ("ACG") intended to establish a new economic Regional Center ("RC")
under the federal EB-5 program (the "EB-5 Program") that will encompass all of  Northern California's Gold Country. Once established, the Regional Center
is expected to provide full funding for the Company's Ruby Mine Project in Sierra County, California.  Terms of the agreement specify that upon filing an
application for a new Regional Center with USCIS, North Bay shall  pay  ACG  its  share  of  the  startup  expenses,  which  as  of  December  31,  2011  were
$0. During Q1, 2011, the Company agreed to reimburse ACG $37,216 in expenses incurred to prepare and file EB-5 applications with USCIS.  As of March
31, 2011, $15,000 of this amount had been paid, and $22,216 remained outstanding.  As of December 31, 2011, $0 remains outstanding and this account
has been paid in full.  No shares of Company stock have been or will be issued in connection with this agreement.
The agreement also provides that North Bay will own 49% of the Regional Center, and ACG will own 51%. ACG and North Bay, working together through
the Regional Center, will seek to raise up to $7.5M in EB-5 funding for North Bay's Ruby Mine Project, subject to USCIS approval. ACG will also be an
equity partner in each project North Bay may bring into the Regional Center, the amount of which will vary on a deal by deal basis based on the amount of
consulting services ACG actually provides. At the present time, no projects other than mining are being considered, and the industry focus for the Regional
Center is expected to be limited to mining initially.
Effective October 14, 2010, the Company, together with ACG, entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with Northern California Regional
Center,  LLC  ("NCRC"),  whereby  NCRC  has  agreed  to  expand  its  scope  to  include  mining  projects  in  the  counties  of  Sierra  and  Nevada  in  Northern
California, and together with ACG has agreed to sponsor North Bay's application to secure $7.5 million for the Ruby Gold project in Sierra County, California,
through the EB-5 Program.  NCRC was approved on April 22, 2010 by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (“USCIS”) as a designated
EB-5 Regional Center, and is currently approved to sponsor qualifying investments in such capacity within the counties of Colusa; Butte; Glenn; Sacramento;
San Joaquin; Shasta; Sutter; Tehama; Yuba; and Yolo in the State of California (the “Regional Center’s Geographic Area”).  Pursuant to its regional center
designation, NCRC may sponsor qualifying investments in certain industry economic sectors that do not currently include mining.  The agreement with North
Bay and ACG calls for NCRC to seek USCIS approval for an expansion of NCRC’s Regional Center Geographic Area (the “Expansion”) to include Sierra
County,  where  the  Ruby  Mine  is  located,  and  for  approval  to  include  mining  within  its  designated  industry  sectors  (the  “Mining  Designation”).  These
applications have been filed with USCIS, and are currently being reviewed. Upon approval of the Expansion and Mining Designation by USCIS, NCRC will
then be permitted to sponsor qualified investments in North Bay’s Ruby Gold project under the EB-5 Program.  Under the terms of the agreement, NCRC will
receive a $5,000 fee for each investor whose minimum $500,000 investment is approved by USCIS.  In addition, upon the Ruby Gold project receiving the
aggregate sum of $7,500,000 through the EB-5 Program, NCRC shall be entitled to an undivided one and one half percent (1.5%) interest in the Ruby Gold
project.  No shares of Company stock have been or will be issued in connection with this agreement, and the entire EB-5 funding is expected to be non-
dilutive to shareholders.
On July 19, 2011, the NCRC Expansion Amendment, which includes the Mining Designation and pre-approval of the Ruby Gold project as a qualified EB-5
project, was formally approved by USCIS.  As of the date of this report, the EB-5 funding is still pending and has not been completed.
NOTE 10                              STOCK SPLITS
On February 18, 2005, the Company effected a 4 for 1 forward stock split of our common shares.  On March 12, 2006, and on February 7, 2008, the Company
effected 1 for 10 reverse stock splits.  All information presented herein has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect these stock splits as they took place as of
the earliest period presented.
NOTE 11                              DEFERRED COMPENSATION/NQDC
The Company has adopted an unfunded Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation (NQDC) plan to compensate our Chief Executive Officer.  Under this plan,
the Company is not required to reserve funds for compensation, and is only obligated to pay compensation when and if funds are available.  Any amounts
due but unpaid automatically accrue to deferred compensation. The plan has the option to be renewed annually at the discretion of the Company. While
unfunded and non-recourse, for compliance with GAAP this is disclosed as an accrued expense on the balance sheet.  On April 28, 2011, the Company
issued two million (2,000,000) shares of common stock to our Chief Executive Officer  to reduce the aggregate amount of deferred compensation owed to him
by $180,000.  The shares were valued at the closing market price of our common stock on the date of issuance.  As of June 30, 2013 and December 31,
2012, the outstanding balance of the NQDC plan is $947,474 and $884,474, respectively.
106
Table of Contents
In 2007, 2008, and 2009, our Chief Executive Officer was awarded restricted stock bonuses for deferring accrued salary. The value of common shares were
based on the market closing price on the day of issuance, and the value of preferred shares were valued via a valuation model generated by an independent
valuation expert, as follows:
Date
2/12/2007 
    2/9/2007 
12/21/2007 
12/16/2008 
8/11/2009
Type of Stock
Preferred
Common
Common
Common
Preferred
Number of
 Shares
100    $
250,000    $
10,000,000    $
2,500,000    $
4,100,000    $
Value
101,000 
31,250 
900,000 
50,000 
253,785
NOTE 12                              ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
Provisions for site closure and reclamation costs are based principally on legal and regulatory requirements established by various government agencies,
principally Sierra County, California, the US Forest Service, and the California Dept. of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation (OMR). Under current
regulations, the Company is required to meet performance standards to minimize the environmental impact from its operations and to perform site restoration
and other closure activities at its mining and development sites. The exact nature of environmental remediation requirements that may be encountered in the
future, if any, cannot be predicted with certainty, because environmental requirements currently established by government agencies may change.
 
The following table illustrates the inputs used to calculate the current Asset Retirement Obligation as of June 30, 2013 and December 31, 2012.
Cost estimate for reclamation work at today's cost
Estimated life of mine (years)
Risk adjusted rate (borrowing rate)
Estimated inflation rate
Asset retirement obligation at 12/31/12
Accretion Expense
Asset retirement obligation at 6/30/13
NOTE 13                              RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
$
$
   
  $
172,914 
50 
9.9%
2.4%
Asset Retirement
Obligation
5,584 
163 
5,747
In August 2009, the Board of Directors approved and the Company executed a management agreement with The PAN Network (“PAN”), a private business
management and consulting company wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.  The agreement is in consideration of $18,000 per month,
and  calls  for  PAN  to  provide  (a)  office  and  board  room  space,  including  reception,  utilities,  landline  phone/fax,  computers,  copiers,  projectors,  and
miscellaneous services; (b) financial services, including accounting, corporate filing and bookkeeping; (c) project and administrative services; (d) resource
targeting,  acquisition,  development  and  management  services;  (e)  marketing  services,  communications,  marketing  materials  management,  and  writing
services; (f) strategic planning, milestone management and critical path analysis; and (g) online services, including web site hosting, web site design, web
site  maintenance,  and  email  services.      The  agreement  includes  Mr.  Leopold’s  salary  of  $15,000  per  month,  which  will  accrue  entirely  to  deferred
compensation during any period in which the commitment remains unpaid.  The term of the agreement is one year, and automatically renews annually on
January 1 each year unless otherwise terminated by either party.  During the six month period ended June 30, 2013, $5,000 of the amount due was paid in
cash, and $49,000 accrued to deferred compensation.
107
Table of Contents
NOTE 14                              ADVANCE GOLD SALES
On June 4, 2013, the Company executed a Memorandum of Understanding (the “Agreement”) with a private US investor (the “Investor”) for an advance sale
of up to 120 ounces of specimen gold from the Ruby Mine in Sierra County, California.  The price paid in advance by the Investor shall be at a ten percent
(10%) discount to the then-current spot price of gold (the “Purchase Price”) on the day the gold is produced and made available for shipment (the “Delivery
Date”).  The  Investor  will  acquire  the  right  to  purchase  the  gold  at  their  discretion.  Upon  signing  the  Agreement,  the  Company  received  an  initial  cash
advance of $150,000 (the “Advance”), which is based on a 10% discount to the current spot price of gold, for delivery of the first 120 ounces of specimen gold
produced from the Ruby Mine on or before February 1, 2014 (the “Due Date”).  The Advance paid will be applied to the amount due to the Company on the
Delivery Date, as determined by the then-current spot price of gold on the Delivery Date.  In the event that 120 ounces of specimen gold is not available for
delivery by the Due Date, the Investor will be entitled to be repaid the Advance in cash plus 10% interest equal to $165,000 total, with an option to still
purchase the same amount of gold at a discount of 10% to the then-current spot price of gold when the specimen gold becomes available for delivery at a
later date. The related obligation has been recorded for the full $150,000 received and an additional $16,667 which represents the additional amount owed
related to the 10% discount on the gold price. This discount is being amortized straight line over the term of the agreement resulting in amortization of $1,913
for the six months ended June 30, 2013.
NOTE 15                              SHARE ISSUANCES SINCE JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION)
In 2004, the Company issued an aggregate of 320,000 shares of common stock and 1,200,000 shares of preferred stock as Founders shares to the Company
Founders. The preferred stock was convertible to common stock at a rate of one common share per two preferred shares. The shares were valued at their par
value which was equal to $1,520.
In  2004,  the  Company  issued  an  aggregate  of  320,000  shares  of  common  stock  and  1,200,000  shares  of  preferred  stock  to  the  Company  Officers  and
Directors upon the merger of Ultimate Jukebox, Inc. and NetMusic Corp. The preferred stock was convertible to common stock at a rate of one common share
per two preferred shares. The shares were valued at their par value which was equal to $1,520.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 12,005,491 shares of common stock for services rendered and exploration stage mining properties.  The
shares were valued at $5,100,667, based on the market price on the date of grant.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 2,574,127 shares of common stock to convert debt to equity.  The shares were valued at $2,510,825
based on the market price on the date of issuance.  Any differences between the value of the shares issued and the debt relieved were recorded as a gain or
loss on conversion.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 302,643 shares of common stock in private placements. The consideration received was $522,700.
Prior to 2008, the Company purchased back and retired 200,000 shares at a net cost of $2,000.
Prior to 2008, the Company received a contribution of $164,371 from a shareholder to pay expenses for mineral claim exploration.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued 100 shares of Series I Preferred stock to our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Perry Leopold, as an anti-takeover measure to
insure that Mr. Leopold maintains control of the Company during periods when the Company’s stock may be severely undervalued and subject to hostile
takeover in the open market.  As specified in the Certificate of Designation filed by the Company with the Delaware Secretary of State in February 2007, ”the
outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock shall vote together with the shares of Common Stock of the Corporation as a single class and, regardless of
the number of shares of Series I Preferred Stock outstanding and as long as at least one of such shares of Series I Preferred Stock is outstanding, shall
represent eighty percent (80%) of all votes entitled to be voted at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Corporation or action by written
consent of shareholders.  Each outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock shall represent its proportionate share of the 80% which is allocated to the
outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock.”  The value of the Series I Preferred shares was valued at $101,000 according to the value of the control
premium from 80% of the voting rights assigned to Series I Preferred stock.
Prior to 2008, the Company converted 2,400,000 shares of Convertible Series A preferred stock to 1,200,000 shares of common stock. The shares were
convertible at a ratio of one share of common stock per two shares of preferred stock.
Prior  to  2008,  a  non-convertible  note  payable  from  a  third  party  totaling  $50,000  with  a  20%  interest  rate,  maturing  thirty  days  from  the  note  date,  was
converted into 1,250,000 shares of common stock. During the same period, a non-convertible note payable from a third party totaling $12,000 with a 10%
interest rate, maturing one year from the note date, was converted into 100,000 shares of common stock.  The aggregate shares were valued according to the
closing market price on their respective conversion dates at $121,500.
108
Table of Contents
Prior to 2008, beneficial conversion features related to convertible notes payable totaling $62,000 were recorded. The entire discount was expensed in the
year ended December 31, 2007 due to the conversion of the note prior to year end.
During 2008, the Company received a contribution of $10,000 from a shareholder for mineral claim maintenance.
During 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 5,500,000 shares of common stock for services rendered.  The shares were valued at $230,000, based
on the market price on the date of grant.
During 2008, the Company issued 2,275,000 shares of common stock in a private placement.  The consideration received was $10,000.
During 2009, the Company issued 4,000,000 shares of Series A Preferred stock, and 100,000 shares of Series G Preferred stock to our Chief Executive
Officer as a bonus for services rendered.  Each share of Series A Preferred has 10 votes per share and is convertible to 5 shares of common.  The Series G
Preferred stock has no voting rights, and each share is convertible to 1/100 of an ounce of gold, or 20 shares of common. The conversion of the Series G
Preferred stock into gold can only be exercised by the holder if the company has gold inventory at the time of conversion. The conversion value of the shares
was $253,785 based on the value of the closing price of the common stock the preferred shares were convertible into on the day of issuance, plus the value
of the control premium from voting rights assigned to the preferred share issuances.
During 2009, the Company issued an aggregate of 21,800,000 shares of common stock in private placements.  The consideration received was $173,000.
During  2009,  the  Company  issued  an  aggregate  of  10,000,000  shares  of  common  stock  to  a  private  investor  to  reduce  the  balance  due  of  deferred
compensation to the Chief Executive Officer by $100,000. The deferred compensation was assigned by the Chief Executive Officer to the private investor in
lieu of cash, and the assigned liability was immediately converted to equity by the investor. The value of the shares issued according to the market price on
the date of issuance was $187,500. The difference between the value of the deferred compensation and the value of the shares issued was recorded as a
loss on conversion.
During 2009, the Company issued an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares of common stock for services rendered. The shares were valued at $29,750, based on
the market price on the date of grant.
During 2009, the Company secured $5 Million in financing under an equity line of credit with Tangiers Investors, LP ("Tangiers") to fund the Company's
operations and prospective mining acquisitions. North Bay has entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Tangiers that provides North Bay the
right, but not the obligation, to draw down on the equity line of credit by selling to Tangiers shares of the Company's common stock for a total purchase price
of up to $5 Million. Tangiers will pay the Company 90% of the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company's common stock during the pricing
period as quoted by Bloomberg, LP on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board ("OTCBB"). Tangiers' obligation to purchase shares of the Company's common
stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement is subject to certain conditions, including the Company obtaining an effective registration statement for
shares of the Company's common stock sold under the Securities Purchase Agreement and is limited to $100,000 per 10 consecutive trading days after the
advance notice is provided to Tangiers.  Upon signing the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company has agreed to issue Tangiers $85,000 in restricted
stock as a one-time commitment fee.  This was classified as Stock Payable at December 31, 2009 and valued at $115,310, based on the closing market
price of our common stock as of October 7, 2009, the date the contract was signed.  Subsequently, the Company issued 6,589,147 shares of restricted
common stock on January 20, 2010 to satisfy this obligation.
During 2010, the Company issued 6,589,147 shares of restricted common stock to Tangiers Investors, LP (“Tangiers”) as a one-time commitment fee in
compliance with the October 7, 2009 agreement with Tangiers.  The value of these shares was recorded in 2009 as a stock payable due to the obligation
existing at that time.  Due to the instrument to be only settled with the issuance of shares, no gain or loss was recorded with the issuance in 2010, and the full
value of the stock payable was relieved to common stock and additional paid-in capital.
During 2010, the Company issued 5,000,000 shares of common stock in a Rule 504 private placement.  The consideration received was $50,000.
During 2010, the Company issued 10 million shares of common stock to Ruby Development Company as part of the initial consideration for the signing of an
option-to-purchase agreement on the Ruby Mine. The market value of these shares as of the date the contract was executed was $150,000.  This amount
was capitalized to Other Assets due to it being a part of the Ruby Mine Purchase Option costs.
109
Table of Contents
During 2011, the Company registered 19,726,822 shares of our common stock for issuance to Tangiers Investors LP ("Tangiers") pursuant to an equity line
of  credit  (“ELOC”)  and  Securities  Purchase  Agreement  ("SPA")  entered  into  with  Tangiers  on  October  7,  2009.    Pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  SPA,  the
Company has the right, but not the obligation, to draw down on the ELOC by selling to Tangiers shares of the Company's common stock for a total purchase
price of up to $5 Million. Tangiers will pay the Company 90% of the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company's common stock during the 5-day
pricing period immediately following any advance notice provided to Tangiers.  Advances are limited to $100,000 per 10 consecutive trading days after the
advance notice is provided to Tangiers.  As of December 31, 2011, the Company has issued an aggregate of 10,314,967 of these registered shares to
Tangiers, in consideration of $857,000. The Company issued 880,982 shares after October 24, 2011. As noted within footnote 9, the shares issued after this
date were considered unregistered and re-classified to temporary equity based on the potential cash redemption to the investor.
During 2011, the Company issued 863,681 shares of common stock to satisfy a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated June 17, 2010 with Tangiers
pursuant to which the Company received $17,500 as a loan from Tangiers.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was $18,725, consisting of $17,500 in
principal plus $1,225 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no gain or loss was recorded on the
conversion.
During 2011, the Company issued 1,600,467 shares of common stock to satisfy a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated September 27, 2010 with
Tangiers pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was $52,495, consisting of
$50,000 in principal plus $2,495 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no gain or loss was
recorded on the conversion.
During  2011,  the  Company  issued  42,857  shares  of  common  stock  for  geological  services  rendered.  The  shares  were  valued  at  $3,000,  based  on  the
closing market price on the date of grant.
During 2011, the Company issued an aggregate of 1,437,416 shares of common stock to a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated December 30,
2010 with Tangiers pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was $51,612,
consisting of $50,000 in principal plus $1,612 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no gain or
loss was recorded on the conversion.
During 2011, the Company issued 550,000 shares common stock as a settlement on a 2009 consulting agreement.  The shares were valued at $62,095
based on the closing market price on the day of the grant. This value was recorded as a loss on settlement during 2011.
During  2011,  the  Company  issued  2  million  shares  of  common  stock  to  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  to  relieve  $180,000  in  accrued  deferred
compensation.  The shares were valued at the closing market price on the day of the grant, and were equal in value to the accrued salary relieved.
During 2011, the Company issued 111,112 shares common stock to Fred Michini as directors compensation of $10,000.  The shares were valued at the
closing market price on the day of grant.
During 2011,  the Company issued an aggregate of 557,528 shares of common stock to fully satisfy and retire a Convertible Note dated January 4, 2011 with
Asher Enterprises, Inc. (“Asher”) pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Asher.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was
$51,020, consisting of $50,000 in principal and $1,020 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no
gain or loss was recorded on the conversion.
During 2011, the Company accepted a notice of exercise on 500,000 warrants issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on December 30, 2010 that were attached to
a convertible promissory note agreement dated December 30, 2010.  The exercise price was $0.05 per shares, and the Company received $25,000 upon the
exercise.  500,000 shares of common stock have not yet been issued, and are accounted for as stock payable.
During  2012,  the  Company  issued  26,650  shares  of  common  stock  for  geological  services  rendered.  The  shares  were  valued  at  $4,000,  based  on  the
closing market price on the date of invoice.
During 2012, the Company cancelled all outstanding shares of the Series G Convertible Preferred Stock and filed a Certificate of Elimination of the Series G
Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to eliminate entirely the Series G Convertible Preferred stock designation
from our Certificate of Incorporation. The cancellation was initiated at the request of the sole shareholder of the Series G Preferred, and $100 was recorded to
additional paid in capital.
110
Table of Contents
During 2012, the Company issued a $100,000 Convertible Promissory Note ("the Note") to Tonaquint, Inc, ("Tonaquint", or “the Lender”).  The Note carries a
$10,000 original issue discount (the “OID”), as well as $3,000 in transaction fees, such that the initial Principal Sum due is $113,000.  The interest rate on the
Note is 8% per annum. The Note has a maturity date of nine (9) months from the Effective Date, and has a fixed conversion price of $0.06.  The Note is self-
amortizing,  such  that  it  may  be  repaid  in  cash  in  three  monthly  installments  of  $37,666.67  plus  accrued  interest  beginning  180  days  from  the  Effective
Date.  In lieu of cash payments, the Company may elect to convert the note to shares at 70% of the arithmetic average of the three (3) lowest VWAPs of the
shares of Common Stock during the ten (10) consecutive Trading Day period immediately preceding the date of such conversion.  No conversion can occur
prior to 180 days from the Effective Date.  In addition, the Company retains the option of pre-paying the Note at any time at an amount equal to 125% of the
outstanding principal and the accrued and unpaid interest.  As of March 31, 2013, this note was repaid entirely in cash and retired.
During 2012, and in connection with the above mentioned Tonaquint transaction, a commission has been paid to Carter Terry & Company, a registered
broker-dealer, consisting of $10,000 in cash and 85,000 restricted Rule 144 shares of common stock.  The shares were valued at $5,610 based on the
closing market price on the date of grant. This value is being amortized over the term of the related note agreement.
During 2012, the Company issued 3,636,619 shares of common stock to Tangiers Investors LP ("Tangiers") pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement
entered into with Tangiers on October 7, 2009, in consideration of cash received of $227,000.  Related to the consideration received, $201,464 was received
in cash, and the remaining $25,536 was applied as principal and interest to retire a $25,000 note payable to Tangiers dated December 30, 2011. As noted
within footnote 9, these shares were considered unregistered and re-classified to temporary equity based on the potential cash redemption to the investor.
During 2012, the Company issued 90,000 restricted shares of common stock for services rendered. The shares were valued at $6,660, based on the closing
market price on the date of grant.
During 2012, the Company issued 500,000 shares that had been previously recorded as stock payable pursuant to a notice of exercise received in 2011 on
500,000 warrants issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on December 30, 2010.  The exercise price was $0.05 per shares, and the Company received $25,000
upon the exercise.
During  Q1  2013,  the  Company  issued  2,211,744  shares  of  common  stock  to  Tangiers  Investors  LP  ("Tangiers")  pursuant  to  a  Securities  Purchase
Agreement  entered  into  with  Tangiers  on  October  7,  2009,  as  amended,  in  consideration  of  $69,000.  As  noted  within  footnote  9,  these  shares  were
considered unregistered and re-classified to temporary equity based on the potential cash redemption to the investor.
During Q1 2013, and pursuant to four partial conversion notices received, the Company issued an aggregate of 3,500,000 shares of common stock of the
Company to satisfy $80,787 of the principal and interest due on a Promissory Note ("the Note") dated July 11, 2012 with JMJ Financial, ("JMJ").  The number
of shares issued was consistent with the terms of the agreement, therefore equity was credited for the value of the debt relieved with no gain or loss recorded.
During the three month period ended June 30, 2013, the Company issued 3,488,305 shares of common stock to Tangiers Investors LP ("Tangiers") pursuant
to a Securities Purchase Agreement entered into with Tangiers on October 7, 2009, as amended, in consideration of $128,000. As noted within footnote 9,
these shares were considered unregistered and classified within temporary equity based on the potential cash redemption to the investor.
During  the  three  month  period  ended  June  30,  2013  and  pursuant  to  three  partial  conversion  notices  received,  the  Company  issued  an  aggregate  of
2,279,414 shares of common stock of the Company to satisfy $52,039 of the principal and interest due on a Promissory Note ("the Note") dated July 11, 2012
with JMJ Financial, ("JMJ").  The number of shares issued was consistent with the terms of the agreement, therefore equity was credited for the value of the
debt relieved with no gain or loss recorded.
NOTE 16                              WARRANTS
Ten million warrants were issued to Ruby Development Company on September 27, 2010 as a part of the purchase option agreement for the Ruby Mine.
The fair value of the warrants of $149,896 was capitalized related to this issuance. On January 26, 2011, the Ruby Mine purchase option was amended, and
the term of said warrants was increased from two years to 5 years, and the fair value of the warrants was increased by $2,519 to $152,415.  This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the initial valuation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
111
Table of Contents
$
  $
0.015 
0.02 
2.26 
440%
0.00%
0.44%
Two and a half million warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on September 27, 2010 that were attached to a convertible promissory note agreement
for  $50,000.  The  fair  value  of  1,500,000  of  the  warrants  of  $22,475  was  recorded  as  a  discount  on  the  convertible  note  payable  upon  issuance.  The
remaining  1,000,000  warrants  had  a  fair  value  of  $14,195.    $9,965  was  recorded  as  an  additional  discount  related  to  these  warrants  based  on  the
contingency resulting in their issuance being resolved, and the remaining undiscounted portion of the convertible note being equal to $9,965.  This value
was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.015 
0.05 
5.00 
440%
0.00%
1.31%
Five  hundred  thousand  warrants  were  issued  to  Tangiers  Investors,  LP  on  December  30,  2010  that  were  attached  to  a  convertible  promissory  note
agreement for $50,000. The fair value of 500,000 of the warrants of $14,195 was recorded as a discount on the convertible note payable upon issuance. This
value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
$
  $
0.029 
0.05 
5.00 
375%
0.00%
Discount Rate
2.06%
Two million warrants were issued to Ruby Development Company on April 22, 2011 as a part of an amendment to the purchase option agreement for the
Ruby Mine. The fair value of the warrants of $219,940 was capitalized related to this issuance. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The
key inputs for the initial valuation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.11 
0.10 
5.00 
324%
0.00%
2.12%
250,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on December 29, 2011 that were attached to a convertible promissory note agreement for $25,000.
The fair value of the warrants of $20,568 was recorded as a discount to the related debt. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key
inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.08 
0.115 
5.00 
158%
0.00%
0.83%
500,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on February 2, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $100,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$52,779.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
112
$
  $
0.12 
0.13 
5.00 
157%
0.00%
1.04%
Table of Contents
 
Two million warrants were issued to Ruby Development Company on March 6, 2012 in consideration for reducing monthly mortgage payments for the Ruby
Mine. The fair value of the warrants of $175,047 was expensed related to this issuance. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key
inputs for the initial valuation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.095 
0.09 
5.00 
155%
0.00%
0.83%
500,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on March 15, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $75,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$45,268.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.098 
0.09 
5.00 
155%
0.00%
1.33%
150,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on May 16, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $50,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$9,411.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.07 
0.07 
5.00 
145%
0.00%
0.75%
150,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on May 30, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $25,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$9,421.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
$
0.07
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
0.06 
5.00 
142%
0.00%
0.69%
750,000 warrants exercisable at $0.07 were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on June 19, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $100,000. The fair value of
the warrants was $49,978.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed.
This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.075 
0.07 
5.00 
140%
0.00%
0.71%
113
Table of Contents
750,000 warrants exercisable at $0.14 were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on June 19, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $100,000. The fair value of
the warrants was $47,431.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed.
This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.075 
0.14 
5.00 
140%
0.00%
0.71%
A summary of activity related to the Company’s warrant activity for the period from December 31, 2009 through June 30, 2013 is presented below:
Outstanding at December 31, 2009
Granted
Exercised
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at December 31, 2010
Granted
Exercised(2)
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at December 31, 2011
Granted
Exercised
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at December 31, 2012
Granted
Exercised
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at June 30, 2013
Number
Outstanding
Per Share
Weighted
Average
Exercise Price    
   
   
-     
-     
0.024     
13,000,000     
-     
-     
-     
-     
0.024     
13,000,000     
2,250,000     
0.10     
-     
-     
-     
-     
0.037     
15,250,000     
0.10     
4,800,000     
(500,000)    
0.05     
-     
-     
0.045     
19,550,000     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
0.045     
19,550,000
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life (Years)
- 
2.62 
- 
- 
2.62 
5.00 
- 
-
3.75(1)
5.00 
- 
-
3.75(1)
- 
- 
- 
2.75
(1) Primary reason for change related to a January 26, 2011 amendment to the Ruby Mine Option Agreement whereby the term of the warrants issued to
Ruby Development Company were extended from 2 years to 5 years.
NOTE 17                              RESTATEMENT
On February 6, 2013, pursuant to a comment letter issued by the Staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") relating to the Form 10-Q for
Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2012 ("Form 10-Q") filed by the Company on November 9, 2012, management of the Company, after discussions with
the  board  of  directors,  the  Company's  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  and  the  Staff  of  the  SEC,  concluded  that  the  previously-issued
consolidated financial statements for the Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2012 contained in the Company's Form 10-Q (the "Financial Statements")
should no longer be relied upon.  The discussions with the Staff of the SEC concerned the capitalization of certain costs to improve the Ruby Mine, including
tunnel/infrastructure and access road improvements.  These costs had been capitalized on the Company's balance sheet. The Commission has clearly
stated in a comment letter received on February 5, 2013, that "It is our position that once you acquired the Ruby property with the intent to explore it and, if
determined to be feasible, ultimately extract minerals, these types of improvement activities are considered exploration stage activities, and their costs should
be  expensed  unless  the  improvements  have  alternative  future  use."    After  extensive  consultation  with  our  auditors  and  the  SEC,  we  concluded  that  it
necessary to make revisions to comply with the Commission's position, and to file our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 with restated
audited December 31, 2011 financial statements and unaudited restatements of the quarters ended March 31, 2012, June 30, 2012, and September 30, 2012
to  remove  the  aforementioned  capitalized  development  costs  from  our  Consolidated  Balance  Sheets  and  expense  them  in  full  on  our  Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
 
The resulting effect on the June 30, 2012 financial statements  is: (1) a decrease in the capitalization of mineral claims by $312,898, (2) an increase of
$218,617 in Mineral Property expenses, (3) an increase of $218,617 in net loss (increase of $0.01 loss per share), and (4) an increase in total stockholders'
deficit of $573,091.  The increase in net loss resulted in no net change to cash used in operating activities.
114
Table of Contents
These restatements also reclassify as temporary equity certain issuances of unregistered common stock issued during the time period from October 24, 2011
through June 30, 2013 and which may be deemed to be redeemable. These shares have been moved to the mezzanine portion of our balance sheet at their
redemption values.
Below is the restated balance sheet and income statement related to the restatement of the six months ended June 30, 2012.
 
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS OF JUNE 30, 2012 (Unaudited)
ASSETS
   Current Assets
   Cash
   Accounts Receivable
   Total Current Assets
 
   Other Assets
   Certificates of Deposit
   Goodwill
   Mining Claims - Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of accumulated depreciation
   Purchase Option - Taber Mine
   Reclamation Bond Deposit – Fraser River
   Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
   Liabilities
   Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - related party
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of discount of $213,201)
   Note Payable (net of discount of $0)
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
   Total Current Liabilities
 
   Long-Term Liabilities
   Asset Retirement Obligation
   Total Long-Term Liabilities
   Total Liabilities
 
Commitment & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption, stated at estimated redemption value, 2,817,774
outstanding at June 30, 2013
Total Commitment & Contingencies
 
   Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
   Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value, 100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued
and outstanding at June 30, 2012
   Convertible Preferred stock, Series A, $0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares authorized,
4,000,000 shares issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012
   Convertible Preferred stock, Series G, $0.001 par value, 1,500,000 shares authorized,
100,000 shares issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012
   Common stock, $0.001 par value, 250,000,000 shares authorized, 96,810,130 shares
issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012
   Additional Paid-In Capital
   Stock Payable
   Deficit Accumulated During Exploration Stage
   Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENT & CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’
EQUITY (DEFICIT)
115
Table of Contents
Jun 30, 2012
(as reported)
110,388     
-     
110,388
172,255     
5,341     
2,110,387     
681,515     
16,000     
2,000     
2,987,498     
3,097,886    $
44,638     
828,474     
10,823     
161,798     
-     
1,857,245     
2,902,978
5,274     
5,274     
2,908,252
-
-
4,000
100
99,628     
11,999,318     
25,000     
(11,938,412)    
189,634
$
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
     
     
     
     
  $
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
   
   
  $
Adjustments
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
(312,898)    
-     
-     
-     
(312,898)    
(312,898)   $
       
       
       
       
-    $
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
-    $
As Restated
110,388 
- 
110,388 
 
 
172,255 
5,341 
1,797,489 
681,515 
16,000 
2,000 
2,674,600 
2,784,988 
 
 
 
 
44,638 
828,474 
10,823 
161,798 
- 
1,857,245 
2,902,978 
 
 
5,274 
5,274 
2,908,252
260,193
-
-
-
260,193
-
4,000
100
(2,818)    
(257,375)    
-     
(312,898)    
(573,091)
96,810 
11,741,943 
25,000 
(12,251,310)
(383,457)
$
3,097,886
(312,898)   $
2,784,988
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE THREE AND SIX MONTH PERIODS ENDING JUNE 30, 2012 (Unaudited)
3 months
ended June 30,
6 months
ended June 30,
2012
Adjustments     As Restated
2012
Adjustments     As Restated
Revenues
Retail Sales (revenue prior to change to
mining company in 2006)
Cost of Revenue
   Gross Loss
 
   Operating Expenses
   Commissions & Consulting Fees
   General & Administrative Costs
   Mining Property Costs
   Impairment Expense
   Accretion Expense
   Depreciation Expense
   Professional Services
   Total Operating Expenses
Net Operating Loss
Other Income (Expenses)
   Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
   Gain on Joint-Ventures
   Impairment Expense
   Interest Income
   Interest Expense
   Loss on Conversion of Debt
   Bad Debt Expense
   Accretion Expense
   Other Expense
   Loss on Settlement
   Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
   Gain (Loss) on Derivative Liability
Net Other Income (Expenses)
Net Loss
    Accretion of Discount on Redeemable
Common Stock
   
    Interest on Redeemable Common Stock    
Net Loss Attributable to Common
Shareholders
$
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Loss per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
 Diluted Net Loss per Share
 
NOTE 18                              SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
$
$
99,296,795     
(0.00)
99,296,795     
(0.00)
None.
116
Table of Contents
To the Board of Directors
North Bay Resources Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
-     
-     
-
6,000     
72,701     
32,687     
 -     
-     
26,185     
6,750     
144,323     
(144,323)
-     
-     
-     
(120)    
(105,048)    
-     
-     
(76)    
-     
-     
-     
 -     
(105,244)    
(249,567)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
106,349     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
106,349     
(106,349)
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
(106,349)
-    $
-     
-
6,000     
72,701     
139,036     
 -     
 -     
26,185     
6,750     
250,672     
(250,672)
-     
-     
-     
(120)    
(105,048)    
-     
-     
(76)    
-     
-     
-     
 -     
(105,244)    
(355,916)
-     
-     
-
6,000     
166,286     
88,533     
 -     
 -     
52,370     
25,250     
338,439     
(338,439)
4,500     
-     
-     
425     
(167,787)    
-     
-     
(203)    
(175,047)    
-     
-     
 -     
(338,112)    
(676,551)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
218,617     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
218,617     
(218,617)
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
(218,617)
-     
-
(6,836)    
(5,453)
(6,836)    
(5,453)
-     
-
(21,442)    
(7,978)
(249,567)
(118,638)
(368,205)
(676,551)
(248,037)
99,296,795     
(0.00)   $
98,712,344     
(0.01)
99,296,795     
(0.00)   $
98,712,344     
(0.01)
-     
-    $
-     
-    $
-     
-    $
-     
-    $
- 
- 
- 
 
 
6,000 
166,286 
307,150 
 - 
- 
52,370 
25,250 
557,056 
(557,056)
 
4,500 
- 
- 
425 
(167,787)
- 
- 
(203)
(175,047)
- 
- 
 - 
(338,112)
(895,168)
(21,442) 
(7,978)
(924,588)
98,712,344 
(0.01)
98,712,344 
(0.01)
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of North Bay Resources Inc. (an exploration stage company) as of December 31, 2012 and
2011, and the related consolidated statements of operations, changes in stockholders' equity (deficit), and cash flows for the years then ended, and for the
period from June 18, 2004 (inception) through December 31, 2012. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. The Company is not
required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control
over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion
on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining,
on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  financial  statement  presentation.  We  believe  that  our  audits  provide  a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of North Bay Resources,
Inc. as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, and the results of its operations, changes in stockholders' equity (deficit) and cash flows for the periods described
above in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
 
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in
Note 2 to the financial statements, the Company has accumulated losses to date, which raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going
concern. Management's plans regarding those matters also are described in Note 2. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might
result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
 
As discussed in Note 19 to the financial statements, the 2012 and 2011 financial statements have been restated to correct errors in the financial statements.
/s/ M&K CPAS, PLLC
Houston, Texas
March 26, 2013, except for Notes 3, 10, 16 and 19 which are as of July 31, 2013
117
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED) AND DECEMBER 31, 2011 (RESTATED)
ASSETS
   Current Assets
   Cash
   Accounts Receivable
   Total Current Assets
 
   Other Assets
   Certificates of Deposit
   Deferred Financing Costs, net
   Goodwill
   Mining Claims – Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of accumulated depreciation
   Other Assets
   Available For Sale Securities
   Reclamation Bond – Fraser River
   Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
   Liabilities
   Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - Related Party
   Accrued Expenses – Ruby Mine
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of discounts of $166,307 and $0, respectively)
   Deferred Gain
   Derivative Liability
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
   Note Payable (net of discounts of $0 and $20,568, respectively)
   Total Current Liabilities
 
   Long-Term Liabilities
   Asset Retirement Obligation
   Total Long-Term Liabilities
   Total Liabilities
 
Commitment & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption, stated at estimated redemption value, 4,517,601 and 880,982 shares
outstanding at December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively
Total Commitment & Contingencies
 
   Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value, 100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued and outstanding at
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively
 
Convertible Preferred stock, Series A, $0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares authorized, 4,000,000 and 4,000,000
Dec 31, 2012
Dec 31, 2011
(restated)
$ 42,008
    -
    42,008
     
     
    172,499
    14,471
    -
    1,797,488
    635,212
    -
    12,550
    2,000
    2,634,220
  $ 2,676,228
     
     
     
     
  $ 56,617
    884,474
    12,250
    41,363
    608,193
    9,835
    496,827
    1,774,822
    -
    3,884,381
     
     
    5,584
    5,584
  $ 3,889,965
(restated)
$ 129,888
      982
      130,870
       
       
      171,875
      -
      5,341
      1,797,564
      733,885
      4,000
      -
      -
      2,712,665
    $ 2,843,535
       
       
       
       
    $ 5,942
      784,474
      -
      -
      25,000
      -
      -
      1,889,185
      4,432
      2,709,033
       
       
      5,147
      5,147
    $ 2,714,180
367,490
  $ 367,490
-
88,273
    $ 88,273
-
shares issued and outstanding at December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively
 
Convertible Preferred stock, Series G, $0.001 par value, 0 and 1,500,000 shares authorized at December 31,
2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively, 0 and 100,000 shares issued and outstanding at December 31,
2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively
 
Common stock, $0.001 par value, 250,000,000 shares authorized, 97,485,130 and 96,783,480 shares issued
and outstanding at December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively
Additional Paid-In Capital
Stock Payable
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Deficit Accumulated During Exploration Stage
   Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
4,000
4,000
-
100
97,485
    11,805,636
    -
    (12,500
    (13,475,848
    (1,581,227
  $ 2,676,228
96,783
      11,271,341
      25,000
)     -
)     (11,356,142
)     41,082
    $ 2,843,535
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
118
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE YEARS ENDING
DECEMBER 31, 2012 AND 2011 (RESTATED)
AND THE PERIOD FROM
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
12 months ended
December 31,
12 months ended
December 31,
2012
(restated)
2011
(restated)
-    $
-     
-
-    $
-     
-
9,000     
339,524     
591,926     
98,673     
5,341     
513     
79,714     
1,124,691     
(1,124,691)
4,500     
32,500     
831     
(644,773)    
(386,833)    
-     
982     
-     
(2,222)    
-     
(995,015)    
(2,119,706)    
-     
(2,119,706)    
(29,516)     
-     
(22,701)     
(2,171,923)     
(12,500)    
(2,184,423)    
99,799,411     
(0.02)   $
99,799,411     
(0.02)   $
43,216     
345,451     
265,137     
60,560     
124,343     
243     
52,970     
891,920     
(891,920)
103,500     
-     
532     
(166,748)    
-     
-     
(29,018)    
(62,095)    
-     
-     
(153,829)    
(1,045,749)    
-     
(1,045,749)    
-     
974     
(247)     
(1,045,022)     
-     
(1,045,022)    
91,479,959       
(0.01)      
91,479,959       
(0.01)
Since inception
(June 18, 2004 -
December 31,
2012)
(restated)
- 
- 
- 
 
312,000 
9,160,947 
1,672,351 
159,233 
145,995 
756 
250,432 
11,701,714 
(11,701,714)
 
227,744 
309,649 
1,472 
(906,959)
(386,833)
(137,000)
(47,185)
(62,095)
(2,222)
(97,109)
(1,100,538)
(12,802,252)
(673,596)
(13,475,848)
(29,516) 
974 
(22,948) 
(13,527,338) 
(12,500)
(13,539,838)
Revenues
   Revenue
   Cost of Revenue
Gross Profit
   Operating Expenses
   Commissions & Consulting Fees
   General & Administrative Costs
   Mining Property Costs
    Depreciation Expense
    Impairment Expense
    Accretion Expense
   Professional Services
   Total Operating Expenses
Net Operating Loss
Other Income (Expenses)
   Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
   Other Income from Mineral Claims
   Interest Income
   Interest Expense
   Gain/Loss on Derivative Liability
   Loss on Conversion of Debt
   Bad Debt (Expense) / Recovery
   Loss on Settlement
   Other Expense
   Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
Net Other Income (Expenses)
Loss From Continuing Operations
Loss From Discontinued Operations
Net Loss
    Accretion of Discount on Redeemable Common Stock
    Excess Cash Received Compared to Redeemable Amount of Stock
    Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common Shareholders
   Unrealized Loss on Available For Sale Securities
Total Comprehensive Loss
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Gain (Loss) per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
Diluted Net Gain (Loss) per Share
$
   
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
   
  $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Preferred Stock
Series
Series
I
A
Series
G
Series
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Common Stock
Series I
Amount   Shares   Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Stockholders’
Deficit
OCI
Deficit
Total
Table of Contents
120
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Preferred Stock
(Continued)
Common Stock
Series A
Shares
Series
Series
G
I
Series
Series
A
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series I
 
Amount
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Shares
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Deficit
OCI
Total
Stockholders’
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,202,000    1,202     2,206,398
-
-
-
1,309,000    1,309     1,543,191
-
-
-
-
-
-
2,207,600
1,544,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
$-
$
1,200
1,200
-
-
$2,400   $
-
-
-
-
-
-
$
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
$ -
$-
$
320,000     320
(1,520
)
320,000     320
(1,520
)
200,000     200
4,800
-
-
-
840,000   $ 840
$1,760
$
-
-
-
12,127
12
180,213
-
-
-
121,491     121
2,586,046
-
-
$2,400   $
-
-
-
$
-
-
-
102,643     103
517,597
-
-
-
1,076,261  $ 1,076   $3,285,616   $
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
$-
-
-
-
(95,587
$(95,587
-
-
-
$
)
) $
(1,816,896 )
$(1,912,483 ) $
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
)
)
$ -
-
-
5,000
(95,587
$ (90,587
180,225
2,586,167
517,700
(1,816,896 )
$ 1,376,609
119
Table of Contents
Series A
Shares
-
-
1,200,000
1,200,000
Inception
6/18/2004   -
Founder's
Shares
issued
Shares
issued for
merger
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2004  2,400,000   
 
   
Common
Stock
issued to
convert
debt
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2005  2,400,000
-
-
-
-
Common
Stock
issued to
convert
debt
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Expenses
paid by
shareholder  -
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2006   2,400,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
$2,400   $
-
-
-
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
164,371
-
3,587,261  $ 3,587   $7,199,576  $
-
-
-
-
(5,504,237 )
$(7,416,720 ) $
-
-
-
164,371
(5,504,237 )
$ (211,157
)
Table of Contents
121
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Preferred Stock
(Continued)
Common Stock
Series
Series
G
I
Series
Series
A
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series A
Shares
Series I
 
 Amount
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Shares
Stock
  
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
Total
Stockholders’
  
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
62,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,350,000     1,350     120,150
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,575,000    10,575    959,425
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,000
10
1,490
-
-
100
-
-
-
-
-
101,000
-
-
-
(2,400)
-
-
1,200,000     1,200     1,200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
62,000
121,500
970,000
1,500
101,000
-
(2,000
70,623
)
(1,490,871 )
$(377,405
)
Beneficial
Conversion
Features on
notes
payable
Common
Stock
issued to
convert
debt
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued as
interest on
loan
-
-
-
-
-
Preferred
Shares
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
conversion
of preferred
shares
Shares
bought
back and
retired
Expenses
paid by
shareholder  -
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2007   -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(2,400,000)
-
-
-
-
-
-
100
$2,400   $
-
-
-
-
$
-
-
-
-
(200,000 )   (200 )   (1,800
)
-
-
-
-
70,623
-
16,522,261  $16,522  $8,513,664  $
-
-
-
-
-
-
(1,490,871 )
$(8,907,591 ) $
Table of Contents
122
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
(Continued)
Preferred Stock
Common Stock
Series
Series
Series
Series
Series
A
G
I
A
G
Shares
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series I
Amount
Shares
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Accumulated
Deficit
OCI
Total
Stockholders’
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
-
-
-
-
-
-
5,500,000     5,500     224,500
-
-
-
-
100
$
-
-
-
-
-
$
-
-
-
-
-
$
-
-
-
-
-
2,275,000     2,275     7,725
-
-
-
-
10,000
-
-
-
-
24,297,287  $24,297  $8,755,889  $
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
230,000
-
-
-
-
-
10,000
10,000
22,780
22,780
(328,478
)   -
(328,478
$(9,236,069 ) $ 22,780
$ (433,103
)
)
-
-
Shares  
Rounding of
shares due
to stock split  
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
Contribution
from
investor
Mark to
market AFS
securities
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2008
-
-
-
-
-
Table of Contents
123
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Preferred Stock
(Continued)
Common Stock
Series A
Shares
Series G
Shares
Series
I
Series
Series
A
G
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series I
 
Amount
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Shares
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
2,500,000     2,500     27,250
-
-
-
249,685     -
21,800,000    21,800    151,200     -
10,000,000    10,000    177,500     -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Accumulated
OCI
Total
Stockholders’
  
Deficit
-
-
-
29,750
253,785
173,000
-
187,500
(22,780
)   (22,780
-
-
-
-
(115,310 )   115,310    -
-
-
-
-
(786,979
)   -
(786,979
58,597,287  $58,597  $9,246,214  $115,310  $(10,023,048) $ 22,780
$ (598,827
-
Common
Stock issued
for services
Preferred
Stock issued
for services
Common
Stock issued
for cash
Common
Stock issued
for deferred
compensation  -
Loss realized
on AFS
securities
-
-
Stock
payable for
commitment
fee on equity
offering
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2009
-
-
-
-
-
-
4,000,000   100,000   -
4,000     100
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4,000,000   100,000   100
$4,000   $ 100   $
Table of Contents
124
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
Preferred Stock
(Continued)
Common Stock
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
FOR THE PERIOD
Series G
 
Shares
Series
I
Series
Series
A
G
Shares
Amount
Amount
Series A
 
Shares
Series I
 
Amount
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Shares
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
-
-
-
-
-
6,589,147     6,589     108,721     (115,310)   -
-
-
-
-
-
5,000,000     5,000     45,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
107,406     -
-
-
107,406
Accumulated
OCI
Total
Stockholders’
  
Deficit
-
-
-
50,000
)
-
-
-
-
150,000
149,896
(287,345
$ (428,870
-
-
Common
Stock
issued for
commitment
fee on
equity
offering
Common
Stock
issued for
cash
Discount on
convertible
notes from
beneficial
conversion
features
and
attached
warrants
Common
Stock
issued for
Ruby Mine
Purchase
Option
Common
Stock issued
for cash
Common
Stock issued
for convertible
debt
conversion
Common
Stock issued
for services
Common
Stock issued
for settlement
of services
Common
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,000,000    10,000    140,000     -
-
Warrants
issued for
Purchase
Option –
Ruby Mine   -
Net loss for
year
Balance at
12/31/2010   4,000,000   100,000   100
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
$4,000   $ 100   $
-
-
-
Table of Contents
-
-
-
-
149,896     -
-
-
-
(287,345
80,186,434  $80,186  $9,797,237  $-
$(10,310,393) $
125
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Preferred Stock
(Continued)
Common Stock
Series A
Shares
Series
I
Series G
Shares  
Shares
Series
A
Amount
Series
G
Amount
Series I
Amount   Shares
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Amount
Stock
  
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
-
-
-
-
-
9,433,985     9,434     758,566
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4,459,092     4,459     169,393
-
-
42,857
43
2,957
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
550,000
550
61,545
-
-
-
-
-
-
Total
Stockholders’
  
Deficit
768,000
173,852
3,000
62,095
Stock issued
for deferred
compensation
-
-
-
-
-
-
2,000,000     2,000     178,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
111,112
111
9,889
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70,568
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2,519
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
219,940
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25,000    -
-
-
-
Common
Stock issued
for directors
compensation  -
Discount on
convertible
notes from
beneficial
conversion
feature
Term
Extension of
Ruby
warrants
Warrants
issued for
Purchase
Option –
Ruby Mine
Stock
payable for
warrant
exercise
Excess cash
received
compared to
redeemable
amount for
stock
Interest on
redeemable
stock
Net loss for
year
(restated)
Balance at
12/31/2011
(restated)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
180,000
10,000
70,568
2,519
219,940
25,000
974
(247
(1,045,749
$41,082
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
974
-
-
-
(247
)   -
-
-
-
-
(1,045,749 )
4,000,000   100,000   100
$4,000   $ 100   $
96,783,480  $96,783  $11,271,341  $25,000  $(11,356,142) $
126
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE PERIOD
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
Preferred Stock
Series A
 
Shares
Series G
  
Shares
(Continued)
Common Stock
Series
I
  
Shares
Series
A
Amount
Series
G
Amount
Series I
Amount   Shares
Amount
Additional
 Paid-In
Capital
Stock
Payable
Accumulated
Deficit
Accumulated
OCI
Total
Stockholders’
Deficit
-
-
-
-
(100,000)  (100 )   -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100
-
-
-
-
116,650
117
10,543
-
-
-
10,660
-
-
-
-
-
85,000
85
5,525
-
-
-
5,610
-
-
-
-
-
500,000
500
24,500
(25,000)    -
-
-
Cancellation
of Series G
Preferred
Common
Stock
issued for
services
Common
Stock
issued for
deferred
financing
costs
Common
Stock
issued for
stock
payable
Mark to
market AFS
securities
Settlement
of Derivative
Liability
Discount on
convertible
notes from
beneficial
conversion
feature and
attached
warrants
Warrants
issued for
modification
of payment
terms on
mortgage
payable
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(12,500
)    (12,500
-
49,795
-
-
-
49,795
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
321,002
-
-
-
321,002
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
175,047
-
-
-
175,047
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Accretion of
discount on
redeemable
common
stock
Interest on
redeemable
common
stock
Net loss for
period
Balance at
12/31/2012
(restated)
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
4,000,000   -
$4,000   $
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(29,516
)   -
-
-
(29,516
-
-
(22,701
-
)   -
-
-
-
(22,701
(2,119,706 )   -
(2,119,706
$
97,485,130  $97,485  $11,805,636  $-
$(13,475,848) $ (12,500
)  $(1,581,227
127
Table of Contents
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEARS ENDING
DECEMBER 31, 2012 AND 2011 (RESTATED)
AND THE PERIOD FROM
JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2012 (RESTATED)
12 months Ended
December 31,
12 months Ended
December 31,
2012
2011
Since inception
(June 18, 2004 to
December 31,
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net Loss
Adjustments to reconcile Net Loss to net cash used in operations:
Gain on option payments received – non-cash
Gain on sale of claims
Common Stock issued for services
Common Stock issued to director for services
Common Stock issued for mining exploration stage property
Warrants issued to modify payment terms of note
Preferred Stock issued for bonus
Loss on conversion of debt and deferred compensation
Loss on AFS securities “other than temporary”
Loss on settlement - Common Shares issued
Bad debt expense
Gain realized on transfer of AFS – securities
Amortization of discount on debt
Amortization of deferred financing cost
Change in derivative liability
Common Stock issued as interest on loan
Depreciation Expense
Accretion Expense
Impairment Expense
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
(restated)
$ (2,119,706
     
   (25,050
   (4,500
   10,660
   -
   -
   175,047
   -
   -
   -
   -
   -
   -
   356,552
   15,639
   386,833
   -
   98,673
   513
   5,341
(restated)
)   $ (1,045,749
       
   -
)
   (73,500
)
 
   3,000
   10,000
 
   -
 
   -
 
   -
 
 
   -
   -
 
   62,095
 
   29,018
 
   -
 
 
   138,475
   -
 
   -
 
   -
 
   60,560
 
 
   243
 
   124,343
2012)
)   $ (13,475,848
       
 
)
(135,985
   (182,834
   5,123,677
   10,000
   351,400
   175,047
   253,785
   2,150,513
   106,985
   62,095
   48,167
   (9,875
   575,958
   15,639
   386,833
   1,500
   159,233
   756
   145,995
)
 
)
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
Accounts receivable
Prepaid Expenses
Other assets
Accrued expenses – related party
Accrued expenses
Accounts Payable
Other current assets
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Cash paid for purchase of fixed assets
Cash received from sales of claims
Cash paid for claims acquired
Cash paid for Ruby Purchase
Cash paid for purchase of Taber Mine Option
Net Cash Provided by/Used in Investing Activities
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Proceeds from sale of redeemable common stock
Proceeds from sale of common stock
Deferred Financing Costs
Contributions from related party
Warrants exercised, shares not yet issued
Debt Repayments
Shares re-purchased and retired
Borrowings on convertible debt
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash increase (decrease) for period
Cash at beginning of period
Cash at end of period
Supplementary Cash Flow Information:
Cash Paid for Interest
Cash Paid for Taxes
Non-Cash Investing & Financing Activities:
Common Stock issued For conversion of preferred shares
Common Stock issued For conversion of debt and accrued salary
Warrants issued for purchase option - Ruby Mine
Term extension of Ruby Mine warrants
Stock Issued  for purchase option - Ruby Mine
Discount from beneficial conversion feature and warrants attached  to convertible notes
payable
Transfer of available for sale securities to relieve accrued salary
Accrued salary relieved for shares issued
Common and preferred shares issued as founders shares
Capitalized costs for Ruby Mine purchase option transferred to fixed assets and mineral
assets upon acquisition
Note payable for Ruby Mine acquisition
Liabilities assumed with Ruby Mine acquisition
Revision to Asset Retirement Obligation
Common stock issued for conversion of convertible debt
Common stock issued for stock payable
Equity draw on redeemable common stock applied towards note principal owed
Common Stock issued for deferred financing costs
Debt discount due to derivative liability
Cancellation of preferred shares
Settlement of Derivative liability
Accretion of Discount on Redeemable Common Stock
Excess Cash Received Compared to Redeemable Amount of Stock
Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Unrealized loss on AFS
982
   -
   1,376
   100,000
   54,149
   50,675
   -
   (892,816
     
   -
   14,335
    -
   -
   -
   14,335
     
   201,464
   -
   (24,500
   -
   -
   (114,363
   -
   728,000
   790,601
   (87,880
   129,888
   42,008
     
   -
   -
     
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
$ 321,002
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
$ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ 76
 $ -
 $ 25,000
 $ 25,536
 $ 5,610
 $ 159,789
 $ 100
 $ 49,795
 $ 29,516
 $ -
 $ 22,701
 $ 12,500
(30,000
   9,910
   -
   136,030
   -
   -
   (257
   (575,832
(12,459
   73,500
    -
   (277,006
   (4,000
   (219,965
)
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
)
 
 
)
 
 
 
)
 
 
       
   -
 
 
   -
       
 $ -
 
 $ -
 
 $ 219,941
 
 
 $ 2,519
 $ -
90,000
   767,000
   -
   -
   25,000
   (103,315
   -
   100,000
   878,685
   82,888
   47,000
   129,888
)
 
 
 
 
 
)
)
       
)
 
 
)
)
)
       
 
 
 
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
   -
 
 
   -
$ 2,400
 $ 253,912
 $ 369,837
 $ 2,519
 $ 150,000
$ 70,568
 $ -
 $ 179,999
 $ -
$ 801,442
 $ 1,990,000
 $ 174,118
 $ 166,714
 $ 173,852
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ -
 $ 974
 $ 247
 $ -
$ 177,974
 $ 12,838
 $ 279,999
 $ 3,040
$ 801,442
 $ 1,990,000
 $ 174,118
 $ 166,790
 $ 173,852
 $ 25,000
 $ 25,536
 $ 5,610
 $ 136,207
 $ 100
 $ 49,795
 $ 29,516
 $ 974
 $ 22,948
 $ 12,500
(29,018
   9,910
   1,376
   1,200,593
   54,149
   50,675
   (29,316
   (2,978,590
(12,459
   192,669
   (16,311
   (361,093
   (4,000
   (201,194
291,464
   1,522,700
   (24,500
   244,994
   25,000
   (217,678
   (2,000
   1,381,812
   3,221,792
   42,008
   -
   42,008
)
 
 
 
 
 
)
)
 
)
 
) 
)
)
)
 
 
 
)
 
 
)
)
128
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
NORTH BAY RESOURCES INC.
(AN EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY)
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1             GENERAL ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS
The  Company  was  incorporated  in  the  State  of  Delaware  on  June  18,  2004  under  the  name  Ultimate  Jukebox,  Inc.    On  September  4,  2004,  Ultimate
Jukebox, Inc. merged with NetMusic Corporation, and subsequently changed the Company name to NetMusic Entertainment Corporation.  On March 10,
2006, the Company ceased digital media distribution operations, began operations as a natural resources company, and changed the Company name to
Enterayon, Inc.  On January 15, 2008, the Company merged with and assumed the name of its wholly-owned subsidiary, North Bay Resources Inc.  As a
result of the merger, Enterayon, Inc. was effectively dissolved, leaving North Bay Resources Inc. as the remaining company.
The Company’s business plan is based on the Generative Business Model, which is designed to leverage our mining properties and mineral claims into
near-term revenue streams even during the earliest stages of exploration and development. This is accomplished by entering into sales, joint-venture, and/or
option contracts with other mining companies, for which the Company generates revenue through payments in cash, stock, and other consideration.
The Generative Business Model is our short term plan to leverage properties until funding is adequate to implement our long term plan. The Company’s long
term plan is to locate and extract gold and silver from current exploration stage properties. This will be done through utilizing joint-ventures and other funding
that is available to develop properties until they reach the production stage. Once in the production stage, the Company plans on extracting gold, silver, and
other profitable by-products, and selling them to smelters. The Company has not currently begun this stage of the business plan.
NOTE 2             GOING CONCERN
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated modest revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends
and is unlikely to pay dividends. The Company has accumulated losses since inception equal to $13,475,848 as of December 31, 2012. These factors raise
substantial doubt regarding the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent
upon the continued financial support from its shareholders, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary equity financing to continue operations and to
determine  the  existence,  discovery  and  successful  exploration  of  economically  recoverable  reserves  in  its  resource  properties,  confirmation  of  the
Company’s interests in the underlying properties, and the attainment of profitable operations. The Company has had very little operating history to date.
These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification
of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
NOTE 3             SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Restatements
On February 6, 2013, pursuant to a comment letter issued by the Staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") relating to the Form 10-Q for
Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2012 ("Form 10-Q") filed by the Company on November 9, 2012, management of the Company, after discussions with
the  board  of  directors,  the  Company's  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  and  the  Staff  of  the  SEC,  concluded  that  the  previously-issued
consolidated financial statements for the Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2012 contained in the Company's Form 10-Q (the "Financial Statements")
should no longer be relied upon.  The discussions with the Staff of the SEC concerned the capitalization of certain costs to improve the Ruby Mine, including
tunnel/infrastructure and access road improvements.  These costs had been capitalized on the Company's balance sheet. The Commission has clearly
stated in a comment letter received on February 5, 2013, that "It is our position that once you acquired the Ruby property with the intent to explore it and, if
determined to be feasible, ultimately extract minerals, these types of improvement activities are considered exploration stage activities, and their costs should
be  expensed  unless  the  improvements  have  alternative  future  use."    After  extensive  consultation  with  our  auditors  and  the  SEC,  we  concluded  that  it
necessary to make revisions to comply with the Commission's position, and to to file our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 with restated
audited December 31, 2011 financial statements and unaudited restatements of the quarters ended March 31, 2012, June 30, 2012, and September 30, 2012
to  remove  the  aforementioned  capitalized  development  costs  from  our  Consolidated  Balance  Sheets  and  expense  them  in  full  on  our  Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
 
These restatements also reclassify as temporary equity certain issuances of unregistered common stock issued during the time period from October 24, 2011
through December 31, 2012 and which may be deemed to be redeemable. These shares have been moved to the mezzanine portion of our balance sheet at
their redemption values.
129
Table of Contents
 
The resulting cumulative effect of the restatement since the Ruby Mine acquisition date on July 1, 2011 and as of September 30, 2012 is: (1) a decrease in
the capitalization of mineral claims by $389,718, (2) an increase of $389,718 in Mineral Property expenses, (3) an increase of $389,718 in net loss (increase
of  $0.00  loss  per  share  since  the  acquisition  date  on  July  1,  2011  as  of  September  30,  2012),  and  (4)  an  increase  in  total  stockholders'  deficit  of
$389,718.  The increase in net loss resulted in no net change to cash used in operating activities. Please see Note 19 for additional information.
Reclassifications
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. There was no material effect to the consolidated financial
statements as result of these reclassifications.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Ruby Gold, Inc. All significant inter-company
accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid debt instruments and other short-term investments with a maturity of three months or less, when purchased, to be
cash equivalents. There were no cash equivalents at December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011. The Company maintains cash and cash equivalent
balances at one financial institution that is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation up to $250,000.
Reclamation Bonds
The Company holds its reclamation bonds on the Ruby Mine in the form of one-year Certificates of Deposit that automatically rollover annually on their
anniversary dates.  These funds are held in reserve to guarantee the Company's Asset Retirement Obligation.
Marketable Securities
The  Company  accounts  for  its  marketable  securities,  which  are  available  for  sale,  in  accordance  with  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)
guidance regarding accounting for certain investments in debt and equity securities, which requires that available-for-sale and trading securities be carried at
fair value. Unrealized gains and losses deemed to be temporary on available-for-sale securities are reported as other comprehensive income (“OCI”) within
shareholders’ deficit. Realized gains and losses and declines in value deemed to be other than temporary on available-for-sale securities are included in
“(Gain) loss on short- and long-term investments” and “Other income” on our statements of operations. Trading gains and losses also are included in “(Gain)
loss on short-term and long-term investments.” Fair value of the securities is based upon quoted market prices in active markets or estimated fair value when
quoted market prices are not available. The cost basis for realized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities is determined on a specific identification
basis. We classify our available-for-sale securities as short- or long-term based upon management’s intent and ability to hold these investments. In addition,
throughout  2009,  the  FASB  issued  various  authoritative  guidance  and  enhanced  disclosures  regarding  fair  value  measurements  and  impairments  of
securities which helps in determining fair value when the volume and level of activity for the asset or liability have significantly decreased and in identifying
transactions that are not orderly.
130
Table of Contents
 
Revenue Recognition
The company has recognized no mining revenue to date. In the future mining revenue will be recognized according to the policy described below.
Revenue is recognized when the following conditions are met:
(a)  persuasive evidence of an arrangement to purchase exists;
(b) the price is fixed or determinable;
(c) the product has been delivered; and
(d) collection of the sales price is reasonably assured.
Under the terms of concentrate sales contracts with third-party smelters, final prices for the gold, silver, zinc, copper and lead in the concentrate are set based
on the prevailing spot market metal prices on a specified future date based on the date that the concentrate is delivered to the smelter. The Company records
revenues under these contracts based on forward prices at the time of delivery, which is when transfer of legal title to concentrate passes to the third-party
smelters. The terms of the contracts result in differences between the recorded estimated price at delivery and the final settlement price. These differences
are adjusted through revenue at each subsequent financial statement date.
Mineral Property Costs
Mineral property acquisition costs are capitalized upon acquisition. Mineral property exploration and improvement costs are expensed as incurred. When it
has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven, proved, probable, inferred, or possible
reserves,  the  costs  incurred  to  develop  and  improve  such  property  are  capitalized.  To  date  the  Company  has  not  established  any  proven  or  probable
reserves on its mineral properties.
The Company reviews long-lived assets for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not
be recoverable. If the review indicates that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable, the potential impairment is measured based on a
projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate that is considered to be commensurate with the risk inherent in the Company's current business
model. For purposes of recognition and measurement of an impairment loss, a long-lived asset is grouped with other assets at the lowest level for which
identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets.
Purchase Options for Mining Property
Costs associated with acquisitions related to purchase options for mining properties are capitalized when the costs are incurred in accordance with ASC
340.10.  The  costs  are  carried  at  the  amount  paid  and  transferred  to  the  appropriate  asset  account  if  the  option  is  exercised.  If  it  is  determined  that  the
Company will not exercise the option, the option is expensed.
Deferred Gains
Deposits on pending sales of mineral claims are classified as deferred gains until the transaction has been completed.  As of December 31, 2012, a deposit
received of $9,835 on the pending sale of a mineral claim was recognized as a deferred gain. The Company will recognize this amount to other income
when the transaction is completed.
Asset Retirement Obligation
The FASB standard on accounting for asset retirement obligation requires that the fair value of the liability for asset retirement costs be recognized in an
entity’s balance sheet, as both a liability and an increase in the carrying values of such assets, in the periods in which such liabilities can be reasonably
estimated. The present value of the estimated future asset retirement obligation (“ARO”), as of the date of acquisition or the date at which mining commences
is capitalized as part of the costs of mineral assets and recorded with an offsetting liability. The asset retirement costs are depleted over the production life of
the mineral assets on a unit-of-production basis.
131
Table of Contents
 
The ARO is recorded at fair value and accretion expense is recognized as the discounted liability is accreted to its expected settlement value. The fair value
of the ARO liability is measured by using expected future cash outflows discounted at the Company’s credit adjusted risk free interest rate.
Amounts incurred to settle plugging and abandonment obligations that are either less than or greater than amounts accrued are recorded as a gain or loss in
current operations.  Revisions to previous estimates, such as the estimated cost to remediate and abandon a mine may require adjustments to the ARO and
are capitalized as part of the costs of mineral assets.
Income Taxes
The Company utilizes the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based
on the differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of the assets and liabilities, and are measured using enacted tax rates that will be
in effect when the differences are expected to reverse.
The Company adopted the provisions of the FASB interpretation related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which seeks to reduce the diversity in
practice associated with the accounting and reporting for uncertainty in income tax positions.  The Company believes it does not have any uncertain tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in its income tax returns.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company adopted the FASB standard related to fair value measurement at inception. The standard defines fair value, establishes a framework for
measuring fair value and expands disclosure of fair value measurements. The standard applies under other accounting pronouncements that require or
permit fair value measurements and, accordingly, does not require any new fair value measurements. The standard clarifies that fair value is an exit price,
representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such,
fair value is a market-based measurement that should be determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability.
As a basis for considering such assumptions, the standard established a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair
value as follows.
Level 1. Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
Level 2. Inputs, other than quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3. Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
The  Company  values  its  derivative  instruments  related  to  embedded  conversion  features  and  warrants  from  the  issuance  of  convertible  debentures  in
accordance with the Level 3 guidelines. For the twelve  month period ended December 31, 2012, the following table reconciles the beginning and ending
balances  for  financial  instruments  that  are  recognized  at  fair  value  in  these  consolidated  financial  statements.  The  fair  value  of  embedded  conversion
features that have floating conversion features and tainted common stock equivalents (warrants and convertible debt) are estimated using a Binomial Lattice
model. The key inputs to this valuation model as of December 31, 2012, were: Volatility of 94% - 104%, inherent term of instruments equal to the remaining
contractual term, quoted closing stock prices on valuation dates, and various settlement scenarios and probability percentages summing to 100%.
Level 3 –
Derivative liabilities from:
Conversion features –
embedded derivative
Conversion features –
tainted equity
Warrants – tainted equity
$
$
132
-    $
-     
-     
-    $
Balance at
New
December 31, 2011
Issuances
Changes in
Fair Values
Balance at
December 31,
2012
98,366    $
(16,129)    $
82,237
37,841     
-     
136,207    $
171,130     
205,619     
360,620    $
208,971 
205,619 
496,827
Table of Contents
 
Changes  in  the  unobservable  input  values  would  likely  cause  material  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  the  Company’s  Level  3  financial  instruments.  The
significant  unobservable  input  used  in  the  fair  value  measurement  is  the  estimation  for  probability  percentages  assigned  to  future  expected  settlement
possibilities. A significant increase (decrease) in this distribution of percentages would result in a higher (lower) fair value measurement.
The following table presents assets that were measured and recognized at fair value as of December 31, 2012 and the year then ended on a recurring basis:
Description
 
Securities
 Totals
Available  For  Sale
Level 1
Level 2
$
  $
12,500    $        -
12,500    $        -
Level 3
$ -
    $ -
Total
    Unrealized
    Loss
$
    $
12,500 
12,500
The Company had no other assets or liabilities valued at fair value on a recurring or non-recurring basis as of December 31, 2012 or 2011.
Stock Based Compensation
Beginning  January  1,  2006,  the  Company  adopted  the  FASB  standard  related  to  stock  based  compensation.  The  standard  requires  all  share-based
payments to employees (which includes non-employee Directors), including employee stock options, warrants and restricted stock, be measured at the fair
value of the award and expensed over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period). The fair value of common stock options or warrants granted
to employees is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model by using the historical volatility of comparable public companies.
The calculation also takes into account the common stock fair market value at the grant date, the exercise price, the expected life of the common stock option
or warrant, the dividend yield and the risk-free interest rate.
The Company from time to time may issue stock options, warrants and restricted stock to acquire goods or services from third parties. Restricted stock,
options or warrants issued to other than employees or directors are recorded on the basis of their fair value, which is measured as of the date required by the
Emerging Issues Task Force guidance related to accounting for equity instruments issued to non-employees. In accordance with this guidance, the options
or warrants are valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model on the basis of the market price of the underlying equity instrument on the “valuation
date,” which for options and warrants related to contracts that have substantial disincentives to non-performance, is the date of the contract, and for all other
contracts is the vesting date. Expense related to the options and warrants is recognized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the period over which
services are to be received or the vesting period.   As of December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, no options or warrants related to compensation have
been issued, and none are outstanding.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
From  time  to  time,  the  Company  may  issue  convertible  notes  that  may  have  conversion  prices  that  create  an  embedded  beneficial  conversion  feature
pursuant to the Emerging Issues Task Force guidance on beneficial conversion features. A beneficial conversion feature exists on the date a convertible
note is issued when the fair value of the underlying common stock to which the note is convertible into is in excess of the remaining unallocated proceeds of
the  note  after  first  considering  the  allocation  of  a  portion  of  the  note  proceeds  to  the  fair  value  of  any  attached  equity  instruments,  if  any  related  equity
instruments  were  granted  with  the  debt.  In  accordance  with  this  guidance,  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  beneficial  conversion  feature  is  recorded  as  a  debt
discount with a corresponding amount to additional paid in capital. The debt discount is amortized to interest expense over the life of the note using the
effective interest method.  This amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2012 totaled $15,639 and is reflected within interest expense on the
Statements of Operations.
133
Table of Contents
 
Deferred Financing Costs
Deferred financing costs include debt issuance costs primarily incurred by the Company as part of Convertible Note transactions. Deferred financing costs as
of December 31, 2012 was $30,110 net of amortization of $15,639. This includes a commission paid to Carter Terry & Company, a registered broker-dealer,
consisting  of  $10,000  in  cash  and  85,000  restricted  Rule  144  shares  of  common  stock  valued  at  $5,620  on  the  date  of  issuance.    This  amount  was
capitalized to Deferred Financing Costs and amortized over the term of the note. Amortization is provided on a straight-line basis over the terms of the
respective debt instruments to which the costs relate and is included in interest expense.  The difference between the straight line and effective interest
methods is immaterial due to the short term nature of the convertible notes.
Accounting for Derivative Instruments
All  derivatives  have  been  recorded  on  the  balance  sheet  at  fair  value  based  on  the  lattice  model  calculation.  These  derivatives,  including  embedded
derivatives in the Company’s convertible notes which have floating conversion prices based on changes to the quoted price of the Company’s common stock
and common stock equivalents tainted as a result of the derivative, are separately valued and accounted for on the Company’s balance sheet. Fair values for
exchange traded securities and derivatives are based on quoted market prices. Where market prices are not readily available, fair values are determined
using market based pricing models incorporating readily observable market data and requiring judgment and estimates.
Lattice Valuation Model
The  Company  valued  the  conversion  features  in  their  convertible  notes  and  tainted  warrants  using  a  lattice  valuation  model,  with  the  assistance  of  a
valuation consultant. The lattice model values these instruments based on a probability weighted discounted cash flow model. The Company uses the model
to  develop  a  set  of  potential  scenarios.  Probabilities  of  each  scenario  occurring  during  the  remaining  term  of  the  instruments  are  determined  based  on
conversion prices relative to current stock prices, historic volatility, and estimates on investor behavior. These probabilities are used to create a cash flow
projection over the term of the instruments and determine the probability that the projected cash flow will be achieved. A discounted weighted average cash
flow for each scenario is then calculated and compared to the discounted cash flow of the instruments without the compound embedded derivative in order to
determine a value for the compound embedded derivative.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.  The Company accounts for goodwill and
intangibles under ASC Topic 350, Intangibles – Goodwill and Other, which does not permit amortization, but requires the Company to test goodwill and other
indefinite-lived assets for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist. The Company fully impaired goodwill of
$5,341 during the year ended December 31, 2012 impairment analysis.
Income/Loss Per Share of Common Stock
Basic net loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted earnings per share includes
additional dilution from common stock equivalents, such as stock issuable pursuant to the exercise of stock options and warrants. Common stock equivalents
are not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share when the Company reports a loss because to do so would be anti-dilutive for the periods
presented.  As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, there were 47,532,822 and 37,562,250 common stock equivalents outstanding, respectively.
134
Table of Contents
 
The following is a reconciliation of the computation for basic and diluted EPS for the full year ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively:
Net Loss
Weighted-average common shares Outstanding (Basic)
December 31,
December 31,
2012
 $ (2,119,706
   99,799,411
)
2011
 $ (1,045,749
   91,479,959
)
Weighted-average common stock Equivalents
Deduction of stock Equivalents not included due to net loss
Weighted-average common shares Outstanding (Diluted)
Basic and Diluted Net Gain (Loss) per Share
47,532,822
   (47,532,822
   99,799,411
 $ (0.02
)
 
)
37,562,250
   (37,562,250
   91,479,959
 $ (0.01
)
 
)
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. The cost of property, plant and equipment is depreciated using the straight-
line method over the estimated useful life of the asset - periods of approximately 18-28 years for buildings, 3-10 years for machinery and equipment and 3- 5
years for vehicles. Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever in management's judgment conditions indicate a possible loss. Such impairment
tests compare estimated undiscounted cash flows to the recorded value of the asset. If an impairment is indicated, the asset is written down to its fair value
or, if fair value is not readily determinable, an estimated fair value is used based on discounted cash flows. Fully depreciated assets are retained in property,
plant and equipment and accumulated depreciation accounts until they are removed from service. In case of disposals of assets, the assets and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts, and the net amounts after proceeds from disposal are credited or charged to income.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
New Accounting Pronouncements
Disclosures about Reclassification Adjustments out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
In February 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an accounting standards update which adds new disclosure requirements for
items reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income. The update requires entities to disclose additional information about reclassification
adjustments, including changes in accumulated other comprehensive income balances by component and significant items reclassified out of accumulated
other comprehensive income. The update will be effective for us in the first quarter of 2013, but early adoption is permitted. The update will primarily impact
our disclosures, but otherwise is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment
In July 2012, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which provides, subject to certain conditions, the option to perform a qualitative, rather than
quantitative, assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying
amount. The update will be effective for us in the first quarter of 2013, but early adoption is permitted. The update may, under certain circumstances, reduce
the  complexity  and  costs  of  testing  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  for  impairment,  but  otherwise  is  not  expected  to  have  a  material  impact  on  the
Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
135
Table of Contents
 
Testing Goodwill for Impairment
In September 2011, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which provides, subject to certain conditions, the option to perform a qualitative, rather
than quantitative, assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. This update
was effective and adopted by the Company in the first quarter of 2012 and did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position,
results of operations or cash flows.
Presentation of Comprehensive Income
In June 2011, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which revises the manner in which entities present comprehensive income in their financial
statements. The new guidance removes the presentation options in existing guidance and requires entities to report components of comprehensive income
in either (1) a continuous statement of comprehensive income or (2) two separate but consecutive statements. Under the two-statement approach, the first
statement would include components of net income, which is consistent with the income statement format previously used by us, and the second statement
would include components of other comprehensive income (“OCI”). The update does not change the items that must be reported in OCI and must be applied
retrospectively for all periods presented in the financial statements. This update was effective and adopted by the Company in the first quarter of 2012 and
impacted the Company’s financial statement presentation, but otherwise did not impact the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations
or cash flows.
Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements
In  May  2011,  the  FASB  issued  an  accounting  standards  update  which  amends  the  definition  of  fair  value  measurement  principles  and  disclosure
requirements  to  eliminate  differences  between  U.S.  GAAP  and  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards.  The  update  requires  new  quantitative  and
qualitative disclosures about the sensitivity of recurring Level 3 measurement disclosures, as well as disclosures of transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of
the fair value hierarchy. This update was effective and adopted by the Company in the first quarter of 2012 and impacted the Company’s disclosures, but
otherwise did not have a material impact on the Company’s condensed consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
NOTE 4             AVAILABLE FOR SALE SECURITIES
On October 24, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement on its Willa property with Caribou King Resources Ltd. ("Caribou", or “CKR”), a Canadian
issuer  listed  on  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange.    Under  the  terms  of  Agreement,  Caribou  may  earn  up  to  a  100%  interest  in  the  Willa  Claims  by  making
aggregate payments to North Bay of USD $232,500 in cash and issuing 1,000,000 shares of Caribou common stock.  Of the aggregate payments, $7,500 in
cash and 500,000 shares are due upon receipt of regulatory acceptance of the agreement by the TSX Venture Exchange.  Subsequent to TSX approval in
November, 2012, and pursuant to the agreement, the Company received 500,000 shares of CKR stock. These shares were valued at $25,000 based upon
the closing price of CKR stock on the date the shares were issued. As of December 31, 2012, the market value of these shares was $12,500.  This resulted
in an unrealized loss of $12,500 for the year ended December 31, 2012. We consider the unrealized loss as temporary due to the short length of time the
market price for these securities has been below its value on the acquisition date.
NOTE 5             ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
On February 10, 2011, the Company executed an agreement (the “Agreement”) to sell a number of its mineral claims in the Slocan Mining District of British
Columbia, Canada, to Yardley Mountain Gold Corp (“Yardley”) for the aggregate sum of $93,000 USD.  The Agreement provides that Yardley shall pay to
North Bay $10,000 USD within ten (10) days of execution of the Agreement, $33,000 USD within three (3) months of the date of the Agreement, and $50,000
USD on or before June 25, 2011.  The parties subsequently agreed to extend the due dates of the second and third payments to August 10, 2011.  As of
August 11, 2011, cash payments of $63,000 had been received, and a $30,000 promissory note due on September 30, 2011, was accepted for the balance
due, plus $982 in reimbursed expenses for claim maintenance.  Accordingly, the sale was completed, and title to all of the claims identified in Schedule A of
the Agreement has been transferred to Yardley.  As of December 31, 2012, the $30,000 note has been classified as a bad debt, and the $982 outstanding for
reimbursed expenses has been paid. Subsequent to December 31, 2012, Yardley has been released from this obligation.
136
Table of Contents
 
NOTE 6             RUBY MINE ACQUISITION
On September 27, 2010, the Company executed an option-to-purchase agreement with Ruby Development Company (“RDC”), a California partnership, for
the acquisition of the Ruby Mine (the “Ruby”) in Sierra County, California. The purchase price is $2,500,000, which was to be paid in stages extending to
December 30, 2012, and which has been extended to June 30, 2013 pursuant to an amendment to the agreement signed on December 12, 2012.
On June 1, 2011, the Company exercised its option to purchase the Ruby Mine and made a final option payment of $85,000 to open escrow.  On July 1,
2011, escrow was closed and the acquisition of the Ruby Mine was completed. During the preceding option period and as of the closing date, the Company
has made payments totaling $510,000 to RDC, consisting of $360,000 cash and 10,000,000 shares of common stock valued at $150,000.  These payments
were credited towards the purchase price, thereby reducing the outstanding principal due to $1,990,000.  In addition, in compliance with the agreement dated
September 27, 2010, as amended on January 26, 2011, the Company issued warrants to RDC that gives them the option, until December 31, 2015, of
purchasing up to 10 million shares of stock at two cents ($0.02) per share, and in compliance with a second amendment to the Option Agreement dated April
22, 2011, the Company issued warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock at the exercise price of ten
cents ($0.10) per share.  These later warrants expire on May 1, 2016.
On the transaction closing date of July 1, 2011, the Company issued a promissory note to RDC for $1,990,000 plus 3% interest per annum.  The note, as
amended, is due on or before June 30, 2013.  As of December 31, 2012, all monthly payments have been paid, and the outstanding balance due on the note
is $1,774,822. As of the date of this report, the Company remains current in its obligations, and all monthly payments have been made on time. The note is
collateralized with all of the assets associated with the Ruby Mine.
Upon the close of the transaction and the transfer of title, as previously set forth in the purchase agreement, the Company acquired all of the real and
personal property associated with the Ruby Gold Mine, all of the shares of Ruby Gold, Inc., a private California corporation, and $171,618 in reclamation
bonds securing the permits at the Ruby Mine. Subsequent to the close of the transaction, Ruby Gold, Inc. became a wholly-owned subsidiary of North Bay
Resources Inc.  The Company has also assumed the reclamation liabilities on the Ruby Mine, for which reclamation bonds are pledged.  In addition, a
$2,500 liability from a pre-existing shareholder loan that was outstanding as of the closing date has been extinguished as of the close of escrow.
All costs related to the acquisition of the property have been capitalized when incurred. All other costs have been expensed when incurred. Cash paid during
the period ended December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010 was equal to $277,006 and $82,994, respectively. Warrants issued during the periods ended
December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2011 were valued at $149,896 and $219,940 respectively. Shares paid as of December 31, 2010 were valued at
$150,000. $2,519 was capitalized to the purchase option during the three months ended March 31, 2011 related to the company’s amendment to extend the
term of the 10,000,000 warrants issued to Ruby Development Company from December 31, 2012 to December 31, 2015. The value of the extension was
calculated using the Black-Scholes model. In addition, $219,940 was capitalized to the purchase option during the six months ended June 30, 2011 related
to the amendment on April 22, 2011 to issue warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock at the exercise
price of ten cents ($0.10) per share.  Said warrants are valid until May 1, 2016. The value of the additional warrants was calculated using the Black-Scholes
model.  On March 6, 2012, the Company issued warrants granting RDC the right to purchase 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock until March 6,
2017 at the exercise price of nine cents ($0.09) per share, in consideration for reducing the monthly mortgage payments due in January, February, and
March, 2012. The fair value of the warrants of $175,047 was expensed related to this issuance. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model.
137
Table of Contents
 
Ruby Mine Purchase Price Allocation
The following table summarizes the purchase price allocation for the transaction. The valuation conclusions include three groups: (i) net current tangible
assets, (ii) assumed liabilities, and (iii) goodwill. Individual asset valuations are presented below:
Cash/Checking/Savings
Ruby Gold Mine Claims
Ruby Gold Inc. Certificates of Deposit
Property and Equipment
Acquisition Date: 07/01/11
 
Allocation of Purchase
 
Tangible Assets Acquired
 
 
 
 
     Total Tangible Assets
 
Assumed Liabilities
Short Term Notes Payable
Asset Retirement Obligation
Price Purchase Allocation
    Credit
  Debit
     
   
     
   5,070
     
   1,964,279
   171,618
     
     
   906,329
     
   3,047,296
2,500
   171,618
Total Liabilities
Net Tangible Assets/Liabilities
Goodwill
Total Net Assets Acquired
2,873,178
   5,341
   2,878,519
174,118
Consideration Paid
Cash Paid (Option Agreement & Purchase Agreement) - prior year
Cash Paid (Option Agreement & Purchase Agreement)
Fees Paid Escrow Agent at Closing
Value of Extension of term for 9/27/10 Warrants issued
Note Payable at closing
Warrant (10,000,000 @$0.02 to 9/27/10 - 12/30/12) - prior year
Warrant (2,000,000 @$0.10 to 4/22/11 - 5/1/16)
Due diligence fees paid in cash in prior year
Common Stock valued at $150,000 - prior year
Total Consideration Paid
Debit
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Credit
      80,000
      280,000
      2,076
      2,519
      1,990,000
      149,896
      219,941
      4,087
      150,000
      2,878,519
138
Table of Contents
NOTE 7             PROPERTY, PLANT, EQUIPMENT AND MINERAL CLAIM ASSETS
As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, components of the Ruby Mine property, plant and equipment and mineral assets were as follows:
Buildings
Machinery and equipment
Vehicles
Total property, plant and equipment
 
Less: impairment expense(2)
Less: accumulated depreciation(3)
 
Property, plant and equipment, net
Mining claims (1)
Asset retirement costs
Total mineral claim assets
Less: accumulated depletion(3)
 
Mining claims, net
2012
December 31,
 
   
 $ 558,885
   119,389
   240,514
   918,788
     
   (124,343
   (159,233
     
 $ 635,212
2012
December 31,
 
   
 $ 1,792,660
   4,828
   1,797,488
   -
     
 $ 1,797,488
December 31,
2011
$ 558,885
   119,389
   240,514
   918,788
)
)
(124,343
   (60,560
$ 733,885
December 31,
2011
$ 1,792,660
 
   4,904
 
   1,797,564
 
 
   -
$ 1,797,564
)
)
(1)Upon the completion of the Ruby Mine acquisition on July 1, 2011, the estimated fair value of the mineral rights acquired was fully capitalized.
(2)Following the acquisition of the Ruby Mine on July1, 2011, an evaluation of the equipment inventory determined that some equipment was obsolete
and/or otherwise not in compliance with safety regulations, resulting in an impairment deduction of $124,343.
(3)Depreciation expense totaled $137,544 and $60,560 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Depletion expense totaled $0 and
$0 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively
139
Table of Contents
 
NOTE 8             FINANCING
On June 17, 2010, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to
which the Company received $17,500 as a loan from Tangiers.  The Note is convertible to common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to
time before maturity at the option of the holder at the greater of (a) $0.001 or (b) eighty percent (80%) of the lowest traded price of common stock out of the ten
(10)  trading  days  immediately  preceding  the  conversion  date.    The  Note  has  a  term  of  one  year  and  accrues  interest  at  a  rate  equal  to  9.9%  per
year.  Conversion rights were waived by the holder from inception of the agreement through July 15, 2010. The beneficial conversion feature resulting from
the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $10,726. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and
offset to additional paid in capital. During the three months ended March 31, 2011 the note balance of $17,500 and accrued interest of $1,225 was settled
with conversion into 863,681 shares of common stock.  The unamortized portion of the discount at the time of conversion of $4,937 was fully amortized upon
conversion. No gain or loss was recorded for the conversion due to the conversion being within the terms of the convertible debt agreement.
On September 27, 2010, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant
to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers to initiate the acquisition of the Ruby Mine.  The Note is convertible to common stock, in
whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at the greater of (a) $0.005 or (b) eighty percent (80%) of the
lowest traded  price of common stock out of the ten (10) trading days immediately preceding the conversion date.  The Note has a term of one year and
accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year.  In addition, Tangiers is entitled to 1.5 million 5 year warrants exercisable at $0.05, with an additional 1
million 5 year warrants exercisable at $0.05 if the note remains outstanding after 90 days, and is also entitled to a 0.75% non-voting interest in the Ruby
Project.
The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to the market price was calculated based on the date of grant to
be $17,560 after adjusting the effective conversion price for the relative fair value of the note proceeds compared to the fair value of the attached warrants
and note. In addition to this discount related to the beneficial conversion feature, an additional discount of $22,475 was recorded based on the fair value of
the 1,500,000 warrants attached to the debt. This value was derived using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The 1,000,000 contingent warrants owed
were valued at $15,000 according to the Black-Scholes model. This value was not recorded initially due to the contingent nature of the issuance.  This
contingency was resolved ninety days after the note was issued when the note was unpaid.  As a result the 1,000,000 warrants were issued.  The remaining
undiscounted portion of the note was $9,965.  As a result of the value of the warrants exceeding the remaining undiscounted portion of the note, only $9,965
was recorded as an additional discount from this issuance. During the three months ended March 31, 2011 the note balance of $50,000 and accrued interest
of $2,495 was settled with conversion into 1,600,467 shares of common stock.  The unamortized portion of the discount at the time of conversion of $36,986
was fully amortized upon conversion. No gain or loss was recorded for the conversion due to the conversion being within the terms of the convertible debt
agreement.
On December 30, 2010, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant
to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers for expenses related to our acquisition of the Ruby Mine.  The Note is convertible to
common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at the greater of (a) $0.005 or (b) seventy
percent (70%) of the lowest traded  price of common stock out of the ten (10) trading days immediately preceding the conversion date.  The Note has a term
of nine months and accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year.  In addition, Tangiers is entitled to 500,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.05.  The
beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $32,485 on the
note, and $14,195 on the warrants. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was
$15,389 for the three months ended March 31, 2011.  On April 1, 2011, $27,983 of principal on the note was satisfied with conversion into 975,000 shares of
common stock.  The remaining balance of $22,017 in principal and $1,612 in accrued interest was satisfied with conversion into 462,416 shares of common
stock on June 1, 2011, and as of June 30, 2011, the debt has been retired.  The unamortized portion of the discount at the time of conversion of $31,163 was
fully  amortized  upon  conversion.  No  gain  or  loss  was  recorded  for  the  conversion  due  to  the  conversion  being  within  the  terms  of  the  convertible  debt
agreement.
140
Table of Contents
 
On January 4, 2011, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Asher Enterprises, Inc. ("Asher"), for the sale of an 8% convertible
note in the principal amount of $50,000 (the "Note").  The Note bears interest at the rate of 8% per annum.  All interest and principal must be repaid by the
maturity date of October 3, 2011.  The Note is convertible into common stock, at Asher's option, at a 45% discount to the average of the three lowest closing
bid prices of the common stock during the 10 trading day period prior to conversion, provided that the number of shares to be issued upon conversion cannot
result in the recipient holding more than 4.99% of the outstanding number of shares   The discount on the Note from the beneficial conversion feature is
$50,000, and $32,065 was amortized during the six months ended June 30, 2011.  On July 19, 2011, the outstanding $50,000 principal of the note plus
$1,020 in accrued interest was converted to 557,528 shares of common stock. Accordingly, the Note has been satisfied, and the debt has been retired. The
remaining value of the unamortized discount was amortized upon conversion.
The discounts on debt are being amortized straight line over the terms of the convertible notes. The difference between the straight line and effective interest
methods is immaterial due to the short term nature of the convertible notes.
On July 1, 2011, upon the acquisition of the Ruby Mine, the Company issued a promissory note to Ruby Development Company (“RDC”) for $1,990,000 plus
3% interest per annum.  The note is due on or before June 30, 2013.  Monthly payments for the duration of 2011 are $35,000 per month.  Monthly payments
as of January 1, 2012, were set to increase to $85,000 per month.  Upon receipt of the Company’s EB-5 funding, the Company has agreed to pay RDC 50%
of the funding received until the note is paid off in full.   In October, 2011, RDC agreed to lower the mortgage payments due in November and December,
2011, to $10,000 each month.  Subsequent to December 31, 2011, RDC agreed to lower the mortgage payments due during FY 2012 to $10,000 each
month. As of December 31, 2011, the outstanding balance due on the note was $1,889,185.  As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on the
note is $1,774,822, plus $4,437 in accrued interest. As of the date of this report, the Company remains current in its obligations, and all monthly payments
have been made on time. The note is collateralized with all of the assets associated with the Ruby Mine.
During the quarter ended September 30, 2011 the Company repaid $2,500 to the former owners of Ruby Gold, Inc. as a part of the loans assumed with the
acquisition of the Ruby Gold Mine.
On  December  29,  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  two  agreements  ("the  Agreements")  with  Tangiers  Investors  LP,  ("Tangiers")  pursuant  to  which  the
Company received two $25,000 loans from Tangiers.  As the Agreement specifies, loan proceeds will only be used towards expenses related to the Ruby
Mine  Project.    The  Agreement  is  structured  as  a  $25,000  Promissory  Note  (the  “Promissory  Note”),  and  a  $25,000  Convertible  Promissory  Note  (the
“Convertible Note”). The Promissory Note, as amended, has a maturity date of twenty four (24) months from the Effective Date, and an interest rate on the
unpaid principal balance equal to 9.9% per year.  The Company shall make cash payments to Tangiers every two (2) weeks beginning January 1, 2012, at a
minimum of $2,500 against the principal and accrued interest until the Promissory Note has been satisfied. The Company has further authorized Tangiers to
debit this amount directly from any drawdowns made on Company’s existing Equity Line of Credit (“ELOC”) with Tangiers.  As further consideration, Tangiers
shall be entitled to 250,000 5-year warrants to purchase 250,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.115 per share. The value of these
warrants was calculated via the Black-Scholes model and was calculated at $20,568. This value was recorded as a discount on the related note payable.
The $25,000 Convertible Note is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the
holder at a fixed price of $0.08 per share, which was the closing market share price on the Effective Date. Due to the conversion price being equal to the
closing share price on the grand date no beneficial conversion feature resulted from this issuance. The Note has a term of nine (9) months and accrues
interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year.  The Agreement further specifies that there shall be no penalty for prepayment of either the Promissory Note or the
Convertible  Note.  As  of  December  31,  2011  and  2012,  $0  and  $20,568  of  the  discount  was  amortized,  respectively,  and  the  discount  has  been  fully
amortized as of December 31, 2012.  As of December 31, 2011 and 2012, the outstanding balance due on the Note is $50,000 and $27,495 respectively,
which includes $2,495 in accrued interest as of December 31, 2012. The maturity date on the note was extended in 2012 and is now due on December 28,
2013.
On  February  2,  2012,  the  Company  entered  into  two  Convertible  Promissory  Note  Agreements  ("the  Notes",  or  individually,  the  “Note”)  with  Tangiers
Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to which the Company received an aggregate of $100,000 ($50,000 per Note) as a loan from Tangiers.  Each Note, as
amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months.  Each Note accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole
or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at a fixed price of $0.08 per share.  As further consideration, Tangiers
shall be entitled to 500,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.13.  The Notes further specify that there shall be no penalty for prepayment. The beneficial
conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $78,296 on the note, and
$21,704 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to
additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was $90,324 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012.  As of December 31, 2012, the
outstanding balance due on the Note is $109,032, which includes $9,032 in accrued interest.
141
Table of Contents
 
On March 15, 2012, the Company entered into two Convertible Promissory Note Agreements ("the Notes", or individually, the “Note”) with Tangiers Investors
LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to which the Company received an aggregate of $75,000 ($37,500 per Note) as a loan from Tangiers.  Each Note, as amended,
has a term of twenty four (24) months.  Each Note accrues interest at a rate equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part,
at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at a fixed price of $0.09 per share.  As further consideration, Tangiers shall be
entitled to 500,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.09.  The Notes further specify that there shall be no penalty for prepayment.  The beneficial conversion
feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date of grant to be $34,896 on the note, and $40,104 on
the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional
paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was $63,771 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012. As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding
balance due on these Notes is $80,920, which includes $5,920 in accrued interest.
On May 16, 2012, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to
which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24)  months, accrues interest at a rate
equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder
at a fixed price of $0.06 per share.  As further consideration, Tangiers shall be entitled to 150,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.07.  The Note further
specifies that there shall be no penalty for prepayment.  The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market
price was valued on the date of grant to be $16,241 on the note, and $9,393 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation
model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was $25,634 for the twelve
months ended December 31, 2012. As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on these Notes is $53,106, which includes $3,106 in accrued
interest.
On May 30, 2012, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to
which the Company received $25,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months, accrues interest at a rate
equal to 9.9% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder
at a fixed price of $0.06 per share.  As further consideration, Tangiers shall be entitled to 150,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.06.  The Note further
specifies that there shall be no penalty for prepayment.  The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market
price was valued on the date of grant to be $10,988 on the note, and $9,380 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation
model. This value was recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was $20,368 for the twelve
months ended December 31, 2012.  As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on this Note is $26,458, which includes $1,458 in accrued
interest.
 
On June 19, 2012, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement ("the Note") with Tangiers Investors LP, ("Tangiers") pursuant to
which the Company received $100,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The Note, as amended, has a term of twenty four (24) months, accrues interest at a rate
equal to 7% per year, and is convertible into common stock, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity at the option of the holder at
the lesser of 7 cents or the undiscounted VWAP price on the day prior to conversion, with a floor price of 2 cents.  As further consideration, Tangiers shall be
entitled to 750,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.07, and 750,000 5-year warrants exercisable at $0.14.  The Note further specifies that there shall be no
penalty for prepayment.  The beneficial conversion feature resulting from the discounted conversion price compared to market price was valued on the date
of grant to be $58,048 on the note, and $41,952 on the warrants. The warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This value was
recorded as a discount on debt and offset to additional paid in capital.  Amortization of the discount was $45,349 for the twelve months ended December 31,
2012. As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on this Note is $103,740, which includes $3,740 in accrued interest.
On July 11, 2012, the Company issued a $550,000 Promissory Note ("the Note") to JMJ Financial, ("JMJ", or “the Lender”).  The Principal Sum due to the
Lender shall be prorated based on the consideration actually paid by the Lender, plus an approximate 10% Original Issue Discount ("OID") that is prorated
based on the consideration actually paid by the Lender as well as any other interest or fees, such that the Company is only required to repay the amount
funded and the Company is not required to repay any unfunded portion of the Note.  The Note has a maturity date of twelve (12) months from the Effective
Date.  If the Note is repaid within ninety (90) days of the Effective Date, the interest rate shall be zero percent (0%).  Should the Note still be outstanding after
90 days, a one-time 5% interest rate will be applied.  In addition, the Lender has the right, at any time 90 days after the Effective Date, at its election, to
convert all or part of the outstanding and unpaid Principal Sum and accrued interest (and any other fees) into shares of fully paid and non-assessable shares
of common stock of the Company. The Conversion Price is the lesser of $0.10 or 70% of the average of the two lowest closing prices in the 25 trading days
previous  to  the  conversion.  The  consideration  received  as  of  December  31,  2012  is  $115,000.  Due  to  the  floating  conversion  price  this  note  had  an
embedded derivative. The debt discount resulting from the derivative was valued on the date of grant to be $111,517 on the note. This value was recorded as
a discount on debt and offset to derivative liability. In addition there was a $11,500 discount as a result of the principal owed ($126,500) exceeding the cash
received ($115,000).  This resulted in a total discount of $123,017.  Amortization of the discount was $58,307 for the twelve months ended December 31,
2012.  As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on this Note is $132,825, which includes $6,325 accrued in interest.
142
Table of Contents
 
On August 2, 2012, the Company issued a $100,000 Convertible Promissory Note ("the Note") to Tonaquint, Inc, ("Tonaquint", or “the Lender”).  The Note
carries a $10,000 original issue discount (the “OID”), as well as $3,000 in transaction fees, such that the initial Principal Sum due is $113,000.  The interest
rate on the Note is 8% per annum. The Note has a maturity date of nine (9) months from the Effective Date, and has a fixed conversion price of $0.06.  The
Note is self-amortizing, such that it may be repaid in cash in three monthly installments of $37,666.67 plus accrued interest beginning 180 days from the
Effective Date.  In lieu of cash payments, the Company may elect to convert the note to shares at 70% of the arithmetic average of the three (3) lowest
VWAPs  of  the  shares  of  Common  Stock  during  the  ten  (10)  consecutive  Trading  Day  period  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  such  conversion.    No
conversion can occur prior to 180 days from the Effective Date.  In addition, the Company retains the option of pre-paying the Note at any time at an amount
equal to 125% of the outstanding principal and the accrued and unpaid interest.  In connection with this transaction, a commission has been paid to Carter
Terry & Company, a registered broker-dealer, consisting of $10,000 in cash and 85,000 restricted Rule 144 shares of common stock valued at $5,620 on the
date of issuance.  This amount was capitalized to Deferred Financing Costs and amortized over the term of the note. The tainted equity valuation and “OID”
totaled $48,272, and $32,231 was amortized during the period ended December 31, 2012. $58,272 of the value was recorded as a discount on debt and
$48,272 was added to the derivative liability. As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on this Note is $116,792 which includes $3,792 in
accrued interest.
On  October  2,  2012,  the  Company  issued  a  $750,000  Promissory  Note  ("the  Note")  to  Tangiers  Investors,  LP  ("Tangiers",  or  “the  Lender”).    The
consideration will be received by the Company in tranches of $50,000 no less than bi-weekly, by mutual consent.  The Principal Sum due to the Lender shall
be prorated based on the consideration actually paid by the Lender plus any accrued interest, such that the Company is only required to repay the amount
funded and the Company is not required to repay any unfunded portion of the Note. The Note has a maturity date of twenty four (24) months from the Effective
Date of each tranche.  The Note shall accrue interest at a rate of 7% per annum on each $50,000 tranche independently from other tranches.  Unless repaid
in cash, the Lender shall have the right to convert all or part of the outstanding and unpaid Principal Sum and accrued interest into shares of fully paid and
non-assessable shares of common stock of the Registrant. The Conversion Price shall be the undiscounted volume weighted average price (VWAP) on the
day of conversion, subject to a floor price of $0.0129 per share, and a ceiling price of the undiscounted VWAP on the date prior to each tranche received by
the Registrant.  In addition, upon conversion, 125,000 5-year warrants for each $50,000 in Consideration received shall be issued, at an exercise price of
125% of the Conversion Price of each tranche, as applicable.  There is no penalty for prepayment, with prepayment subject to the consent of the Lender.  As
of December 31, 2012, the Company has drawn $160,000 from this facility.  As of December 31, 2012, the outstanding balance due on this Note is $161,059
which includes $1,059 in accrued interest.
The following table summarizes all of the Convertible Notes outstanding as of December 31, 2012 and 2011:
December 31,
December 31,
Mortgage payable – Ruby Mine
Unsecured note payable with annual interest rate of 8%
Discount on note payable
Net note payable
Convertible notes:
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 9.9%
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 8%
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 7%
Unsecured convertible notes payable with annual interest rate of 5%
Discount on convertible notes from derivative valuation
Total convertible notes
Total Debt
2012
 $ 1,774,822
   -
   -
   -
     
   275,000
   113,000
   260,000
   126,500
   (166,307
   608,193
 $ 2,383,015
143
Table of Contents
 
NOTE 9             DERIVATIVE LIABILITIES
)
2011
 $ 1,889,185
   25,000
   (20,568
   4,432
25,000
   -
   -
   -
   -
   25,000
   1,918,617
)
On July 11, 2012, the Company borrowed $100,000 requiring principal repayment of $110,000 convertible at the lesser of $0.10 or the average of the two
lowest closing prices in the 25 trading days prior to conversion. This note payable contained an embedded derivative liability due to the conversion feature
not being considered fixed or determinable. The related derivative liability was valued at issuance and the fair value of $98,366 was recorded as a derivative
liability and debit to debt discount.
In addition to this convertible note all other debt and equity instruments (except for preferred stock) convertible to common stock at the discretion of the holder
were  considered  as  a  part  of  the  derivative  liability  due  to  the  tainted  equity  environment.    As  of  July  11,  2012,  these  tainted  instruments  consisted  of
convertible debt outstanding of $375,000 and 20,050,000 warrants. These instruments were valued when they became tainted on July 11, 2012.  The fair
value of the conversion features on the convertible debt of $83,358 was added to the derivative liability and recorded as a part of the loss on the derivative for
the period. The fair value of the warrants was also added to the derivative liability and recorded as a loss on the derivative liability. During the remainder of
2012, the Company issued additional convertible notes totaling $273,000 which were considered tainted upon issuance. The related derivative liability and
debt  discount  recorded  was  valued  at  inception  and  equal  to  $48,272.  All  instruments  with  embedded  derivative  liabilities  or  included  in  the  derivative
liability  due  to  the  tainted  equity  environment  were  re-valued  at  December  31,  2012  with  all  changes  flowing  through  the  gain/loss  on  derivative.  The
derivative liability related to convertible debt was valued at $291,208, and the derivative liability related to warrants was $205,689 as of December 31, 2012.
Prior to December 31, 2012 the Company issued 500,000 shares of common stock for warrants exercised were valued as a part of the tainted equity portion
of the derivative liability. The related derivative was marked to market on the settlement according to the lattice valuation and relieved to additional paid in
capital for $49,795.
The following shows the changes in the derivative liability measured on a recurring basis for the year ended December 31, 2012.
Derivative Liability at December 31, 2011
Derivative Liability for Convertible Debt (Recorded as discount on debt due to it being a new
issuance)
Settlement to APIC from Warrants Exercise
Loss on Derivative Liability
Derivative Liability at December 31, 2012
$ -
159,789
   (49,795
   386,833
 $ 496,827
)
The following tabular presentation reflects the components of derivative financial instruments on the Company’s balance sheet at December 31, 2012 and
December 31, 2011:
Derivative Liabilities:
Embedded derivative liability in convertible debt
Derivative liability due to tainted equity – convertible debt
Derivative liability due to tainted equity – warrants
Total Derivative Liability
December 31,
2012
$ 82,237
   208,971
   205,619
 $ 496,827
December 31, 2011
$
  
  
 $
-
-
-
-
NOTE 10           COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
 
During the second quarter of fiscal 2013, the Company discovered it had offered and sold certain shares of common stock without registration under the
Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”), as amended, during the period from October 24, 2011 through April 25, 2013.  Pursuant to Section 10(a)(3) of the
Securities Act, by the time our prospectus had been in use for 9 months from the effective date of January 24, 2011, the balance sheet date of the audited
financial statement contained in our prospectus was more than 16 months old, and had not been refreshed to present our current financial statements within
said  prospectus.  This  inadvertent  technical  failure  to  update  our  prospectus  according  to  Section  10(a)(3)  of  the  Securities  Act  may  have  caused  our
prospectus to no longer be effective as of October 24, 2011. As a result, purchasers of these securities may have the right to rescind their purchases for an
amount equal to the purchase price paid for the securities, plus interest from the date of purchase, limited to the unregistered shares purchased from the
original seller and still held by the original purchaser. The federal Securities Act requires that any claim for rescission be brought within one year of the
violation. The time periods within which claims for rescission must be brought under state securities laws vary and may be two years or more from the
transaction date. As of the date of this report, approximately 10 million shares of our outstanding common stock are subject to possible rescission. The
maximum potential liability as of December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011 was $367,490 and $88,273, respectively. These amounts include interest at
10% per annum from the date of the respective purchases. Due to the shares being redeemable by the holder since their inception, the shares are required to
be classified outside of permanent equity on the balance sheet. Since redemption is uncertain and outside of the Company’s control the shares are classified
within the mezzanine section of the balance sheet at their respective redemption values. Any differences between the cash received and the redemption
value was recorded to additional paid in capital. Interest of 10% is being accrued on the values and is recorded through additional paid in capital consistent
with the appropriate accounting guidance covering the accounting treatment of mezzanine instruments.
144
Table of Contents
 
The following shows the changes in the redeemable common stock from October 24, 2011 through December 31, 2012.
Cash received for 880,982 shares issued after October 24, 2011
Mark redeemable common stock down to the redeemable amount
Interest on redeemable common stock
Redeemable common stock value at December 31, 2011
Cash and note relief received for 3,636,619 shares issued
Mark redeemable common stock up to the redeemable amount
Interest on redeemable common stock
Redeemable common stock value at December 31, 2012
$
   
   
  $
   
   
   
  $
89,000 
(974) 
247 
88,273 
227,000 
29,516 
22,701 
367,490
As of December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively, the Company does not have any outside commitments, and is not currently leasing any
office space.  Office space is provided as part of a management agreement with The PAN Network, a private business management and consulting company
wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer (see Note 15 - Related Party Transactions).  The agreement is renewable annually at the discretion
of both parties. As a result there are no future payments for our lease beyond the current year contract.
The Company is not and has never been involved in any litigation of any nature, and the Company is not aware of any pending or threatened litigation.
 
EB-5
On July 28, 2010, the Company executed an agreement with ACG Consulting, LLC ("ACG") intended to establish a new economic Regional Center ("RC")
under the federal EB-5 program (the "EB-5 Program") that will encompass all of  Northern California's Gold Country. Once established, the Regional Center
is expected to provide full funding for the Company's Ruby Mine Project in Sierra County, California.  Terms of the agreement specify that upon filing an
application for a new Regional Center with USCIS, North Bay shall  pay  ACG  its  share  of  the  startup  expenses,  which  as  of  December  31,  2011  were
$0. During Q1, 2011, the Company agreed to reimburse ACG $37,216 in expenses incurred to prepare and file EB-5 applications with USCIS.  As of March
31, 2011, $15,000 of this amount had been paid, and $22,216 remained outstanding.  As of December 31, 2011, $0 remains outstanding and this account
has been paid in full.  No shares of Company stock have been or will be issued in connection with this agreement.
The agreement also provides that North Bay will own 49% of the Regional Center, and ACG will own 51%. ACG and North Bay, working together through
the Regional Center, will seek to raise up to $7.5M in EB-5 funding for North Bay's Ruby Mine Project, subject to USCIS approval. ACG will also be an
equity partner in each project North Bay may bring into the Regional Center, the amount of which will vary on a deal by deal basis based on the amount of
consulting services ACG actually provides. At the present time, no projects other than mining are being considered, and the industry focus for the Regional
Center is expected to be limited to mining initially.
Effective October 14, 2010, the Company, together with ACG, entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with Northern California Regional
Center,  LLC  ("NCRC"),  whereby  NCRC  has  agreed  to  expand  its  scope  to  include  mining  projects  in  the  counties  of  Sierra  and  Nevada  in  Northern
California, and together with ACG has agreed to sponsor North Bay's application to secure $7.5 million for the Ruby Gold project in Sierra County, California,
through the EB-5 Program.  NCRC was approved on April 22, 2010 by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (“USCIS”) as a designated
EB-5 Regional Center, and is currently approved to sponsor qualifying investments in such capacity within the counties of Colusa; Butte; Glenn; Sacramento;
San Joaquin; Shasta; Sutter; Tehama; Yuba; and Yolo in the State of California (the “Regional Center’s Geographic Area”).  Pursuant to its regional center
designation, NCRC may sponsor qualifying investments in certain industry economic sectors that do not currently include mining.  The agreement with North
Bay and ACG calls for NCRC to seek USCIS approval for an expansion of NCRC’s Regional Center Geographic Area (the “Expansion”) to include Sierra
County,  where  the  Ruby  Mine  is  located,  and  for  approval  to  include  mining  within  its  designated  industry  sectors  (the  “Mining  Designation”).  These
applications have been filed with USCIS, and are currently being reviewed. Upon approval of the Expansion and Mining Designation by USCIS, NCRC will
then be permitted to sponsor qualified investments in North Bay’s Ruby Gold project under the EB-5 Program.  Under the terms of the agreement, NCRC will
receive a $5,000 fee for each investor whose minimum $500,000 investment is approved by USCIS.  In addition, upon the Ruby Gold project receiving the
aggregate sum of $7,500,000 through the EB-5 Program, NCRC shall be entitled to an undivided one and one half percent (1.5%) interest in the Ruby Gold
project.  No shares of Company stock have been or will be issued in connection with this agreement, and the entire EB-5 funding is expected to be non-
dilutive to shareholders.
On July 19, 2011, the NCRC Expansion Amendment, which includes the Mining Designation and pre-approval of the Ruby Gold project as a qualified EB-5
project, was formally approved by USCIS.  As of the date of this report, the EB-5 funding is still pending and has not been completed.
NOTE 11           STOCK SPLITS
On February 18, 2005, the Company effected a 4 for 1 forward stock split of our common shares.  On March 12, 2006, and on February 7, 2008, the Company
effected 1 for 10 reverse stock splits.  All information presented herein has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect these stock splits as they took place as of
the earliest period presented.
145
Table of Contents
 
NOTE 12           INCOME TAXES
As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, the Company had net operating loss carry-forwards totaling approximately $3,129,410 and $2,138,602, respectively,
that begin to expire in 2025.  The carry-forward losses and the related deferred tax benefit are significantly limited by the provisions of Internal Revenue
Code Section 382. The Company’s taxable losses and temporary differences created a deferred tax asset before valuation allowances of approximately
$1,165,226 and $1,460,510 at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Due to the Company determining that it will not likely realize the deferred tax
asset, a full valuation allowance has been taken to reduce the deferred tax asset to zero as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
In 2012 and 2011, the primary difference between financial statement reporting and taxable income (loss) was expenses not deductible for tax purposes
including non-cash share based payments issued for services, amortization of discounts on debt, and gains from non-cash exchanges of $929,020 and
$711,999, respectively. Temporary differences between financial statement reporting loss and taxable loss were due to differences in timing of recognition for
expenses related to deferred compensation and depreciation of fixed assets.
 
The deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2012 and 2011 are as follows:
 
 
Deferred Tax Asset:
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
Current Year Net Operating Loss/(Gain)
Total Operating Loss Carryforward
Enacted Future Tax Rate
Deferred Tax Asset for NOL
Deferred Tax Asset for Temporary Differences Between Book and Tax Income
Gross Deferred Tax Asset
Valuation Allowance
Net Deferred Tax Asset
 
NOTE 13           DEFERRED COMPENSATION/NQDC
2012
   
 $ 2,138,602
   990,808
   3,129,410
   35
   1,095,294
   69,932
   1,165,226
   (1,165,226
   -
748,511
   711,999
   1,460,510
   (1,460,510
   -
2011
   
 $ 1,804,852
   333,750
   2,138,602
%    35
 
 
 
)
%
 
 
 
)
The Company has adopted an unfunded Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation (NQDC) plan to compensate our Chief Executive Officer.  Under this plan,
the Company is not required to reserve funds for compensation, and is only obligated to pay compensation when and if funds are available.  Any amounts
due but unpaid automatically accrue to deferred compensation. The plan has the option to be renewed annually at the discretion of the Company. While
unfunded and non-recourse, for compliance with GAAP this is disclosed as an accrued expense on the balance sheet.  On April 28, 2011, the Company
issued two million (2,000,000) shares of common stock to our Chief Executive Officer  to reduce the aggregate amount of deferred compensation owed to him
by $180,000.  The shares were valued at the closing market price of our common stock on the date of issuance.  As of December 31, 2012 and December
31, 2011, the outstanding balance of the NQDC plan is $884,474 and $784,474, respectively.
In 2007, 2008, and 2009, our Chief Executive Officer was awarded restricted stock bonuses for deferring accrued salary. The value of common shares were
based on the market closing price on the day of issuance, and the value of preferred shares were valued via a valuation model generated by an independent
valuation expert, as follows:
Date
Type of Stock
2/12/2007  
    2/9/2007  
12/21/2007  
12/16/2008  
8/11/2009
Number of
 Shares
Preferred    100
Common    250,000
Common    10,000,000
Common    2,500,000
Preferred    4,100,000
Value
$ 101,000
 $ 31,250
 $ 900,000
 $ 50,000
 $ 253,785
NOTE 14           ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
 
Provisions for site closure and reclamation costs are based principally on legal and regulatory requirements established by various government agencies,
principally Sierra County, California, the US Forest Service, and the California Dept. of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation (OMR). Under current
regulations, the Company is required to meet performance standards to minimize the environmental impact from its operations and to perform site restoration
and other closure activities at its mining and development sites. The exact nature of environmental remediation requirements that may be encountered in the
future, if any, cannot be predicted with certainty, because environmental requirements currently established by government agencies may change.
146
Table of Contents
The following table illustrates the inputs used to calculate the current Asset Retirement Obligation as of December 31, 2012.
Cost estimate for reclamation work at today's cost
Estimated life of mine (years)
Risk adjusted rate (borrowing rate)
Estimated inflation rate
Estimated asset retirement obligation at time of acquisition (7/1/11)
Accretion Expense
Revisions to asset retirement obligation
Asset retirement obligation at 12/31/11
Accretion Expense
Revisions to asset retirement obligation
Asset retirement obligation at 12/31/12
$ 172,914
   50
   9.9
   2.4
%
%
Asset Retirement
Obligation
$ 171,618
   243
   (166,714
 $ 5,147
   513
   (76
 $ 5,584
)
 
 
)
NOTE 15           RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In August 2009, the Board of Directors approved and the Company executed a management agreement with The PAN Network (“PAN”), a private business
management and consulting company wholly-owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.  The agreement is in consideration of $18,000 per month,
and  calls  for  PAN  to  provide  (a)  office  and  board  room  space,  including  reception,  utilities,  landline  phone/fax,  computers,  copiers,  projectors,  and
miscellaneous services; (b) financial services, including accounting, corporate filing and bookkeeping; (c) project and administrative services; (d) resource
targeting,  acquisition,  development  and  management  services;  (e)  marketing  services,  communications,  marketing  materials  management,  and  writing
services; (f) strategic planning, milestone management and critical path analysis; and (g) online services, including web site hosting, web site design, web
site  maintenance,  and  email  services.      The  agreement  includes  Mr.  Leopold’s  salary  of  $15,000  per  month,  which  will  accrue  entirely  to  deferred
compensation during any period in which the commitment remains unpaid.  The term of the agreement is one year, and automatically renews annually on
January 1 each year unless otherwise terminated by either party.
In  2008,  the  Company  was  to  receive  $100,000  in  joint-venture  payments  from  Hidalgo  Mining  International  Inc.  (OTC:  HMIT)  pursuant  to  joint-venture
agreements on the Company's Silver Leaf and Gold Hill Project properties.  The Company elected to accept payment in shares of HMIT stock and received a
total of 9,875,214 shares.  In October 2009, the joint-ventures with Hidalgo were terminated, and by agreement the Company retained its shares of HMIT.  As
of December 31, 2009, the Company has taken an impairment charge and written down the value of the shares to $3,950.  The loss was realized and
classified as Other Expenses due to the Company’s determination that the devaluation of the shares was “other than temporary”.  Hidalgo has since ceased
operations as a mining company, and has become Verde Media Group Inc. as the result of a reverse merger in December 2009.  As there was no reason to
continue holding the HMIT shares, on June 14, 2010, the HMIT shares were transferred to CEO Perry Leopold and applied towards deferred compensation
reduction.  The shares were valued at $13,825 as their fair market value on the day of transfer.  The deferred compensation relieved was $12,838.  The
excess value of shares transferred over deferred compensation relieved was expensed for $987 due to it being considered as additional compensation to the
CEO.  A gain of $9,875 was realized on the transaction due to the change in value of the stock from December 31, 2009 to the transfer date.
147
Table of Contents
 
NOTE 16           SHARE ISSUANCES SINCE JUNE 18, 2004 (INCEPTION)
In 2004, the Company issued an aggregate of 320,000 shares of common stock and 1,200,000 shares of preferred stock as Founders shares to the Company
Founders. The preferred stock was convertible to common stock at a rate of one common share per two preferred shares. The shares were valued at their par
value which was equal to $1,520.
In  2004,  the  Company  issued  an  aggregate  of  320,000  shares  of  common  stock  and  1,200,000  shares  of  preferred  stock  to  the  Company  Officers  and
Directors upon the merger of Ultimate Jukebox, Inc. and NetMusic Corp. The preferred stock was convertible to common stock at a rate of one common share
per two preferred shares. The shares were valued at their par value which was equal to $1,520.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 12,005,491 shares of common stock for services rendered and exploration stage mining properties.  The
shares were valued at $5,100,667, based on the market price on the date of grant.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 2,574,127 shares of common stock to convert debt to equity.  The shares were valued at $2,510,825
based on the market price on the date of issuance.  Any differences between the value of the shares issued and the debt relieved were recorded as a gain or
loss on conversion.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 302,643 shares of common stock in private placements. The consideration received was $522,700.
Prior to 2008, the Company purchased back and retired 200,000 shares at a net cost of $2,000.
Prior to 2008, the Company received a contribution of $164,371 from a shareholder to pay expenses for mineral claim exploration.
Prior to 2008, the Company issued 100 shares of Series I Preferred stock to our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Perry Leopold, as an anti-takeover measure to
insure that Mr. Leopold maintains control of the Company during periods when the Company’s stock may be severely undervalued and subject to hostile
takeover in the open market.  As specified in the Certificate of Designation filed by the Company with the Delaware Secretary of State in February 2007, ”the
outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock shall vote together with the shares of Common Stock of the Corporation as a single class and, regardless of
the number of shares of Series I Preferred Stock outstanding and as long as at least one of such shares of Series I Preferred Stock is outstanding, shall
represent eighty percent (80%) of all votes entitled to be voted at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Corporation or action by written
consent of shareholders.  Each outstanding share of the Series I Preferred Stock shall represent its proportionate share of the 80% which is allocated to the
outstanding shares of Series I Preferred Stock.”  The value of the Series I Preferred shares was valued at $101,000 according to the value of the control
premium from 80% of the voting rights assigned to Series I Preferred stock.
Prior to 2008, the Company converted 2,400,000 shares of Convertible Series A preferred stock to 1,200,000 shares of common stock. The shares were
convertible at a ratio of one share of common stock per two shares of preferred stock.
Prior  to  2008,  a  non-convertible  note  payable  from  a  third  party  totaling  $50,000  with  a  20%  interest  rate,  maturing  thirty  days  from  the  note  date,  was
converted into 1,250,000 shares of common stock. During the same period, a non-convertible note payable from a third party totaling $12,000 with a 10%
interest rate, maturing one year from the note date, was converted into 100,000 shares of common stock.  The aggregate shares were valued according to the
closing market price on their respective conversion dates at $121,500.
Prior to 2008, beneficial conversion features related to convertible notes payable totaling $62,000 were recorded. The entire discount was expensed in the
year ended December 31, 2007 due to the conversion of the note prior to year end.
During 2008, the Company received a contribution of $10,000 from a shareholder for mineral claim maintenance.
148
Table of Contents
 
During 2008, the Company issued an aggregate of 5,500,000 shares of common stock for services rendered.  The shares were valued at $230,000, based
on the market price on the date of grant.
During 2008, the Company issued 2,275,000 shares of common stock in a private placement.  The consideration received was $10,000.
During 2009, the Company issued 4,000,000 shares of Series A Preferred stock, and 100,000 shares of Series G Preferred stock to our Chief Executive
Officer as a bonus for services rendered.  Each share of Series A Preferred has 10 votes per share and is convertible to 5 shares of common.  The Series G
Preferred stock has no voting rights, and each share is convertible to 1/100 of an ounce of gold, or 20 shares of common. The conversion of the Series G
Preferred stock into gold can only be exercised by the holder if the company has gold inventory at the time of conversion. The conversion value of the shares
was $253,785 based on the value of the closing price of the common stock the preferred shares were convertible into on the day of issuance, plus the value
of the control premium from voting rights assigned to the preferred share issuances.
During 2009, the Company issued an aggregate of 21,800,000 shares of common stock in private placements.  The consideration received was $173,000.
During  2009,  the  Company  issued  an  aggregate  of  10,000,000  shares  of  common  stock  to  a  private  investor  to  reduce  the  balance  due  of  deferred
compensation to the Chief Executive Officer by $100,000. The deferred compensation was assigned by the Chief Executive Officer to the private investor in
lieu of cash, and the assigned liability was immediately converted to equity by the investor. The value of the shares issued according to the market price on
the date of issuance was $187,500. The difference between the value of the deferred compensation and the value of the shares issued was recorded as a
loss on conversion.
During 2009, the Company issued an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares of common stock for services rendered. The shares were valued at $29,750, based on
the market price on the date of grant.
During 2009, the Company secured $5 Million in financing under an equity line of credit with Tangiers Investors, LP ("Tangiers") to fund the Company's
operations and prospective mining acquisitions. North Bay has entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Tangiers that provides North Bay the
right, but not the obligation, to draw down on the equity line of credit by selling to Tangiers shares of the Company's common stock for a total purchase price
of up to $5 Million. Tangiers will pay the Company 90% of the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company's common stock during the pricing
period as quoted by Bloomberg, LP on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board ("OTCBB"). Tangiers' obligation to purchase shares of the Company's common
stock under the Securities Purchase Agreement is subject to certain conditions, including the Company obtaining an effective registration statement for
shares of the Company's common stock sold under the Securities Purchase Agreement and is limited to $100,000 per 10 consecutive trading days after the
advance notice is provided to Tangiers.  Upon signing the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company has agreed to issue Tangiers $85,000 in restricted
stock as a one-time commitment fee.  This was classified as Stock Payable at December 31, 2009 and valued at $115,310, based on the closing market
price of our common stock as of October 7, 2009, the date the contract was signed.  Subsequently, the Company issued 6,589,147 shares of restricted
common stock on January 20, 2010 to satisfy this obligation.
During 2010, the Company issued 6,589,147 shares of restricted common stock to Tangiers Investors, LP (“Tangiers”) as a one-time commitment fee in
compliance with the October 7, 2009 agreement with Tangiers.  The value of these shares was recorded in 2009 as a stock payable due to the obligation
existing at that time.  Due to the instrument to be only settled with the issuance of shares, no gain or loss was recorded with the issuance in 2010, and the full
value of the stock payable was relieved to common stock and additional paid-in capital.
During 2010, the Company issued 5,000,000 shares of common stock in a Rule 504 private placement.  The consideration received was $50,000.
During 2010, the Company issued 10 million shares of common stock to Ruby Development Company as part of the initial consideration for the signing of an
option-to-purchase agreement on the Ruby Mine. The market value of these shares as of the date the contract was executed was $150,000.  This amount
was capitalized to Other Assets due to it being a part of the Ruby Mine Purchase Option costs.
149
Table of Contents
 
During 2011, the Company registered 19,726,822 shares of our common stock with the SEC for issuance to Tangiers Investors LP ("Tangiers") pursuant to
an equity line of credit (“ELOC”) and Securities Purchase Agreement ("SPA") entered into with Tangiers on October 7, 2009.  Pursuant to the terms of the
SPA, the Company has the right, but not the obligation, to draw down on the ELOC by selling to Tangiers shares of the Company's common stock for a total
purchase price of up to $5 Million. Tangiers will pay the Company 90% of the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company's common stock during
the 5-day pricing period immediately following any advance notice provided to Tangiers.  Advances are limited to $100,000 per 10 consecutive trading days
after the advance notice is provided to Tangiers.  As of December 31, 2011, the Company has issued an aggregate of 10,314,967 of these registered shares
to Tangiers, in consideration of $857,000. The Company issued 880,982 shares after October 24, 2011. As noted within footnote 10, the shares issued after
this date were considered unregistered and re-classified to temporary equity based on the potential cash redemption to the investor.
During 2011, the Company issued 863,681 shares of common stock to satisfy a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated June 17, 2010 with Tangiers
pursuant to which the Company received $17,500 as a loan from Tangiers.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was $18,725, consisting of $17,500 in
principal plus $1,225 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no gain or loss was recorded on the
conversion.
During 2011, the Company issued 1,600,467 shares of common stock to satisfy a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated September 27, 2010 with
Tangiers pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was $52,495, consisting of
$50,000 in principal plus $2,495 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no gain or loss was
recorded on the conversion.
During  2011,  the  Company  issued  42,857  shares  of  common  stock  for  geological  services  rendered.  The  shares  were  valued  at  $3,000,  based  on  the
closing market price on the date of grant.
During 2011, the Company issued an aggregate of 1,437,416 shares of common stock to a Convertible Promissory Note Agreement dated December 30,
2010 with Tangiers pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Tangiers.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was $51,612,
consisting of $50,000 in principal plus $1,612 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no gain or
loss was recorded on the conversion.
During 2011, the Company issued 550,000 shares common stock as a settlement on a 2009 consulting agreement.  The shares were valued at $62,095
based on the closing market price on the day of the grant. This value was recorded as a loss on settlement during 2011.
During  2011,  the  Company  issued  2  million  shares  of  common  stock  to  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  to  relieve  $180,000  in  accrued  deferred
compensation.  The shares were valued at the closing market price on the day of the grant, and were equal in value to the accrued salary relieved.
During 2011, the Company issued 111,112 shares common stock to Fred Michini as directors compensation of $10,000.  The shares were valued at the
closing market price on the day of grant.
During 2011,  the Company issued an aggregate of 557,528 shares of common stock to fully satisfy and retire a Convertible Note dated January 4, 2011 with
Asher Enterprises, Inc. (“Asher”) pursuant to which the Company received $50,000 as a loan from Asher.  The total amount satisfied on conversion was
$51,020, consisting of $50,000 in principal and $1,020 in accrued interest. The note was converted according to the terms of the agreement and therefore no
gain or loss was recorded on the conversion.
During 2011, the Company accepted a notice of exercise on 500,000 warrants issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on December 30, 2010 that were attached to
a convertible promissory note agreement dated December 30, 2010.  The exercise price was $0.05 per shares, and the Company received $25,000 upon the
exercise.  500,000 shares of common stock have not yet been issued, and are accounted for as stock payable.
150
Table of Contents
 
During  2012,  the  Company  issued  26,650  shares  of  common  stock  for  geological  services  rendered.  The  shares  were  valued  at  $4,000,  based  on  the
closing market price on the date of invoice.
During 2012, the Company cancelled all outstanding shares of the Series G Convertible Preferred Stock and filed a Certificate of Elimination of the Series G
Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to eliminate entirely the Series G Convertible Preferred stock designation
from our Certificate of Incorporation. The cancellation was initiated at the request of the sole shareholder of the Series G Preferred, and $100 was recorded to
additional paid in capital.
During 2012, the Company issued a $100,000 Convertible Promissory Note ("the Note") to Tonaquint, Inc, ("Tonaquint", or “the Lender”).  The Note carries a
$10,000 original issue discount (the “OID”), as well as $3,000 in transaction fees, such that the initial Principal Sum due is $113,000.  The interest rate on the
Note is 8% per annum. The Note has a maturity date of nine (9) months from the Effective Date, and has a fixed conversion price of $0.06.  The Note is self-
amortizing,  such  that  it  may  be  repaid  in  cash  in  three  monthly  installments  of  $37,666.67  plus  accrued  interest  beginning  180  days  from  the  Effective
Date.  In lieu of cash payments, the Company may elect to convert the note to shares at 70% of the arithmetic average of the three (3) lowest VWAPs of the
shares of Common Stock during the ten (10) consecutive Trading Day period immediately preceding the date of such conversion.  No conversion can occur
prior to 180 days from the Effective Date.  In addition, the Company retains the option of pre-paying the Note at any time at an amount equal to 125% of the
outstanding principal and the accrued and unpaid interest.
During 2012, and in connection with the above mentioned Tonaquint transaction, a commission has been paid to Carter Terry & Company, a registered
broker-dealer, consisting of $10,000 in cash and 85,000 restricted Rule 144 shares of common stock.  The shares were valued at $5,610 based on the
closing market price on the date of grant. This value is being amortized over the term of the related note agreement.
During 2012, the Company issued 3,636,619 shares of common stock previously registered with the SEC for issuance to Tangiers Investors LP ("Tangiers")
pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement entered into with Tangiers on October 7, 2009, in consideration of cash received of $227,000.  Related to the
consideration received, $201,464 was received in cash, and the remaining $25,536 was applied as principal and interest to retire a $25,000 note payable to
Tangiers dated December 30, 2011. As noted within footnote 10, these shares were considered unregistered and re-classified to temporary equity based on
the potential cash redemption to the investor.
During 2012, the Company issued 90,000 restricted shares of common stock for services rendered. The shares were valued at $6,660, based on the closing
market price on the date of grant.
During 2012, the Company issued 500,000 shares that had been previously recorded as stock payable pursuant to a notice of exercise received in 2011 on
500,000 warrants issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on December 30, 2010.  The exercise price was $0.05 per shares, and the Company received $25,000
upon the exercise.
NOTE 17           WARRANTS
Ten million warrants were issued to Ruby Development Company on September 27, 2010 as a part of the purchase option agreement for the Ruby Mine.
The fair value of the warrants of $149,896 was capitalized related to this issuance. On January 26, 2011, the Ruby Mine purchase option was amended, and
the term of said warrants was increased from two years to 5 years, and the fair value of the warrants was increased by $2,519 to $152,415.  This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the initial valuation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
151
$
  $
0.015 
0.02 
2.26 
440%
0.00%
0.44%
Table of Contents
 
Two and a half million warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on September 27, 2010 that were attached to a convertible promissory note agreement
for  $50,000.  The  fair  value  of  1,500,000  of  the  warrants  of  $22,475  was  recorded  as  a  discount  on  the  convertible  note  payable  upon  issuance.  The
remaining  1,000,000  warrants  had  a  fair  value  of  $14,195.    $9,965  was  recorded  as  an  additional  discount  related  to  these  warrants  based  on  the
contingency resulting in their issuance being resolved, and the remaining undiscounted portion of the convertible note being equal to $9,965.  This value
was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.015 
0.05 
5.00 
440%
0.00%
1.31%
Five  hundred  thousand  warrants  were  issued  to  Tangiers  Investors,  LP  on  December  30,  2010  that  were  attached  to  a  convertible  promissory  note
agreement for $50,000. The fair value of 500,000 of the warrants of $14,195 was recorded as a discount on the convertible note payable upon issuance. This
value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.029 
0.05 
5.00 
375%
0.00%
2.06%
Two million warrants were issued to Ruby Development Company on April 22, 2011 as a part of an amendment to the purchase option agreement for the
Ruby Mine. The fair value of the warrants of $219,940 was capitalized related to this issuance. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The
key inputs for the initial valuation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.11 
0.10 
5.00 
324%
0.00%
2.12%
250,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on December 29, 2011 that were attached to a convertible promissory note agreement for $25,000.
The fair value of the warrants of $20,568 was recorded as a discount to the related debt. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key
inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
152
$
  $
0.08 
0.115 
5.00 
158%
0.00%
0.83%
Table of Contents
 
500,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on February 2, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $100,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$52,779.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.12 
0.13 
5.00 
157%
0.00%
1.04%
Two million warrants were issued to Ruby Development Company on March 6, 2012 in consideration for reducing monthly mortgage payments for the Ruby
Mine. The fair value of the warrants of $175,047 was expensed related to this issuance. This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key
inputs for the initial valuation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.095 
0.09 
5.00 
155%
0.00%
0.83%
500,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on March 15, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $75,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$45,268.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.098 
0.09 
5.00 
155%
0.00%
1.33%
150,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on May 16, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $50,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$9,411.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
153
$
  $
0.07 
0.07 
5.00 
145%
0.00%
0.75%
Table of Contents
 
150,000 warrants were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on May 30, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $25,000. The fair value of the warrants was
$9,421.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed. This value was
calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.07 
0.06 
5.00 
142%
0.00%
0.69%
750,000 warrants exercisable at $0.07 were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on June 19, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $100,000. The fair value of
the warrants was $49,978.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed.
This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.075 
0.07 
5.00 
140%
0.00%
0.71%
750,000 warrants exercisable at $0.14 were issued to Tangiers Investors, LP on June 19, 2012 as part of a loan agreement for $100,000. The fair value of
the warrants was $47,431.  The total of the warrants and beneficial conversion feature was recorded as a discount on debt up to the principal amount owed.
This value was calculated via the Black-Scholes model. The key inputs for the calculation are shown below.
Stock Price on Measurement Date
Exercise Price of Warrants
Term of Warrants (years)
Computed Volatility
Annual Dividends
Discount Rate
$
  $
0.075 
0.14 
5.00 
140%
0.00%
0.71%
154
Table of Contents
 
A summary of activity related to the Company’s warrant activity for the period from December 31, 2009 through December 31, 2012 is presented below:
Outstanding at December 31, 2009
Granted
Exercised
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at December 31, 2010
Granted
Exercised(2)
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at December 31, 2011
Granted
Exercised
Canceled/forfeited/expired
Outstanding at December 31, 2012
Number
Outstanding
Per Share
Weighted
Average
Exercise Price    
   
   
-     
-     
0.024     
13,000,000     
-     
-     
-     
-     
0.024     
13,000,000     
0.10     
2,250,000     
-     
-     
-     
-     
0.037     
15,250,000     
4,800,000     
0.10     
0.05     
(500,000)     
-     
-     
0.045     
19,550,000
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life (Years)
- 
2.62 
- 
- 
2.62 
5.00 
- 
-
3.75(1)
5.00 
- 
-
3.75(1)
(1) Primary reason for change related to a January 26, 2011 amendment to the Ruby Mine Option Agreement whereby the term of the warrants issued to
Ruby Development Company were extended from 2 years to 5 years.
NOTE 18          SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, the Company issued 1,864,357 shares of common stock previously registered with the SEC for issuance to Tangiers
Investors LP ("Tangiers") pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement entered into with Tangiers on October 7, 2009, as amended, in consideration of
$59,000.
Subsequent to December 31, 2012 and pursuant to four partial conversion notices received, the Company issued an aggregate of 3,500,000 shares of
common stock of the Company to satisfy $80,787 of the principal and interest due on a Promissory Note ("the Note") dated July 11, 2012 with JMJ Financial,
("JMJ").    As  of  the  date  of  this  report,  the  remaining  amount  outstanding  on  the  Note,  including  accrued  interest  and  Original  Issue  Discount,  is
$107,288.  500,000 shares issued were valued at $0.028 per share, 1,000,000 shares issued were valued at $0.02205 per share, 1,100,100 shares were
valued at $0.02177 per share, and 900,000 shares were valued at $0.0231 per share, which in each instance pursuant to the terms of the Note was equal to
70% of the average of the two lowest closing prices of our common stock in the 25 trading days immediately preceding the conversion dates.
NOTE 19          RESTATEMENT OF THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012 AND DECEMBER 31, 2011, AND PERIODS ENDED MARCH 31, JUNE
30 AND SEPTEMBER 30, 2012
The Company has restated its annual financial statements from amounts previously reported for the years ended December 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011.
The Company has determined that certain development and construction costs related to the Ruby Mine that were capitalized on our Consolidated Balance
Sheets must be expensed in full on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.  In addition to restating the annual audited statements as of December 31,
2011, the Company has included restatements of all unaudited quarterly financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2012.
These restatements also reclassify as temporary equity certain issuances of unregistered common stock issued during the time period from October 24, 2011
through December 31, 2012 and which may be deemed to be redeemable. These shares have been moved to the mezzanine portion of our balance sheet at
their redemption values.
155
Table of Contents
 
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2012 AND DECEMBER 31, 2011
ASSETS
   Current Assets
   Cash
   Accounts Receivable
   Total Current Assets
 
   Other Assets
   Certificates of Deposit
   Deferred Financing Costs, net
   Goodwill
   Mining Claims – Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of
accumulated depreciation
   Other Assets
   Available For Sale Securities
   Reclamation Bond – Fraser River
Dec 31, 2012
As Previously
Reported
$ 42,008
    -
    42,008
     
     
    172,499
    14,471
    -
    1,797,488
As
Restated
Adjustments    
     
     
     
      -
       
      -
       
       
      -
      -
      -
      -
42,008
      -
      42,008
       
       
      172,499
      14,471
      -
      1,797,488
Dec 31, 2011
As Previously
Reported
$ 129,888
      982
      130,870
       
       
      171,875
      -
      5,341
      1,891,845
As
Restated
Adjustments    
     
     
     
      -
       
      -
       
       
      -
      -
      -
      (94,281
129,888
      982
      130,870
       
       
      171,875
      -
      5,341
)     1,797,564
635,212
    -
    12,550
    2,000
-
      -
      -
      -
635,212
      -
      12,550
      2,000
733,885
      4,000
      -
      -
-
      -
      -
      -
733,885
      4,000
      -
      -
2,634,220
  $ 2,676,228
9,835
    496,827
    1,774,822
-
    3,884,381
     
     
    5,584
    5,584
  $ 3,889,965
$ -
  $ -
$ 56,617
    884,474
    12,250
    41,363
Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(DEFICIT)
   Liabilities
   Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - Related Party
   Accrued Expenses – Ruby Mine
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of
discounts of $166,307 and $0, respectively)     608,193
   Deferred Gain
   Derivative Liability
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
   Note Payable (net of discounts of $0 and
$20,568, respectively)
   Total Current Liabilities
 
   Long-Term Liabilities
   Asset Retirement Obligation
   Total Long-Term Liabilities
   Total Liabilities
 
Commitment & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption,
stated at estimated redemption value,
4,517,601 and 880,982 shares outstanding
at December 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011, respectively
Total Commitment & Contingencies
 
   Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value,
100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued
and outstanding at December 31, 2012 and
December 31, 2011, respectively
 
Convertible Preferred stock, Series A,
$0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares
authorized, 4,000,000 and 4,000,000
shares issued and outstanding at
December 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011, respectively
 
Convertible Preferred stock, Series G,
$0.001 par value, 0 and 1,500,000 shares
authorized at December 31, 2012 and
December 31, 2011, respectively, 0 and
100,000 shares issued and outstanding at
December 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011, respectively
 
Common stock, $0.001 par value,
250,000,000 shares authorized, 97,485,130
and 96,783,480 shares issued and
outstanding at December 31, 2012 and
December 31, 2011, respectively
   Additional Paid-In Capital
   Stock Payable
   Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income
   Deficit Accumulated During Exploration
Stage
   Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS &
CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’
EQUITY (DEFICIT)
4,000
(12,500
-
-
102,003
    12,168,608
    -
-
      -
-
      -
      -
      -
-
      -
      -
      -
-
      -
       
       
      -
      -
      -
2,634,220
      2,676,228
2,806,946
    $ 2,937,816
(94,281
      (94,281
)     2,712,665
)     2,843,535
56,617
      884,474
      12,250
      41,363
608,193
      9,835
      496,827
      1,774,822
-
      3,884,381
       
       
      5,584
      5,584
      3,889,965
$ 5,942
      784,474
      -
      -
25,000
      -
      -
      1,889,185
4,432
      2,709,033
       
       
      5,147
      5,147
    $ 2,714,180
-
      -
      -
      -
-
      -
      -
      -
-
      -
       
       
      -
      -
      -
5,942
      784,474
      -
      -
25,000
      -
      -
      1,889,185
4,432
      2,709,033
       
       
      5,147
      5,147
      2,714,180
367,490
      367,490
367,490
      367,490
-
-
      -
-
88,273
      88,273
88,273
      88,273
-
-
4,000
4,000
-
4,000
-
-
100
-
100
(4,518
      (362,972
      -
)     97,485
)     11,805,636
      -
97,664
      11,358,733
      25,000
(881
      (87,392
      -
)     96,783
)     11,271,341
      25,000
)     -
(12,500
)     -
-
-
(13,475,848 )     -
    (1,213,737
)     (367,490
(13,475,848 )     (11,261,861 )     (94,281
)     (1,581,227
      (182,554
)     223,636
)     (11,356,142 )
)     41,082
$ 2,676,228
-
2,676,228
$ 2,937,816
2,843,535
156
Table of Contents
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDING DECEMBER 31, 2011
12 months ended
Revenues
   Retail Sales (revenue prior to change to mining company in 2006)
   Cost of Revenue
   Gross Loss
 
   Operating Expenses
   Commissions & Consulting Fees
   General & Administrative Costs
   Mining Property Costs
    Impairment Expense
    Accretion Expense
    Depreciation Expense
   Professional Services
   Total Operating Expenses
   Net Operating Loss
   Other Income (Expenses)
   Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
   Gain on Joint-Ventures
   Impairment Expense
   Interest Income
   Interest Expense
   Loss on Conversion of Debt
   Bad Debt Expense
   Accretion Expense
   Other Expense
   Loss on Settlement
   Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
   Gain (Loss) on Derivative Liability
   Net Other Income (Expenses)
Net Loss
    Excess Cash Received Compared to Redeemable Amount of Stock
    Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common Shareholders
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Gain (Loss) per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
Diluted Net Gain (Loss) per Share
157
December 31,
2011
-    $
-     
-
43,216     
345,451     
170,856     
124,343     
243     
60,560     
52,970     
797,639     
(797,639)
103,500     
-     
 -     
532     
(166,748)    
-     
(29,018)    
 -     
 -     
(62,095)    
-     
 -     
(153,829)    
(951,468)    
-     
-     
(951,468)    
91,479,959
(0.01)
91,479,959     
(0.01)
$
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
   
  $
Adjustments
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
94,281     
-     
-     
-     
-     
94,281     
(94,281)
-     
-     
 -     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
(94,281)    
974     
(247)    
(93,554)    
-     
    $
-     
-    $
As restated
- 
- 
- 
 
 
43,216 
345,451 
265,137 
124,343 
243 
60,560 
52,970 
891,920 
(891,920)
 
103,500 
- 
 - 
532 
(166,748)
- 
(29,018)
 - 
 - 
(62,095)
- 
 - 
(153,829)
(1,045,749)
974 
(247)
(1,045,022)
91,479,959 
(0.01)
91,479,959 
(0.01)
Table of Contents
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDING DECEMBER 31, 2012
Revenues
   Revenue
   Cost of Revenue
Gross Profit
   Operating Expenses
   Commissions & Consulting Fees
   General & Administrative Costs
   Mining Property Costs
    Depreciation Expense
    Impairment Expense
    Accretion Expense
   Professional Services
   Total Operating Expenses
Net Operating Loss
Other Income (Expenses)
   Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
   Other Income from Mineral Claims
   Interest Income
   Interest Expense
   Gain/Loss on Derivative Liability
   Loss on Conversion of Debt
   Bad Debt (Expense) / Recovery
   Loss on Settlement
   Other Expense
   Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
Net Other Income (Expenses)
Loss From Continuing Operations
Adjustments
12 months ended
December 31,
$
2012
-    $
-     
-     
       
9,000
339,524     
591,926     
98,673     
5,341     
513     
79,714     
1,124,691     
(1,124,691)
4,500       
32,500     
831     
(644,773)    
(386,833)    
-     
982     
-     
(2,222)    
-     
(995,015)    
(2,119,706)
-    $
-     
-     
       
     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-       
     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
 -     
-     
-
As restated
- 
- 
- 
 
9,000 
339,524 
591,926 
98,673 
5,341 
513 
79,714 
1,124,691 
(1,124,691)
 
4,500 
32,500 
831 
(644,773)
(386,833)
- 
982 
- 
(2,222)
- 
(995,015)
(2,119,706)
Loss From Discontinued Operations
Net Loss
    Accretion of Discount on Redeemable Common Stock
    Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common Shareholders
   Unrealized Loss on Available For Sale Securities
Total Comprehensive Loss
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Gain (Loss) per Share
158
Table of Contents
 
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS OF MARCH 31, 2012 (Unaudited)
ASSETS
   Current Assets
   Cash
   Accounts Receivable
   Total Current Assets
 
   Other Assets
   Certificates of Deposit
   Goodwill
   Mining Claims - Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of accumulated depreciation
   Purchase Option - Taber Mine
   Reclamation Bond Deposit – Fraser River
   Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
   Liabilities
   Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - related party
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of discount of $146,198)
   Note Payable (net of discount of $4,069)
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
   Total Current Liabilities
 
   Long-Term Liabilities
   Asset Retirement Obligation
   Total Long-Term Liabilities
   Total Liabilities
 
Commitment & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption, stated at estimated redemption value, 1,914,491
shares outstanding at March 31, 2012
Total Commitment & Contingencies
 
   Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value, 100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued and
outstanding at March 31, 2012
Convertible Preferred stock, Series A, $0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares authorized,
4,000,000 shares issued and outstanding at March 31, 2012
Convertible Preferred stock, Series G, $0.001 par value, 1,500,000 shares authorized,
100,000 shares issued and outstanding at March 31, 2012
Common stock, $0.001 par value, 250,000,000 shares authorized, 96,810,130 shares
issued and outstanding at March 31, 2012
Additional Paid-In Capital
Stock Payable
Deficit Accumulated During Exploration Stage
   Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’
EQUITY (DEFICIT)
159
Table of Contents
$
$
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
     
     
     
     
  $
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
   
   
  $
-     
(2,119,706)    
-     
-     
(2,119,706)    
(12,500)
(2,132,206)      
99,799,411     
(0.02)
-     
-     
(29,516)    
(22,701)    
(52,217)    
-     
     
-     
-    $
- 
(2,119,706)
(29,516)
(22,701)
(2,171,923)
(12,500)
(2,184,423)
99,799,411 
(0.02)
Mar 31, 2012
(as reported)
118,734     
-     
118,734
172,133     
5,341     
2,004,295     
707,700     
10,000     
2,000     
2,901,469     
3,020,203    $
30,976     
812,474     
3,348     
53,802     
5,931     
1,873,275     
2,779,806
5,198     
5,198     
2,785,004
-
-
4,000
100
98,725     
11,796,219     
25,000     
(11,688,845)    
235,199
Adjustments
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
(206,550)    
-     
-     
-     
(206,550)    
(206,550)   $
       
       
       
       
-    $
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
-    $
As Restated
118,734 
- 
118,734 
 
 
172,133 
5,341 
1,797,745 
707,700 
10,000 
2,000 
2,694,919 
2,813,653 
 
 
 
 
30,976 
812,474 
3,348 
53,802 
5,931 
1,873,275 
2,779,806 
 
 
5,198 
5,198 
2,785,004
189,904
-
-
-
189,904
4,000
100
(1,915)    
(187,989)    
-     
(206,550)    
(396,454)
96,810 
11,608,230 
25,000 
(11,895,395)
(161,255)
$
3,020,203
(206,550)   $
2,813,653
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE THREE MONTH PERIOD ENDING MARCH 31, 2012 (Unaudited)
Revenues
   Retail Sales (revenue prior to change to mining company in 2006)
   Cost of Revenue
   Gross Loss
 
   Operating Expenses
   Commissions & Consulting Fees
   General & Administrative Costs
   Mining Property Costs
   Impairment Expense
   Accretion Expense
    Depreciation Expense
   Professional Services
   Total Operating Expenses
   Net Operating Loss
   Other Income (Expenses)
   Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
   Gain on Joint-Ventures
   Impairment Expense
   Interest Income
   Interest Expense
   Loss on Conversion of Debt
   Bad Debt Expense
   Accretion Expense
   Other Expense
   Loss on Settlement
   Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
   Gain (Loss) on Derivative Liability
   Net Other Income (Expenses)
Net Loss
    Accretion of Discount on Redeemable Common Stock
    Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common Shareholders
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Loss per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
Diluted Net Loss per Share
160
Table of Contents
 
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS OF JUNE 30, 2012 (Unaudited)
ASSETS
   Current Assets
   Cash
   Accounts Receivable
   Total Current Assets
 
   Other Assets
   Certificates of Deposit
   Goodwill
   Mining Claims - Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of accumulated depreciation
   Purchase Option - Taber Mine
   Reclamation Bond Deposit – Fraser River
   Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
   Liabilities
   Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - related party
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of discount of $213,201)
   Note Payable (net of discount of $0)
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
   Total Current Liabilities
3 months ended
March 31, 2012
(as reported)
$
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
   
  $
-     
-     
-     
       
       
-     
93,585     
55,846     
 -     
 -     
26,185     
18,500     
194,116     
(194,116)
4,500     
-     
-     
545     
(62,739)    
-     
-     
(127)    
(175,047)    
-     
-     
 -     
(232,868)    
(426,984)    
-     
-     
(426,984)
98,127,893       
(0.00)      
98,127,893       
(0.00)
Adjustments
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
112,269     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
112,269     
(112,269)
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
(112,269)    
(14,606)    
(2,525)    
(129,400)
$
     
    $
As Restated
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
93,585 
168,115 
 - 
 - 
26,185 
18,500 
306,385 
(306,385)
 
4,500 
- 
- 
545 
(62,739)
- 
- 
(127)
(175,047)
- 
- 
 - 
(232,868)
(539,253)
(14,606)
(2,525)
(556,384)
 
(0.01)
98,127,893 
(0.01)
Jun 30, 2012
(as reported)
110,388     
-     
110,388
172,255     
5,341     
2,110,387     
681,515     
16,000     
2,000     
2,987,498     
3,097,886    $
44,638     
828,474     
10,823     
161,798     
-     
1,857,245     
2,902,978
$
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
     
     
     
     
  $
Adjustments
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
(312,898)    
-     
-     
-     
(312,898)    
(312,898)   $
       
       
       
       
-    $
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-
As Restated
110,388 
- 
110,388 
 
 
172,255 
5,341 
1,797,489 
681,515 
16,000 
2,000 
2,674,600 
2,784,988 
 
 
 
 
44,638 
828,474 
10,823 
161,798 
- 
1,857,245 
2,902,978
Long-Term Liabilities
   Asset Retirement Obligation
   Total Long-Term Liabilities
   Total Liabilities
 
Commitment & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption, stated at estimated redemption value, 2,817,774
shares outstanding at June 30, 2012
Total Commitment & Contingencies
 
   Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value, 100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued and
outstanding at June 30, 2012
Convertible Preferred stock, Series A, $0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares authorized,
4,000,000 shares issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012
Convertible Preferred stock, Series G, $0.001 par value, 1,500,000 shares authorized,
100,000 shares issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012
Common stock, $0.001 par value, 250,000,000 shares authorized, 96,810,130 shares
issued and outstanding at June 30, 2012
Additional Paid-In Capital
Stock Payable
Deficit Accumulated During Exploration Stage
   Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’
EQUITY (DEFICIT)
161
$
5,274     
5,274     
2,908,252
-
-
4,000
100
99,628     
11,999,318     
25,000     
(11,938,412)    
189,634
-     
-     
-    $
260,193
-
-
-
5,274 
5,274 
2,908,252
260,193
-
4,000
100
(2,818)    
(257,375)    
-     
(312,898)    
(573,091)
96,810 
11,741,943 
25,000 
(12,251,310)
(383,457)
$
3,097,886
(312,898)   $
2,784,988
Table of Contents
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE THREE AND SIX MONTH PERIODS ENDING JUNE 30, 2012 (Unaudited)
3 months
ended
6 months
ended
June 30, 2012     Adjustments     As Restated
June30, 2012     Adjustments     As Restated
- 
- 
- 
 
 
6,000 
166,286 
307,150 
 - 
- 
52,370 
25,250 
557,056 
(557,056)
 
4,500 
-
- 
425 
(167,787)
- 
- 
(203)
(175,047)
- 
- 
 - 
(338,112)
(895,168)
(21,442)
(7,978)
-     
-
(6,836)    
(5,453)
(6,836)    
(5,453)
-     
-
(21,442)    
(7,978)
(249,567)
(118,638)
(368,205)
(676,551)
(248,037)
(924,588)
$
99,296,795     
(0.00)
-     
-    $
99,296,795     
(0.00)   $
98,712,344     
(0.01)
-     
-    $
98,712,344 
(0.01)
99,296,795
-
99,296,795
98,712,344
-
98,712,344
-     
-     
-
6,000     
72,701     
32,687     
 -     
-     
26,185     
6,750     
144,323     
(144,323)
-     
-
-     
(120)    
(105,048)    
-     
-     
(76)    
-     
-     
-     
 -     
(105,244)    
(249,567)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
106,349     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
106,349     
(106,349)
-     
-
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
(106,349)
-    $
-     
-
-     
-     
-
6,000     
72,701     
139,036     
 -     
 -     
26,185     
6,750     
250,672     
(250,672)
6,000     
166,286     
88,533     
 -     
 -     
52,370     
25,250     
338,439     
(338,439)
-     
-
4,500     
-
-     
(120)    
(105,048)    
-     
-     
(76)    
-     
-     
-     
 -     
(105,244)    
(355,916)
-     
425     
(167,787)    
-     
-     
(203)    
(175,047)    
-     
-     
 -     
(338,112)    
(676,551)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
218,617     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
218,617     
(218,617)
-     
-
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
(218,617)
$
Revenues
Retail Sales (revenue prior to change to
mining company in 2006)
Cost of Revenue
   Gross Loss
 
   Operating Expenses
   Commissions & Consulting Fees
   General & Administrative Costs
   Mining Property Costs
   Impairment Expense
   Accretion Expense
   Depreciation Expense
   Professional Services
   Total Operating Expenses
Net Operating Loss
Other Income (Expenses)
   Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
Gain on Joint-Ventures
   Impairment Expense
   Interest Income
   Interest Expense
   Loss on Conversion of Debt
   Bad Debt Expense
   Accretion Expense
   Other Expense
   Loss on Settlement
   Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
   Gain (Loss) on Derivative Liability
Net Other Income (Expenses)
Net Loss
Accretion of Discount on Redeemable
Common Stock
Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common
Shareholders
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Loss per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
Diluted Net Loss per Share
162
Table of Contents
$
(0.00)
-    $
(0.00)   $
(0.01)
-    $
(0.01)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 2012 (Unaudited)
ASSETS
Current Assets
   Cash
   Accounts Receivable
Total Current Assets
 
Other Assets
   Certificates of Deposit
   Deferred Financing Costs, net
   Goodwill
   Mining Claims - Unproved
   Property, Plant & Equipment, net of accumulated depreciation
   Purchase Option - Taber Mine
   Reclamation Bond Deposit – Fraser River
Total Other Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
Liabilities
Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable
   Accrued Expenses - related party
   Accrued Interest
   Convertible notes payable (net of discount of $240,325)
   Note Payable (net of discount of $0)
   Derivative Liability
   Note Payable – Ruby Mine Mortgage
Total Current Liabilities
 
Long-Term Liabilities
   Asset Retirement Obligation
Total Long-Term Liabilities
Total Liabilities
 
Commitment & Contingencies
Common shares subject to redemption, stated at estimated redemption value, 3,602,492
shares outstanding at September 30, 2012
Total Commitment & Contingencies
 
Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock, Series I, $0.001 par value, 100 shares authorized, 100 shares issued and
outstanding at September 30, 2012
Convertible Preferred stock, Series A, $0.001 par value, 8,000,000 shares authorized,
4,000,000 shares issued and outstanding at September 30, 2012
Convertible Preferred stock, Series G, $0.001 par value, 0 and 1,500,000 shares
authorized, 0 issued and outstanding at September 30, 2012
Common stock, $0.001 par value, 250,000,000 shares authorized, 96,895,130 shares
issued and outstanding at September 30, 2012
Additional Paid-In Capital
Stock Payable
Deficit Accumulated During Exploration Stage
Total Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
TOTAL LIABILITIES, COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES, & STOCKHOLDERS’
EQUITY (DEFICIT)
Sep 30, 2012
(as reported)
70,726     
-     
70,726
172,378     
21,131     
5,341     
2,187,207     
660,083     
22,000     
2,000     
3,070,140     
3,140,866
31,165     
850,474     
18,513     
357,675     
-     
585,498     
1,841,095     
3,684,420
5,350     
5,350     
3,689,770
-
-
4,000
-
100,498     
12,047,659     
25,000     
(12,726,061)    
(548,904)
$
   
   
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
     
     
     
     
  $
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
   
   
  $
Adjustments
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
-     
(389,718)    
-     
-     
-     
(389,718)    
(389,718)   $
       
       
       
       
-    $
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
-    $
As Restated
70,726 
- 
70,726 
 
 
172,378 
21,131 
5,341 
1,797,489 
660,083 
22,000 
2,000 
2,680,422 
2,751,148 
 
 
 
 
31,165 
850,474 
18,513 
357,675 
- 
585,498 
1,841,095 
3,684,420 
 
 
5,350 
5,350 
3,689,770
314,757
-
-
314,757
-
4,000
-
(3,603)    
(311,154)    
-     
(389,718)    
(704,475)
96,895 
11,736,505 
25,000 
(13,115,779 
(1,253,379)
$
3,140,866
(389,718)   $
2,751,148
163
Table of Contents
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE THREE AND NINE MONTH PERIODS ENDING SEPTEMBER 30, 2012 (Unaudited)
Revenues
3 months
ended
Sept 30, 2012
(as reported)
Adjustments     As Restated
9 months
ended
Sept 30, 2012
(as reported)
Adjustments     As Restated
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
85,640     
63,326     
 -     
 -     
21,432     
10,922     
181,320     
(181,320)
-     
-     
-     
159     
(155,881)    
-     
982     
(76)    
(2,222)    
-     
 -     
(449,291)    
(606,329)    
(787,649)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
76,820     
 -     
 -     
-     
-     
76,820     
(76,820)
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
-     
(76,820)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
85,640     
140,146     
 -     
 -     
21,432     
10,922     
258,140     
(258,140)
-     
-     
-     
159     
(155,881)    
-     
982     
(76)    
(2,222)    
-     
 -     
(449,291)    
(606,329)    
(864,469)
-    $
-     
-
6,000     
251,926     
151,859     
 -     
 -     
73,802     
36,172     
519,759     
(519,759)
4,500     
-     
-     
584     
(323,668)    
-     
982     
(279)    
(177,269)    
-     
 -     
(449,291)    
(944,441)    
(1,464,200)
-    $
-     
-     
       
       
-     
-     
295,437     
 -     
-     
-     
-     
295,437     
(295,437)
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
-     
 -     
-     
-     
(295,437)
- 
- 
- 
 
 
6,000 
251,926 
447,296 
 - 
 - 
73,802 
36,172 
815,196 
(815,196) 
 
4,500 
- 
- 
584 
(323,668) 
- 
982 
(279)
(177,269)
- 
 - 
(449,291)
(944,441) 
(1,759,637)
-     
-
(4,157)    
(6,907)
(4,157)    
(6,907)
-     
-
(25,599)    
(14,885)
(25,599)
(14,885)
(787,649)
(87,884)
(875,533)
(1,464,200)
(284,723)
$
Retail Sales (revenue prior to change to
mining company in 2006)
Cost of Revenue
Gross Loss
 
Operating Expenses
Commissions & Consulting Fees
General & Administrative Costs
Mining Property Costs
Impairment Expense
          Accretion Expense
Depreciation Expense
Professional Services
Total Operating Expenses
Net Operating Loss
Other Income (Expenses)
Gain on Mineral Claim Sales
Gain on Joint-Ventures
Impairment Expense
Interest Income
Interest Expense
Loss on Conversion of Debt
Bad Debt Expense
Accretion Expense
Other Expense
Loss on Settlement
        Realized Gain (Loss) on Investment
Gain (Loss) on Derivative Liability
Net Other Income (Expenses)
Net Loss
Accretion of Discount on Redeemable
Common Stock
Interest on Redeemable Common Stock
Net Loss Attributable to Common
Shareholders
 
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Basic)
 Basic Net Loss per Share
WEIGHTED AVG NUMBER OF SHARES
OUTSTANDING (Diluted)
 Diluted Net Loss per Share
164
Table of Contents
100,200,957     
  $
(0.01)
-      100,200,957     
    $
(0.01)   $
99,212,170
(0.01)
100,200,957     
(0.01)    
  $
-     
-    $
95,880,831     
(0.01)   $
99,212,170     
(0.01)
(1,800,121)
99,212,170 
(0.02)
89,719,476 
(0.02)
-     
    $
-     
-    $