
6-K 1 d230554d6k.htm 6-K 6-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER
Pursuant to Rule 13a-16 or 15d-16
Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the month of August 2016
Commission File Number: 001-04307
Husky Energy Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
707 - 8th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 1H5
(Address of principal executive offices)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of Form
20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F  ¨            Form 40-F  x
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1).  ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7):  ¨
On August 2, 2016, Husky Energy issued a press release announcing that its China subsidiary
had signed a Heads of Agreement with CNOOC Limited and relevant companies for the price
adjustment of natural gas from the Liwan 3-1 and Liuhua 34-2 fields. The press release is
attached hereto as Exhibit A.
This report on Form 6-K shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference into Husky Energy
Inc.’s Registration Statements on Form F-10 (File No. 333-208443) and Form S-8 (File No. 333-
187135) and to be a part thereof from the date on which this report is filed, to the extent not
superseded by documents or reports subsequently filed or furnished.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURES
Date: August 3, 2016
HUSKY ENERGY INC.
BY: /s/James D. Girgulis
 JAMES D. GIRGULIS
 
 
 SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
 GENERAL COUNSEL & SECRETARY
Exhibit A
Husky Energy and CNOOC Limited Announce Agreement for Liwan Gas Project
Calgary, Alberta (August 2, 2016) – Husky Energy’s China subsidiary has signed a Heads of
Agreement (HOA) with CNOOC Limited and relevant companies for the price adjustment of
natural gas from the Liwan 3-1 and Liuhua 34-2 fields that would see the price set at $12.50-
15.00 Cdn per thousand cubic feet (mcf) at current exchange rates.
“Long term fundamentals remain strong for natural gas demand in China. The price adjustment
will allow Husky and CNOOC to maintain their market share in a competitive gas market,” said
CEO Asim Ghosh. “We reached this agreement in the spirit of the longstanding relationship
between Husky and CNOOC that brought to life the first deepwater development offshore China.”
Gross take-or-pay volumes from the fields remain unchanged in the range of 300-330 million
cubic feet per day (mmcf/day). Liquids production, net to Husky, is also expected to remain in the
range of 5,000-6,000 barrels per day. The price adjustment under the HOA is effective as of
November 20, 2015 and the settlement of outstanding payments is calculated from that date.
“Husky and CNOOC plan to further deepen their cooperation and have undertaken to jointly
create more value with the advancement of the Liuhua 29-1 gas field,” said Ghosh.
Plans will get underway to finalize the commercial and development approach to tie the Liuhua
29-1 field into the Liwan infrastructure. Liuhua 29-1 gross gas sales volumes are expected to add
approximately 80 mmcf/day.
Husky holds a 49 percent interest in the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) for the Liwan Gas
Project and operates the deepwater infrastructure. CNOOC Limited holds a 51 percent interest in
the PSC and operates the shallow water facilities and the onshore gas terminal.
Husky and CNOOC continue to advance a rich portfolio of opportunities in the Asia Pacific
Region, including several shallow water natural gas and liquids developments offshore
Indonesia.
Husky Energy is one of Canada’s largest integrated energy companies. It is headquartered in
Calgary, Alberta, Canada and its common shares are publicly traded on the Toronto Stock
Exchange under the symbol HSE. More information is available at www.huskyenergy.com
For further information, please contact:
Investor Inquiries:
Media Inquiries:
Rob Knowles
Mel Duvall
Manager, Investor Relations
Manager, Media & Issues
Husky Energy Inc.
587-747-2116
Husky Energy Inc.
403-513-7602
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements in this news release are forward-looking statements and information
(collectively “forward-looking statements”), within the meaning of the applicable Canadian
securities legislation, Section 21E of the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, and Section 27A of the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The
forward-looking statements contained in this news release are forward-looking and not historical
facts.
Some of the forward-looking statements may be identified by statements that express, or involve
discussions as to, expectations, beliefs, plans, objectives, assumptions or future events or
performance (often, but not always, through the use of words or phrases such as “will likely
result”, “are expected to”, “will continue”, “is anticipated”, “is targeting”, “estimated”, “intend”,
“plan”, “projection”, “remain”, “could”, “aim”, “vision”, “goals”, “objective”, “target”, “schedules” and
“outlook”). In particular, forward-looking statements in this news release include, but are not
limited to, references to: long term fundamentals remaining strong for natural gas demand in
China; take-or-pay volumes and liquids production from the Liwan fields; and anticipated gross
gas sales volumes for Liuhua 29-1.
There are numerous uncertainties inherent in projecting future sales volumes. The total amount
of actual sales volumes may vary from initial estimates.
Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected by the forward-looking statements
presented in this news release are reasonable, the Company’s forward-looking statements have
been based on assumptions and factors concerning future events that may prove to be
inaccurate. Those assumptions and factors are based on information currently available to the
Company about itself and the businesses in which it operates. Information used in developing
forward-looking statements has been acquired from various sources including third-party
consultants, suppliers, regulators and other sources.
Because actual results or outcomes could differ materially from those expressed in any forward-
looking statements, investors should not place undue reliance on any such forward-looking
statements. By their nature, forward-looking statements involve numerous assumptions, inherent
risks and uncertainties, both general and specific, which contribute to the possibility that the
predicted outcomes will not occur. Some of these risks, uncertainties and other factors are similar
to those faced by other oil and gas companies and some are unique to Husky.
The Company’s Annual Information Form for the year ended December 31, 2015 and other
documents filed with securities regulatory authorities (accessible through the SEDAR website
www.sedar.com and the EDGAR website www.sec.gov) describe risks, material assumptions
and other factors that could influence actual results and are incorporated herein by reference.
Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and,
except as required by applicable securities laws, the Company undertakes no obligation to
update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which
such statement is made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. New factors emerge
from time to time, and it is not possible for management to predict all of such factors and to
assess in advance the impact of each such factor on the Company’s business or the extent to
which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from
those contained in any forward-looking statement. The impact of any one factor on a particular
forward-looking statement is not determinable with certainty as such factors are dependent upon
other factors, and the Company’s course of action would depend upon its assessment of the
future considering all information then available.