
6-K 1 v447003_6k.htm FORM 6-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER
PURSUANT TO RULE 13a – 16 OR 15d – 16 UNDER THE
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the month of August, 2016
Commission File No. 0-53646
Intelligent Content Enterprises Inc.
(Translation of Registrant’s name into English)
1 King Street West, Suite 1505
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5H 1A1
(Address of principal executive office)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of Form
20-F or Form 40F.
Form 20-F x            Form 40-F ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1):
Yes ¨            No x
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7):
Yes ¨            No x
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.                  Intelligent Content Enterprises Inc., News Release issued on August 11, 2016 as
filed on Sedar on August 15, 2016.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
August 15, 2016INTELLIGENT CONTENT ENTERPRISES INC.
By:  /s/ James Cassina                          
Name:  James Cassina
Title:  President
ITEM 1
Intelligent Content Enterprises opens 1st global Center of Excellence focussing on
proprietary development and innovation for online media, technologies and engagement
Toronto, Canada August 11, 2016 – INTELLIGENT CONTENT ENTERPRISES INC. (OTCQB
“ICEIF”) (“ICE” or the “Corporation”), is pleased to announce that it has opened its 1st global
innovation Center of Excellence (“ICE COE”), located in Toronto, Canada, to enhance its
development and growth of global online media, technologies and support for its proprietary
technology platforms, marketing programs and client services. As a key part of the ICE COE
mandate, ICE has begun to work with The University of Toronto a top 25 globally ranked
university to support ICE’s efforts to in the fields of computer science, linguistic programming,
social media, web services, marketing, communications and business. ICE will look to continue
to expand its reach to other institutions as the program grows.
Starting with its first Center of Excellence, ICE will provide accelerated digital solutions to the
marketplace by partnering bright, young minds with seasoned leadership to explore, create and
commercialize new and exciting innovations that will potentially increase the value proposition
for online audiences as they explore web and mobile media, advertising and shopping services,
locally and globally, and instantly available in over 50 languages through www.digiwidgy.com .
As the ICE Center of Excellence expands, it will begin to increase its scope and reach to include
potentially other physical locations as well as remote participation by enterprising individuals,
groups and partners around the globe.
“Today’s generation are the new creators, inventors and global strategists as they have an ability
to accelerate their experiences to meet the demands of the rapidly evolving online world,” said
James Cassina, President and CEO of ICE. “By combining the power of these exceptional
young people with the wisdom and experience of some of our key leadership groups, ICE
believes that we can create new and innovative solutions that will power the future of globalized
content, media, advertising and engagement, where consumption and commerce are ubiquitous.”
On July 26, 2016, ICE and its proposed license and acquisition partner, Catch Star Studios
announced the commercial launch of its interactive video platform, Clix.Video™
(www.clix.video), which enables digital and mobile viewers to instantly connect to web and
mobile sites by clicking on custom interactive tags within digital videos. Clix.Video™ allows
viewers to make social media connections, view extra and exclusive content as well as make
online and mobile purchases. All user interactions are made directly via the HTML5 video
broadcast, providing a richer, deeper consumer experience related to the video content.
With US digital video advertising on pace to nearly double from its present expected 2016 value
of $9.59 Billion to $14.77 Billion by 2019, according to an eMarketer report in February this year,
enabling video to have a more robust and direct engagement between users and creators is a
key area of focus for Clix.Video™. Recently Facebook announced Facebook Live, allowing
users to engage with each other in live video, reinforcing the value of video engagement. Apps
and programs like Facebook Live, Skype, Snapchat, and FaceTime by Apple all create
potentially innovative opportunities for brands to engage with users in on-demand settings.
Clix.Video™ is currently exploring, in addition to its recorded video applications, live overlay
technologies to support these platforms. The ICE COE will also work with Clix.Video™ to explore
interactive 360 video as it relates to user interaction and commercial opportunities.
Additionally, the ICE COE teams will focus on how content, language and marketing relate in
localized geographic regions, allowing advertisers to provide uses with targeted, multi-lingual
offerings based on individual and group demographics, particular to a user’s language, not just
where they are, creating a more robust value chain between brands and constituents.
For more information, please visit www.intelligentcontententerprises.com
About Intelligent Content Enterprises Inc.
Intelligent Content Enterprises Inc. (ICE) is an emerging Media and Internet company that
focuses on the experience of the user, creating brands, products and destinations globally,
regionally and by language that are value driven proving an informative, entertaining and
engaging look at content.
ICE’s 4 pillar strategy is to drive revenue through technologies, platforms and services that
deliver Content, Social and Digital Media, eCommerce and Advertising.
ICE’s first acquisition, Digital Widget Factory provides the baseline infrastructure and technology
platform enabling content and media to be disseminated globally, efficiently and effectively,
creating economies of scale for distribution in over 50 languages, allowing users to create and
participate in the content process and consumption.
Intelligent Content Enterprises is a publicly traded company on the OTC QB Markets under the
symbol “ICEIF”
For further information, please contact:
Intelligent Content Enterprises Inc.
Investor Relations: investorrelations@intelligentcontententerprises.com
Certain information regarding the Corporation in this news release may constitute forward-
looking statements or future oriented financial information under applicable securities laws. The
forward-looking information includes, without limitation, successful completion of the proposed
transaction, projections or estimates made by us and our management in connection with our
business operations or the business operations of CSS.  Various assumptions were used in
drawing the conclusions or making the forecasts and projections contained in the forward-looking
information contained in this press release, which assumptions are based on management
analysis of historical trends, experience, current conditions and expected future developments
pertaining to the Company and the industry in which it operates as well as certain assumptions
as specifically outlined in the release above.  Forward-looking information is based on current
expectations, estimates and projections that involve a number of risks, which could cause actual
results to vary and in some instances to differ materially from those anticipated by the Company
and described in the forward-looking information contained in this press release.  Undue reliance
should not be placed on forward-looking information, which is not a guarantee of performance
and is subject to a number of risks or uncertainties.  Readers are cautioned that the foregoing list
of risk factors is not exhaustive.  Forward-looking information is based on the estimates and
opinions of the Company’s management at the time the information is released and the Company
disclaims any intent or obligation to update publicly any such forward-looking information,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, other than as expressly
required by applicable securities law
Safe Harbor Statement
This press release may contain forward-looking information within the meaning of Section 21E of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), including all statements
that are not statements of historical fact regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the
company, its directors or its officers with respect to, among other things: (i) the company's
financing plans; (ii) trends affecting the company's financial condition or results of operations; (iii)
the company's growth strategy and operating strategy; and (iv) the declaration and payment of
dividends. The words "may," "would," "will," "expect," "estimate," "anticipate," "believe," "intend"
and similar expressions and variations thereof are intended to identify forward-looking
statements. Also, forward-looking statements represent our management's beliefs and
assumptions only as of the date hereof. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to
update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could
differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, even if new
information becomes available in the future. Investors are cautioned that any such forward-
looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties,
many of which are beyond the company's ability to control, and that actual results may differ
materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors
including the risk disclosed in the Company's Form 6-K filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.