
EX-99.1 2 ex99-1.htm
Exhibit 99.1
Quantum Materials Corp Developing Nanomaterials for Tracing Fracking Fluids to Point of Origin
San Marcos, TX – August 3, 2016 – Leading North American quantum dot manufacturer
Quantum Materials Corporation (OTCQB:QTMM) today announced that the Company has
partnered with a Texas-based E&P technology business and is currently developing specialized
nanomaterials for use in oil and gas well production optimization. The project, which is nearing
the completion of the initial phase, is targeting new materials which are expected to provide for
safer and more efficient recovery of hydrocarbon resources.
“We are excited to be a part of this project which has the potential to bring a wealth of new
information to the oil and gas industry.” said Sri Peruvemba, CEO of Quantum Materials Corp.
“However more importantly to Quantum, the challenges of creating nanoparticles that can
withstand the harsh downhole environment are leading us to discoveries that we can apply to
make our quantum dots for use in displays and lighting more robust.”
The Company realized a small revenue contribution from this project in fiscal year 2016 that
ended June 30.
About Quantum Materials Corp
Quantum Materials Corporation (QMC) develops and manufactures quantum dots and
nanomaterials for use in medical, display, solar energy and lighting applications through its
patented volume production process. QMC’s volume manufacturing methods enable consistent
quality and scalable cost reductions to drive innovative discovery to commercial success. The
company’s technology continues to move the future of quantum dots to the present. QMC’s
products are the foundation for technologically superior, energy efficient and environmentally
sound LCD UHD displays, the next generation of solid-state lighting, solar photovoltaic power
applications, advanced battery and energy storage solutions, biotech imaging, and biomedical
theranostics. Wholly-owned subsidiary Solterra Renewable Technologies develops sustainable
quantum dot solar technology.
For more information follow Quantum Materials Corp at www.QMCDOTS.com and on LinkedIn
and Twitter.
Safe Harbor statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
This press release contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties
concerning business, products, and financial results. Actual results may differ materially from the
results predicted. More information about potential risk factors that could affect our business,
products, and financial results are included in our annual report and in reports subsequently filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). All documents are available through the
SEC’s EDGAR System at http://www.sec.gov/ or www.QMCdots.com. We hereby disclaim any
obligation to publicly update the information provided above, including forward-looking
statements, to reflect subsequent events or circumstances.
CONTACTS:
Toshi Ando
Senior Director of Business Development
510.300.4021
toshi@qmcdots.com
Media:
Rich Schineller
941.780.8100
rich@prmgt.com
Investor Relations:
Clay Chase /SD Torrey Hills Capital
858.456.7300
cc@sdthc.com
