
EX-2.1 2 d411916dex21.htm PURCHASE AND SALE AGREEMENT Purchase and Sale
Agreement
Exhibit 2.1
PURCHASE AND SALE AGREEMENT
AMONG
GOODRICH PETROLEUM COMPANY, L.L.C.
(“GOODRICH LLC”),
GOODRICH PETROLEUM CORPORATION
(“GOODRICH CORP”)
AND
MEMORIAL PRODUCTION OPERATING LLC
(“BUYER”)
DATED AS OF SEPTEMBER 18, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 
1  
 
  
 
1  
  
  12  
  
  13  
  
  13  
  
  13  
  
  14  
  
  16  
  
  17  
  
  18  
  
  18  
  
  18  
  
  19  
  
  19  
  
  19  
  
  19  
  
  19  
  
  19  
  
  19  
  
  20  
  
  20  
  
  20  
  
  20  
  
  20  
  
  21  
  
  21  
  
  21  
  
  21
Interpretation and Construction
ARTICLE 1 DEFINED TERMS
Section 1.1      Definitions
Section 1.2     
ARTICLE 2 PURCHASE AND SALE
Section 2.1      Purchase and Sale
Section 2.2      The Assets
Section 2.3      Excluded Assets
Section 2.4      Receipts and Credits
Section 2.5      Assumed Obligations
ARTICLE 3 PURCHASE PRICE
Section 3.1      Purchase Price
Section 3.2      Allocation of Purchase Price
ARTICLE 4 SELLER PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section 4.1      Organization and Standing
Section 4.2      Legal Power
Section 4.3      Authorization and Enforceability
Section 4.4      Liability for Broker’s Fees
Section 4.5      No Bankruptcy
Section 4.6      No Conflicts
Section 4.7      Consents and Approvals
Section 4.8      Litigation
Section 4.9     
Insurance
Section 4.10     Liens
Section 4.11    
Section 4.12     Compliance with Law
Section 4.13     Rights to Production
Section 4.14     Take-or-Pay Arrangements
Section 4.15     Material Agreements
Section 4.16
Compliance With Leases
Judgments
Imbalances
Compliance With Leases
Section 4.16
Section 4.17     Payouts
Section 4.18     Non-Consent Operations
Section 4.19     Royalties and Rentals
Section 4.20     Permits
Section 4.21    
Section 4.22     Preferential Rights and Transfer Requirements
Section 4.23     Taxes and Assessments
Section 4.24     Wells and Equipment
Section 4.25     Outstanding Capital Commitments
Section 4.26     Absence of Certain Changes
Section 4.27     Environmental Matters
i
ARTICLE 5 BUYER’S REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section 5.1      Organization and Standing
Section 5.2      Power
Section 5.3      Authorization and Enforceability
Section 5.4      Liability for Brokers’ Fees
Section 5.5      Litigation
Section 5.6      Securities Law, Access to Data and Information
Section 5.7      Due Diligence
Section 5.8      Basis of Buyer's Decision
Section 5.9      Financial Ability
Section 5.10     Bargaining Position
ARTICLE 6 COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
Section 6.1      Covenants and Agreements of the Seller Parties
Section 6.2      Enforcement of Third Party Provisions
Section 6.3      Confidentiality.
Section 6.4      Preferential Purchase Rights and Transfer Requirements.
Section 6.5      SEC Matters
Section 6.6      Casualty or Condemnation Loss
Section 6.7      Further Assurances
Section 6.8      Notification
Section 6.9      Amendment to Schedules
Section 6.10     Replacement of Bonds, Letters of Credit and Guaranties
Section 6.11     Non-Competition
ARTICLE 7 TITLE DEFECTS
Section 7.1      Title Examination and Access
Section 7.2      Title Defects
Section 7.3      Title Defect Value
Section 7.4      Procedure for Closing on Affected Assets
Section 7.5      Contested Title Defects
Section 7.6      Limitations on Adjustments for Title Defects
Section 7.7     
ARTICLE 8 ENVIRONMENTAL DEFECTS
Section 8.1      Buyer’s Environmental Assessment
Section 8.2      Environmental Defects
Section 8.3      Seller Parties’ Right to Remediate
Section 8.4      Remedies for Environmental Defects
Section 8.5      Contested Environmental Defects
Section 8.6      Limitation
Section 8.7      Exclusive Remedies
Section 8.8      Limited Arbitration
ARTICLE 9 SELLER PARTIES’ CONDITIONS TO CLOSE
Section 9.1      Representations
Interest Additions
Section 9.2
Performance
21  
  21  
  22  
  22  
  22  
  22  
  22  
  22  
  23  
  23  
  24  
  24
24  
 24  
 24  
 24  
 25  
 25  
 25  
 25  
 25  
 25  
 26  
 26  
 26  
 29  
 29  
 30  
 32  
 32  
 33  
 33  
 34  
 34  
 34  
 35  
 35  
 36  
 36  
 37  
 38  
 38  
 38  
 40  
 40  
 40  
 40  
 40  
 42  
 43  
 43  
 43  
 44  
 44
Section 9.2
Section 9.3      Pending Matters
Performance
ii
Section 9.4      Execution and Delivery of the Closing Documents
Section 9.5      Adjustments
Section 9.6      Casualty Losses
ARTICLE 10 BUYER’S CONDITIONS TO CLOSE
Section 10.1      Representations
Section 10.2      Performance
Section 10.3      Pending Matters
Section 10.4      Execution and Delivery of the Closing Documents
Section 10.5      Adjustments
Section 10.6      Casualty Losses
ARTICLE 11 THE CLOSING
Section 11.1      Time and Place of the Closing
Section 11.2      Adjustments to Purchase Price at the Closing
Section 11.3      Closing Statement; Post-Closing Adjustment
Section 11.4      Actions of the Seller Parties at the Closing
Section 11.5      Actions of Buyer at the Closing
ARTICLE 12 TERMINATION
Section 12.1      Right of Termination
Section 12.2      Effect of Termination
ARTICLE 13 OBLIGATIONS AND INDEMNIFICATION
Section 13.1      Retained Obligations
Section 13.2      Buyer’s Indemnification
Section 13.3      Seller Parties’ Indemnification
Section 13.4      Limitations for the Seller Parties’ Indemnification
Section 13.5      Notices and Defense of Indemnified Matters
ARTICLE 14 LIMITATIONS ON REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section 14.1      Disclaimers of Representations and Warranties
Section 14.2      Survival
ARTICLE 15 MISCELLANEOUS
Section 15.1      Expenses
Section 15.2      Document Retention
Section 15.3      Entire Agreement
Section 15.4      Amendments
Section 15.5      Waiver
Section 15.6      Publicity
Section 15.7      No Third Party Beneficiaries
Section 15.8      Assignment
Section 15.9      Governing Law
Section 15.10     Specific Performance
Section 15.11     Notices
Section 15.12     Severability
Section 15.13     Time of the Essence
Section 15.14     Counterpart Execution
Section 15.15     Further Assurances
Section 15.16     Transfer Taxes
iii
EXHIBITS
45  
 45
45  
 45  
 45  
 45  
 45  
 45  
 45  
 46  
 46  
 46  
 46  
 46  
 46  
 48  
 49  
 50  
 51  
 51  
 52  
 52  
 52  
 53  
 53  
 53  
 54  
 55  
 55  
 56  
 57  
 57  
 57  
 57  
 57  
 57  
 58  
 58  
 58  
 58  
 59  
 59  
 60  
 60  
 60
60  
 61
A.      Leases
B.      Wells
C.      Material Agreements
D.      Form of Conveyance
E.      Other Excluded Assets
F.      Allocation Schedule
G.     Territory Map
SCHEDULES
Insurance
Schedule 2.2(h)     Surface Rights
Schedule 4.9
Schedule 4.13      Rights to Production
Schedule 4.21     
Schedule 4.22      Preferential Rights and Transfer Requirements
Schedule 6.10      Bonds, Letters of Credit and Guaranties
Imbalances
iv
PURCHASE AND SALE AGREEMENT
This Purchase and Sale Agreement is dated as of September 18, 2012, by and among Goodrich Petroleum Company,
L.L.C., a Louisiana limited liability company (“Goodrich LLC”), Goodrich Petroleum Corporation, a Delaware corporation
(“Goodrich Corp”  and,  together  with  Goodrich  LLC,  the  “Seller  Parties”)  and  Memorial  Production  Operating  LLC,  a
Delaware  limited  liability  company  (“Buyer”).  The  Seller  Parties  and  Buyer  are  sometimes  collectively  referred  to
herein as the “Parties” and individually referred to as a “Party.”
RECITALS
1. Goodrich LLC owns various oil and gas properties and interests as more fully described in the Exhibits hereto.
2. The Seller Parties desire for Goodrich LLC to sell to Buyer and Buyer desires to purchase from Goodrich LLC the
properties  and  rights  of  Goodrich  LLC  hereinafter  described,  in  the  manner  and  upon  the  terms  and  conditions
hereafter set forth.
AGREEMENT
NOW,  THEREFORE,  in  consideration  of  the  premises  and  of  the  mutual  promises,  representations,  warranties,
covenants,  conditions  and  agreements  contained  herein,  and  for  other  valuable  consideration,  the  receipt  and
sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the Parties hereto, intending to be legally bound by the terms hereof,
agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1
DEFINED TERMS
Section 1.1 Definitions. The following capitalized terms have the meanings given such terms below or elsewhere in
this Agreement as set forth below.
“AAA” is defined in Section 8.8.
“Accounting Arbitrator” is defined in Section 11.3(c).
“AFE” means authorization for expenditure.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any specified Person, another Person that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled
by, or is under common control with, such specified Person, with “control” in such context meaning the possession,
directly  or  indirectly,  of  the  power  to  direct  the  management  or  policies  of  a  Person,  whether  through  ownership  of
voting securities, by contract, or otherwise.
“Aggregate Environmental Defect Value” is defined in Section 8.6.
“Aggregate Title Defect Value” is defined in Section 7.6.
1
“Agreement” means this Purchase and Sale Agreement, as amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified
from time to time.
“Allocated Value” is defined in Section 3.2.
“Allocation Schedule” is defined in Section 3.2.
“Assets” is defined in Section 2.2.
“Assumed Obligations” is defined in Section 2.5.
“Business Day” means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday, or a day on which banks are authorized or required
by law to be closed for business in New York, New York or Houston, Texas.
“Buyer” is defined in the preamble of this Agreement.
“Buyer  Indemnitees”  means  Buyer  and  its  Affiliates,  together  with  its  and  their  respective  officers,  directors,
managers, employees, agents, partners, representatives, members, affiliates, shareholders, subsidiaries, successors
and assigns.
“Casualty Loss” is defined in Section 6.6.
“Closing” is defined in Section 11.1.
“Closing Date” is defined in Section 11.1.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended and interpreted by applicable Treasury Regulations.
“Conveyance” means a conveyance, substantially in the form of Exhibit D.
“Cure” is defined in Section 7.5.
“Defect Notice Time” is defined in Section 7.2.
“Defensible Title” means such title to each Property that, subject to and except for Permitted Encumbrances:
(a) Entitles Goodrich LLC to receive and retain, without suspension, reduction, or termination, not less than the Net
Revenue Interest set forth on Exhibit A or Exhibit B for such Property throughout the life of such Property, except for
any  decrease  (i)  caused  by  actions  of  any  Governmental  Authority  after  the  date  hereof  that  concern  pooling,
unitization, communitization, or spacing matters or (ii) caused by Buyer or its successors or assigns;
(b)  Obligates  Goodrich  LLC  to  bear  costs  and  expenses  relating  to  the  maintenance,  development,  operation  and
production of Hydrocarbons from each
2
Property  in  an  amount  not  greater  than  the  Working  Interest  set  forth  in Exhibit  A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property
throughout  the  life  of  such  Property,  except  for  any  increase  (i)  accompanied  by  a  proportionate  increase  in  the
corresponding Net Revenue Interest for such Property, (ii) caused by actions of any Governmental Authority after the
date  hereof  that  concern  pooling,  unitization,  communitization,  or  spacing  matters  or  (iii)  caused  by  Buyer  or  its
successors or assigns; and
(c) Is free and clear of encumbrances, liens and defects.
“Deposit Amount” means $4,750,000 (5% of the Purchase Price), as adjusted pursuant to investments thereof by the
Escrow Agent.
“DTPA” is defined in Section 5.10.
“Effective Time” means 8:00 a.m. Houston, Texas time on July 1, 2012.
“Environmental Defect” means any event occurring or condition existing that causes an Asset to be, or if known to the
applicable Governmental Authority could reasonably be expected to cause such Governmental Authority to assert that
an Asset is, subject to liability or remediation under, or not in compliance with, any Environmental Law.
“Environmental Defect Closing Date” is defined in Section 8.3.
“Environmental Defect Notice” is defined in Section 8.2.
“Environmental Defect Rejection Notice” is defined in Section 8.5.
“Environmental Defect Value” is defined in Section 8.2.
“Environmental  Laws”  means  all  laws,  statutes,  ordinances,  court  decisions,  rules  and  regulations  of  any
Governmental  Authority  pertaining  to  health,  human  safety  or  the  environment  as  may  be  interpreted  by  applicable
court  decisions  or  administrative  orders,  including  the  Clean  Air  Act,  the  Comprehensive  Environmental  Response,
Compensation  and  Liability  Act  (“CERCLA”),  the  Federal  Water  Pollution  Control  Act,  the  Occupational  Safety  and
Health  Act,  the  Resources  Conservation  and  Recovery  Act  (“RCRA”),  the  Safe  Drinking  Water  Act,  the  Toxic
Substances  Control  Act,  the  Superfund  Amendment  and  Reauthorization  Act  of  1986,  the  Hazardous  Materials
Transportation Act, and comparable state and local laws, but excluding all laws, orders, rules, and regulations of the
Railroad  Commission  of  Texas  relating  to  spacing,  density,  setbacks,  specifications  or  grades  for  equipment  or
materials (including drilling mud or fluid), well integrity or construction, the prevention of physical or economic waste,
or the protection of correlative rights in Hydrocarbons, and, in each case, any cause of action or other rights in favor
of third Persons arising therefrom, or relating thereto.
“Environmental Liabilities” means any Losses arising from or under either an Environmental Law or third Party claims
relating to the environment, and which relates to the Assets or the ownership or operation of the same.
3
“Environmental Purchase Price” is defined in Section 8.4(a).
“Escrow Agent” is defined in Section 3.1.
“Escrow Agreement” means that certain escrow agreement to be executed contemporaneously with this Agreement,
by and among Buyer, the Seller Parties, and Escrow Agent.
“Estimated  Imbalances”  means  the  aggregate  estimate  of  Imbalances  with  respect  to  the  Assets  existing  at  the
Effective Time delivered pursuant to Section 11.3(a).
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
“Excluded Assets” is defined in Section 2.3.
“Excluded Taxes” means Taxes measured by (a) net income, gross receipts, profits, capital, capital gains, or similar
measures  or  (b)  multiple  bases  (including  corporate,  franchise,  business  and  occupation,  business  license,
withholding, payroll, employment, social security, unemployment, stamp, occupation, or similar Taxes).
“Facilities” is defined in Section 2.2(d).
“Financial Statements” is defined in Section 6.5.
“Fundamental Representations” means the representations and warranties made by the Seller Parties in Sections 4.1,
4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6.
“GAAP” means accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
“Goodrich Corp” is defined in the preamble of this Agreement.
“Goodrich LLC” is defined in the preamble of this Agreement.
“Governmental Authority”  means  any  federal,  state,  local,  tribal,  or  foreign  government,  or  any  court  of  competent
jurisdiction,  regulatory  or  administrative  agency,  commission,  or  other  governmental  authority  that  exercises
jurisdiction over any of the Assets.
“Hazardous Materials” means any material, chemical, compound, substance, mixture or by-product that is identified,
defined, designated, listed, restricted or otherwise regulated under Environmental Laws as a “hazardous constituent,”
“hazardous  substance,”  “hazardous  material,”  “acutely  hazardous  material,”  “extremely  hazardous  material,”
“hazardous  waste,”  “hazardous  waste  constituent,”  “acutely  hazardous  waste,”  “extremely  hazardous  waste,”  “solid
waste,”  “infectious  waste,”  “medical  waste,”  “biomedical  waste,”  “pollutant,”  “toxic  pollutant,”  or  “contaminant,”  and
includes  any  “hazardous  substances”  as  defined,  listed,  designated  or  regulated  under  CERCLA,  any  “hazardous
wastes” or “solid wastes” as defined, listed, designated or regulated under RCRA, and, to the extent defined, listed,
designated  or  regulated  under  Environmental  Laws,  any  asbestos  or  asbestos  containing  materials,  any
polychlorinated biphenyls, and any petroleum or hydrocarbonic substance, fraction, distillate or by-product.
4
“Hydrocarbons”  means  oil,  gas,  minerals,  and  other  gaseous  and/or  liquid  hydrocarbons  or  any  combination  of  the
foregoing, produced from and attributable to the Properties.
“Imbalances”  means  over-production  or  under-production  or  over-delivery  or  under-delivery  with  respect 
to
Hydrocarbons produced from the Properties, regardless of whether the same arise at the wellhead, pipeline, gathering
system, transportation system, processing plant, or any other location, including any imbalances under gas balancing
or  similar  agreements,  production  handling  agreements,  processing  agreements,  and/or  gathering  or  transportation
agreements.
“Information” is defined in Section 6.3.
“Interest Addition” is defined in Section 7.7(a).
“Interest Addition Notice” is defined in Section 7.7(a).
“Interest Addition Rejection Notice” is defined in Section 7.7(d).
“Interest Addition Value” is defined in Section 7.7(a).
“Laws” means all laws, statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, orders, decrees, requirements, judgments, and codes
of Governmental Authorities.
“Leases” is defined in Section 2.2(a).
“Losses” means any and all losses, damages, Obligations, liabilities, claims, demands, causes of action, judgments,
settlements, fines, penalties, costs and expenses (including court costs and reasonable attorneys’ and experts’ fees)
of any and every kind or character.
“Material Agreements” means, to the extent binding on any of the Assets or Buyer’s ownership thereof after Closing,
any  contract,  agreement,  or  other  arrangement,  other  than  the  instruments  constituting  the  Leases,  which  is  one  or
more of the following types:
(a) A contract with any Affiliate of a Seller Party;
(b) A contract for the sale, purchase, exchange, or other disposition of Hydrocarbons which are not cancelable without
penalty on 60 days prior written notice;
(c) A contract to sell, lease, farmin, farmout, exchange, or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the Assets (including
contracts containing rights of first refusal, rights of first offer, or put or call rights, but excluding conventional rights of
reassignment upon intent to abandon or release a Well or Lease);
(d) A joint operating agreement, unit operating agreement, unit agreement, or other similar agreement;
(e)  A  non-competition  agreement  or  any  agreement  that  purports  to  restrict,  limit,  or  prohibit  a  Seller  Party  from
engaging in any line of business or the manner in
5
which,  or  the  locations  at  which,  a  Seller  Party  (or  Buyer,  as  successor  in  interest  to  Goodrich  LLC)  conducts
business,  including  area  of  mutual  interest  agreements,  or  that  would  obligate  Buyer  after  the  Closing  to  sell  any
interest in any Asset(s), purchase any leasehold interest or other asset, or employ and pay for a drilling rig;
(f) A contract for the gathering, treatment, processing, storage, or transportation of Hydrocarbons;
(g)  An  indenture,  mortgage  or  deed  of  trust,  loan,  credit  or  note  purchase  agreement,  sale-lease  back  agreement,
guaranty, bond, letter of credit, or similar financial agreement; or
(h)  A  contract  for  the  construction  and  installation  or  rental  of  equipment,  fixtures,  or  facilities  with  guaranteed
production  throughput  requirements  or  demand  charges  or  which  cannot  be  terminated  by  Goodrich  LLC  without
penalty on no more than 60 days notice.
“Net Revenue Interest” means, with respect to any Property, the interest in and to all Hydrocarbons produced, saved,
and  sold  from  or  allocated  to  such  Property  after  giving  effect  to  all  royalties,  overriding  royalties,  production
payments,  carried  interests,  net  profits  interests,  reversionary  interests,  and  other  burdens  upon,  measured  by,  or
payable out or production therefrom.
“Non-Operated Assets” means Assets operated by any Person other than a Seller Party or its Affiliates.
“Obligations”  means  duties,  liabilities,  and  obligations,  whether  vested,  absolute,  or  contingent,  known  or  unknown,
asserted  or  unasserted,  accrued  or  unaccrued,  liquidated  or  unliquidated,  due  or  to  become  due,  and  whether
contractual, statutory, or otherwise.
“Party” and “Parties” are defined in the preamble to this Agreement.
“Permits” means all permits, licenses, approvals and consents from appropriate Governmental Authorities necessary
to conduct operations on or with respect to the Assets.
“Permitted Encumbrances” means:
(a)  The  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Leases  and  other  instruments  of  record  relating  to  the  Wells,  including  lessor’s
royalties,  overriding  royalties,  net  profits,  carried  interests,  reversionary  interests  and  similar  burdens  (payable  or  in
suspense) to the extent that such terms and conditions do not, individually or in the aggregate, operate to reduce the
Net Revenue Interest of any Property below that set forth on Exhibit A or Exhibit B for such Property or increase the
Working  Interest  for  any  Property  above  that  set  forth  on Exhibit  A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  without  a
proportionate increase in the corresponding Net Revenue Interest for such Property;
6
(b)  Liens  for  current  period  Taxes,  or  assessments  not  yet  delinquent  or,  if  delinquent,  that  are  being  contested  in
good faith in the normal course of business, responsibility for which shall be retained by Goodrich LLC after Closing,
and adequate cash reserves for which are maintained in accordance with GAAP;
(c)  All  rights  to  consent  by,  required  notices  to,  filings  with,  or  other  actions  by  a  Governmental  Authority,  in
connection with the conveyance of the applicable Asset if the same are customarily obtained after such conveyance;
(d) Conventional rights of reassignment triggered by Goodrich LLC’s (or, after the Closing, Buyer’s) express indication
of  its  intention  to  release  or  abandon  its  interest  prior  to  expiration  of  the  primary  term  or  other  termination  of  such
interest;
(e)  Easements,  rights  of  way,  servitudes,  permits,  surface  leases  and  other  similar  rights  with  respect  to  surface
operations, on, over, or in respect of any Asset, or restrictions on access thereto, that do not materially interfere with
or impair the exploration, development and/or operation of the affected Asset;
(f)  The  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Material  Agreements  described  on Exhibit  C,  to  the  extent  the  same  do  not,
individually or in the aggregate, reduce the Net Revenue Interest for any Property below that set forth in Exhibit A or
Exhibit B  for  such  Property  or  increase  the  Working  Interest  for  any  Property  above  that  set  forth  in Exhibit  A  or
Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  without  a  proportionate  increase  in  the  corresponding  Net  Revenue  Interest  for  such
Property;
(g) Materialmens’, mechanics’, operators’ or other similar liens arising in the ordinary course of business incidental to
operation of the Assets if such liens and charges have not yet become delinquent or if their validity is being contested
in good faith by appropriate action and Goodrich LLC retains responsibility therefor after Closing, and, in each case,
adequate cash reserves for the payment thereof are maintained in accordance with GAAP;
(h)  Preferential  rights  to  purchase  or  similar  agreements  (i)  with  respect  to  which  waivers  or  consents  are  obtained
from the appropriate parties for the transactions contemplated hereby, (ii) with respect to which required notices have
been  given  for  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  to  the  holders  of  such  rights  and  the  appropriate  period  for
asserting such rights has expired without an exercise of such rights or (iii) which are listed on Schedule 4.22;
(i)  Third  party  consents  to  assignments  or  similar  agreements  (i)  with  respect  to  which  waivers  or  consents  are
obtained  from  the  appropriate  parties  for  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby,  (ii)  with  respect  to  which  required
notices  have  been  given  for  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  to  the  holders  of  such  rights  and  the  appropriate
period for asserting such rights has expired without an exercise of such rights, request for further information about
the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement  or  any  Party  to  this  Agreement,  or  other  objection  to  the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement, or (iii) with respect to which arrangements (acceptable to Buyer in its
sole discretion) have been made by the Parties to allow Buyer to receive substantially the same economic benefits as
if all such waivers and consents had been obtained;
7
(j)  Errors  or  omissions  in  documents  related  to  the  Assets  caused  by  oversights  in  drafting,  executing,  or
acknowledging  that  (i)  a  prudent  operator,  when  applying  industry  standards,  would  regard  as  immaterial,  (ii)  do  not
affect  and  have  not  historically  affected  the  operations  of  or  production  from  the  Assets,  and  (iii)  do  not  reduce  the
Net Revenue Interest for any Property below that set forth in Exhibit A or Exhibit B for such Property or increase the
Working  Interest  for  any  Property  above  that  set  forth  in Exhibit  A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  without  a
proportionate increase in the corresponding Net Revenue Interest for such Property;
(k) Defects or irregularities of title as to which the relevant statute(s) of limitations or prescription would bar any attack
or claim against the applicable Seller Party’s title (or, after the Closing, Buyer’s);
(l)  Imbalances,  whether  resulting  from  overproduction  or  underproduction,  and  plugging  and  surface  restoration
obligations;
(m)  Defects  or  irregularities  resulting  from  or  related  to  probate  proceedings  or  the  lack  thereof  that  have  been
outstanding for ten years or more;
(n)  The  terms  and  conditions  of  unitizations,  communitizations,  poolings  and  pooling  agreements,  joint  operating
agreements  and  production  sales  agreements  to  the  extent  that  such  terms  and  conditions  (other  than  the  non-
consent provisions of joint operating agreements) do not, individually or in the aggregate, operate to reduce the Net
Revenue  Interest  of  any  Property  below  that  set  forth  on Exhibit A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  or  increase  the
Working  Interest  for  any  Property  above  that  set  forth  on Exhibit  A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  without  a
proportionate increase in the corresponding Net Revenue Interest for such Property;
(o)  Rights  reserved  to  or  vested  in  any  Governmental  Authority  to  control  or  regulate  any  of  the  Assets  and  the
applicable  laws,  rules  and  regulations  of  such  Governmental  Authority,  except  to  the  extent  any  of  the  same  have
been  applied  or  exercised,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  in  a  manner  that  operates  to  reduce  the  Net  Revenue
Interest  for  any  Property  below  that  set  forth  in Exhibit  A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  or  increase  the  Working
Interest  for  any  Property  above  that  set  forth  in Exhibit  A  or Exhibit  B  for  such  Property  without  a  proportionate
increase in the corresponding Net Revenue Interest for such Property;
(p) Any maintenance of uniform interest provision in an operating agreement if waived by the party or parties having
the right to enforce such provision or if the violation of such provision would not give rise to the unwinding of the sale
of the affected Asset hereunder; or
8
(q) Such other defects or irregularities of title as Buyer may have waived in writing or by which Buyer shall be deemed
to have waived pursuant to the provisions of Section 7.2(b).
“Person”  means  any  individual,  firm,  corporation,  partnership,  limited  liability  company,  joint  venture,  association,
trust, unincorporated organization, Governmental Authority or any other entity.
“Preferential Asset” is defined in Section 6.4(b).
“Preferential Rights” means any right or agreement that enables any Person to purchase or acquire any Asset or any
interest therein or portion thereof as a result of or in connection with (a) the sale, assignment or other transfer of any
Asset or any interest therein or portion thereof, or (b) the execution or delivery of this Agreement or the consummation
or performance of the terms and conditions contemplated by this Agreement.
“Properties” is defined in Section 2.2(c).
“Property  Costs”  means  all  amounts  attributable  to  the  operation  and  ownership  of  the  Assets,  including  capital
expenses, joint interest billings, lease operating expenses, lease rental and maintenance costs, royalties, overriding
royalties, leasehold payments, Taxes (other than Excluded Taxes), drilling expenses, workover expenses, geological,
geophysical and any other exploration or development expenditures chargeable under applicable operating agreements
or  other  agreements  consistent  with  the  standards  established  by  the  Council  of  Petroleum  Accountants  Societies,
Inc.; provided,  however,  that  Property  Costs  shall  not  include  any  liabilities,  losses,  costs,  or  expenses  arising
attributable to:
(a)  claims,  investigations,  administrative  proceedings,  arbitration  or  litigation  directly  or  indirectly  arising  out  of  or
resulting from actual or claimed personal injury or other torts, illness or death;
(b) property damage (other than damage to structures, fences, irrigation systems and other fixtures, crops, livestock,
and other personal property in the ordinary course of business);
(c) violation of any Law (or a private cause or right of action under any Law);
(d)  environmental  damage  or  liabilities,  including  Remediation  obligations  for  any  contamination  of  groundwater,
surface water, soil, sediments, or Facilities;
(e) title and environmental claims (including claims that Leases have terminated);
(f)  claims  of  improper  calculation  or  payment  of  royalties  (including  overriding  royalties  and  other  burdens  on
production) related to deduction of post-production costs or use of posted or index prices or prices paid by Affiliates;
9
(g) gas balancing and other production balancing obligations;
(h) Casualty Losses; or
(i)  any  claims  for  indemnification,  contribution,  or  reimbursement  from  any  third  Person  with  respect  to  liabilities,
losses,  costs,  and  expenses  of  the  type  described  in  preceding  clauses  (a)  through  (h),  whether  such  claims  are
made pursuant to contract or otherwise.
“Purchase Price” is defined in Section 3.1.
“Purchase Price Adjustments” is defined in Section 11.2.
“Records” is defined in Section 2.2(f).
“Remediation”  and  its  syntactical  variants  mean  the  implementation  and  completion  of  any  remedial,  removal,
response, construction, repair, closure, disposal, restoration, or other corrective actions required under Environmental
Laws.
“Restricted Business”  means  the  exploration,  development,  exploitation,  or  production  of  oil,  natural  gas,  or  natural
gas liquids.
“Retained Asset” is defined in Section 6.4(d).
“Retained Obligations” is defined in Section 13.1.
“Schedule” means any disclosure Schedule attached to this Agreement.
“SEC” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
“Seller  Indemnitees”  means  the  Seller  Parties  and  their  Affiliates,  together  with  their  respective  officers,  directors,
managers, employees, agents, partners, representatives, members, shareholders, affiliates, subsidiaries, successors
and assigns.
“Seller Operated Assets” means Assets operated by Goodrich LLC or its Affiliates.
“Seller Parties” is defined in the preamble of this Agreement.
“Seller’s  Knowledge”  means  the  actual  knowledge  of  any  fact,  circumstance  or  condition  by  a  current  officer  of
Goodrich LLC or Goodrich Corp, or any operational supervisory or field-level supervisory employee of any Seller Party
or their Affiliates with authority or responsibility over or including any of the Assets.
“Statement” is defined in Section 11.3(a).
“Surface Rights” is defined in Section 2.2(h).
10
“Suspense Funds” means proceeds of production and associated penalties and interest, if any, in respect of any of
the  Assets  that  are  payable  to  third  parties  and  are  being  held  in  suspense  by  the  applicable  Seller  Party  as  the
operator of such Assets.
“Tax” means:
(a)  federal,  state,  local,  or  foreign  taxes,  charges,  fees  imposts,  levies,  or  other  assessments,  including  all  net
income,  gross  receipts,  franchise,  capital,  sales,  use,  ad  valorem,  value  added,  transfer,  profits,  inventory,  capital
stock,  license,  withholding,  payroll,  employment,  social  security,  unemployment,  excise,  severance,  stamp,
occupation, property and estimated taxes, fees, assessments, and charges of any kind whatsoever;
(b)  all  interest,  penalties,  fines,  additions  to  tax,  or  additional  amounts  imposed  by  any  Governmental  Authority  in
connection with any item described in subsection (a); and
(c)  any  liability  for  any  item  described  in  subsections  (a)  and  (b),  payable  by  reason  of  contract,  assumption,
transferee liability, operation of Law, or otherwise.
“Tax Return” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.23.
“Territory” means that portion of Rusk County, Texas outlined on the map attached hereto as Exhibit G.
“Title Defect” is defined in Section 7.2.
“Title Defect Notices” is defined in Section 7.2.
“Title Defect Rejection Notice” is defined in Section 7.5.
“Title Defect Value” is defined in Section 7.2.
“Transfer Requirement”  means  any  consent,  approval,  authorization  or  permit  of,  or  filing  with  or  notification  to,  any
Person  which  is  required  to  be  obtained,  made  or  complied  with  for  or  in  connection  with  any  sale,  assignment  or
transfer  of  any  Asset  or  any  interest  therein,  other  than  any  consent  of,  notice  to,  filing  with,  or  other  action  by
Governmental  Authorities  in  connection  with  the  sale  or  conveyance  of  oil  and/or  gas  leases  or  interests  therein  or
Surface  Rights  or  interests  therein,  if  they  are  not  required  prior  to  the  assignment  of  such  oil  and/or  gas  leases,
Surface  Rights  or  interests  or  they  are  customarily  obtained  subsequent  to  the  sale  or  conveyance  (including
consents from state agencies).
“Transition Services Agreement” means the agreement to be executed by Goodrich LLC and Buyer at Closing, in form
and substance mutually acceptable to both of such Parties, regarding the operation of the Assets during the transition
period set forth therein after Closing.
“Treasury Regulations” means the regulations promulgated by the United States Department of the Treasury pursuant
to and in respect of provisions of the Code. All references herein to Sections of the Treasury Regulations shall include
any corresponding provision or provisions of Treasury Regulations hereafter proposed or adopted.
11
“Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(c).
“Walkaway Sum” is defined in Section 12.1(e).
“Wells” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(b).
“Working Interest” means, with respect to any Property, the interest in and to such Property that is burdened with the
obligation to bear and pay costs and expenses of maintenance, development, and operations on or in connection with
such Property, but without regard to the effect of any royalties, overriding royalties, production payments, net profits
interests, and other similar burdens upon, measured by, or payable out of production therefrom.
Section  1.2 Interpretation and Construction. In interpreting and construing this Agreement, the following principles
shall be followed:
(a) If a term is defined as one part of speech (such as a noun), it shall have a corresponding meaning when used as
another  part  of  speech  (such  as  a  verb).  The  terms  “herein,”  “hereof,”  “hereby,”  and  “hereunder,”  and  other  similar
terms  refer  to  this  Agreement  as  a  whole  and  not  only  to  the  particular  Article,  Section  or  subdivision  in  which  any
such  terms  may  be  employed.  The  terms  “include,”  “includes,”  and  “including”  shall  be  deemed  to  be  followed  by
“without limitation.” The plural shall be deemed to include the singular, and vice versa.
(b)  Unless  the  context  of  this  Agreement  clearly  requires  otherwise,  references  to  Articles,  Sections,  subsections,
Exhibits  and  Schedules  refer  to  the  Articles,  Sections,  and  subsections  of,  and  Exhibits  and  Schedules  to,  this
Agreement.
(c)  Any  accounting  term  not  otherwise  defined  herein  has  the  meaning  assigned  to  it  under  GAAP.  Words  not
otherwise defined herein that have well-known and generally accepted technical or trade meanings in the oil and gas
industry are used herein in accordance with such recognized meanings.
(d)  The  table  of  contents  and  headings  contained  in  this  Agreement  are  for  reference  purposes  only,  and  shall  not
affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.
(e) Each exhibit, attachment, and schedule to this Agreement constitutes a part of this Agreement and is incorporated
herein  by  reference,  but  if  there  is  any  conflict  or  inconsistency  between  the  main  body  of  this  Agreement  and  any
exhibit, attachment, or schedule, the provisions of the main body of this Agreement shall prevail.
(f) Every covenant, term and provision of this Agreement shall be construed simply according to its fair meaning and
not  strictly  for  or  against  any  Party  (notwithstanding  any  rule  of  law  requiring  an  agreement  to  be  strictly  construed
against  the  drafting  party),  it  being  understood  that  the  Parties  to  this  Agreement  are  sophisticated  and  have  had
adequate  opportunity  and  means  to  retain  counsel  to  represent  their  interests  and  to  otherwise  negotiate  the
provisions of this Agreement.
12
(g) Any reference to a statute, regulation or law shall include any amendment thereof or any successor thereto, and
any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(h) Any reference to “$” or “dollars” means United States Dollars.
ARTICLE 2
PURCHASE AND SALE
Section 2.1 Purchase and Sale. At the Closing, and upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Agreement,
Goodrich  LLC  shall  (and  Goodrich  Corp  shall  cause  Goodrich  LLC  to)  sell  to  Buyer,  and  Buyer  shall  purchase  from
Goodrich LLC, the Assets, in exchange for the consideration set forth in this Agreement and the assumption by Buyer
of the Assumed Obligations attributable to the Assets.
Section 2.2 The Assets. As used herein, the term “Assets” means all of Goodrich LLC’s right, title and interest in, to
and under the following (except to the extent constituting Excluded Assets):
(a) The oil, gas, and/or mineral leases described on Exhibit A, and any other oil, gas, and/or mineral lease on which
any  of  the  Assets  are  located,  together  with  all  interests  (including  carried  interests,  royalty  interests,  overriding
royalty interests, mineral interests, production payments and net profits interests) in such leases or derived from such
leases in or to any pools or units that include any lands covered by any such leases or that include any Wells, and all
tenements,  hereditaments,  and  appurtenances  belonging  to  such  leases  and  such  pooled  areas  or  units  (the
“Leases”);
(b)  All  existing  oil  and/or  gas  wells  located  on  the  lands  covered  by  the  Leases,  whether  producing,  shut-in,  or
temporarily  abandoned,  including  those  wells  (and  possible  well  locations  and  exploratory  prospects)  specifically
described in Exhibit B, together with all injection and disposal wells on such lands (collectively, the “Wells”);
(c) The unitization, pooling and communitization agreements, declarations and orders, and the units created thereby,
and all other such agreements relating to the Leases and/or the Wells and to the production of Hydrocarbons, if any,
attributable to the Leases and/or the Wells (the “Units,” and, together with the Wells and Leases, the “Properties”);
(d)  All  production  facilities,  structures,  tubular  goods,  well  equipment,  lease  equipment,  production  equipment,
pipelines, inventory and all other personal property, fixtures and facilities used in connection with the Properties (the
“Facilities”);
(e)  All  existing  and  effective  contracts,  agreements  and  instruments  by  which  any  of  the  Assets  are  bound  or  that
directly relate to or are directly applicable to any
13
transportation  and  processing  contracts,  operating
Asset  (including  sales,  purchase,  exchange,  gathering, 
agreements,  balancing  agreements,  farmin  or  farmout  agreements,  service  agreements,  water  rights  agreements,
production  handling  agreements,  exploration  agreements,  and  participation  agreements),  including  the  agreements
described  in Exhibit C,  but  (subject  to Section  6.4)  excluding  any  contract,  agreement  or  instrument  to  the  extent
transfer thereof is restricted by third-party agreement or applicable Law;
(f)  All  records,  files,  orders,  maps,  data,  interpretations,  seismic  data,  geological  and  geographic  information,
schedules, reports and logs that relate to the Properties’ seismic, engineering, geological, and geophysical data and
other records and data relating to the Assets, but (subject to Section 6.4) only to the extent not subject to unaffiliated
third  party  contractual  restrictions  on  disclosure  or  transfer  and  only  to  the  extent  related  to  the  Assets  (the
“Records”);
(g) All rights and benefits arising from or in connection with any Imbalances existing as of the Effective Time;
(h)  To  the  extent  transferable,  all  easements,  permits,  licenses,  servitudes,  rights-of-way,  surface  leases  and  other
surface  rights  appurtenant  to,  and  used  or  held  for  use  primarily  in  connection  with,  the  Properties,  including  those
identified on Schedule 2.2(h) (“Surface Rights”);
(i) All Hydrocarbons produced from or attributable to the Properties from and after the Effective Time;
(j) All Hydrocarbon inventories produced from or attributable to the Properties that are in storage or existing in stock
tanks at the Effective Time, whether produced before, on or after the Effective Time;
(k) The Suspense Funds;
(l) All trade credits, accounts receivable, notes receivable, take-or-pay amounts receivable, and other receivables and
general intangibles, attributable to the Assets with respect to periods of time from and after the Effective Time; and
(m) All liens and security interests in favor of Goodrich LLC or its Affiliates, whether choate or inchoate, under any law
or contract, to the extent arising from, or relating to, the ownership, operation, or sale or other disposition on or after
the Effective Time of any of the other Assets or to the extent arising in favor of Goodrich LLC as a non-operator of
any Non-Operated Property.
Section  2.3 Excluded Assets.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  the  Assets  shall  not  include,  and  there  is  excepted,
reserved and excluded from the sale contemplated hereby (collectively, the “Excluded Assets”):
14
(a)  All  trade  credits,  accounts  receivable,  notes  receivable,  and  other  receivables  attributable  to  the  Assets  with
respect to any period of time prior to the Effective Time;
(b)  All  deposits,  cash,  checks  in  process  of  collection,  cash  equivalents,  and  funds  attributable  to  the  Assets  with
respect to any period of time prior to the Effective Time;
(c)  All  claims  and  causes  of  action  of  each  Seller  Party  arising  from  acts,  omissions,  or  events  relating  to  (i)  the
Assets,  or  damage  to  or  destruction  of  the  Assets,  occurring  prior  to  the  Effective  Time  or  (ii)  any  of  the  Excluded
Assets or the Retained Assets;
(d) All rights, titles, claims, and interests of each Seller Party arising prior to the Effective Time under any policy or
agreement  of  insurance  or  bond,  or  to  any  insurance  proceeds  or  awards  relating  to  events,  circumstances,  or
occurrences prior to the Effective Time;
(e)  All  claims  of  each  Seller  Party  for  refund  of,  or  loss  carry  forwards  with  respect  to,  (i)  ad  valorem,  severance,
production, property, excise, or any other taxes attributable to any period prior to the Effective Time (even if applied
for after the Effective Time), (ii) income or franchise taxes imposed on each Seller Party or their Affiliates, or (iii) any
taxes attributable to the Excluded Assets or the Retained Assets;
(f)  All  amounts  due  or  payable  to  a  Seller  Party  as  adjustments  or  refunds  under  any  Material  Agreements  with
respect to any period prior to the Effective Time (excluding all rights and interests with respect to Imbalances existing
as of the Effective Time conveyed as part of the Assets);
(g)  All  proceeds,  income  or  revenues  (and  any  security  or  other  deposits  made)  to  the  extent  attributable  to  (i)  the
Assets  prior  to  the  Effective  Time  (excluding  all  rights  and  interests  with  respect  to  Imbalances  existing  as  of  the
Effective Time conveyed as part of the Assets) or (ii) the Excluded Assets or the Retained Assets;
(h) All amounts due or payable to any Seller Party as adjustments to insurance premiums related to any period prior to
the Effective Time;
(i)  All  of  each  Seller  Party’s  proprietary  computer  software,  technology,  patents,  trade  secrets,  copyrights,  names,
trademarks,  logos  and  other  intellectual  property  (excluding  the  interests  in  seismic,  engineering,  geological,  and
geophysical data conveyed as part of the Assets);
(j) All documents and instruments of each Seller Party that may be protected by an attorney-client privilege;
15
(k) Audit rights arising under any of the Contracts or otherwise with respect to any period prior to the Effective Time or
to any of the Excluded Assets or Retained Assets;
(l) All corporate minute books, financial records, and other business records of each Seller Party that relate to each
Seller Party’s business generally;
(m) All personal computers and associated peripherals, and radio and telephone equipment;
(n) All assets and interests excluded from the “Assets” pursuant to Article 7 or Article 8; and
(o) All items listed on Exhibit E.
Section 2.4 Receipts and Credits.
(a) Allocation of Income and Costs. If the Closing occurs:
(i)  Buyer  shall  be  entitled  to  all  revenues,  production,  proceeds,  income,  and  products  from  or  attributable  to  the
Assets from and after the Effective Time, and to all other income, proceeds, receipts, and credits earned (including
delay  rentals,  shut-in  royalties,  and  lease  bonuses)  with  respect  to  the  Assets  on  or  after  the  Effective  Time,  and
shall be responsible for (and entitled to any refunds and indemnities with respect to) all Property Costs incurred from
and after the Effective Time; and
(ii)  Except  as  expressly  set  forth  to  the  contrary  herein,  Goodrich  LLC  shall  be  entitled  to  all  revenues,  production,
proceeds, income, and products from or attributable to the Assets prior to the Effective Time, and to all other income,
proceeds, receipts, and credits earned (including delay rentals, shut-in royalties, and lease bonuses) with respect to
the  Assets  prior  to  Effective  Time,  and  shall  be  responsible  for  (and  entitled  to  any  refunds  and  indemnities  with
respect to) all Property Costs incurred prior to the Effective Time.
(b) Determinations. The terms “earned” and “incurred,” as used in this Agreement, shall be interpreted in accordance
with GAAP and the standards established by the Council of Petroleum Accountants Societies, Inc. For purposes of
this Section 2.4,  determination  of  whether  Property  Costs  are  attributable  to  the  period  before  or  after  the  Effective
Time shall be based on when services are rendered, when the goods are delivered, or when the work is performed. For
clarification, the date an item or work is ordered is not the date of such transaction for interpretive purposes, but rather
the date on which the item ordered is delivered to the job site, or the date on which the work ordered is performed,
shall be the relevant date. For purposes of allocating Hydrocarbon production, revenues, proceeds, income, accounts
receivable, and products under this Section 2.4:
16
(i)  liquid  Hydrocarbons  shall  be  deemed  to  be  “from  or  attributable  to”  the  Properties  when  they  pass  through  the
pipeline  connecting  into  the  storage  facilities  into  which  they  are  run,  or,  if  there  is  no  such  facility,  the  applicable
lease automatic custody transfer meters through which they are run; and
(ii) gaseous Hydrocarbons shall be deemed to be “from or attributable to” the Properties when they pass through the
delivery point sales meters on the pipelines through which they are transported.
Buyer shall utilize reasonable interpolative procedures to arrive at an allocation of Hydrocarbon production when exact
meter readings or gauging and strapping data is not available.
(c) Allocation of Taxes. Taxes (other than Excluded Taxes), right-of-way fees, insurance premiums and other Property
Costs that are paid periodically shall be prorated based on the number of days in the applicable period falling before,
and  the  number  of  days  in  the  applicable  period  falling  at  or  after,  the  Effective  Time,  except  that  Hydrocarbon
production, severance and similar Taxes shall be prorated based on the number of units actually produced, purchased
or sold or proceeds of sale, as applicable, before, and at or after, the Effective Time. In each case, Buyer shall be
responsible  for  the  portion  allocated  to  the  period  at  and  after  the  Effective  Time  and  Goodrich  LLC  shall  be
responsible for the portion allocated to the period before the Effective Time. After Closing, each Party shall be entitled
to  participate  in  all  joint  interest  audits  and  other  audits  of  Property  Costs  for  which  such  Party  is  responsible  or
revenues to which such Party is entitled (whether entirely or in part) pursuant to this Section 2.4.
(d) Payments.  Except  to  the  extent  the  Purchase  Price  is  adjusted  in  respect  of  such  amount,  if  Buyer  or  a  Seller
Party  receives  any  amount  to  which  the  other  is  entitled  pursuant  to  this Section  2.4,  such  receiving  Party  will
promptly account for and transmit such amount to the other. If Buyer or a Seller Party pays any amount for which the
other is obligated pursuant to this Section 2.4, such paying Party will notify the other, and such other shall promptly
reimburse such Party for such amount.
Section 2.5 Assumed Obligations. If the Closing occurs, from and after the Closing Date, Buyer shall assume, pay
and discharge the following insofar as allocable to the Assets (“Assumed Obligations”), except to the extent the same
constitute Retained Obligations or are matters for which the Seller Parties owe indemnification under Section 13.3:
(a) Any and all Obligations in any way relating to the ownership and/or operation of the Assets arising during, related
to or otherwise attributable to the period commencing with the Effective Time;
(b)  All  plugging,  abandonment,  and  surface  restoration  of  the  oil,  gas,  injection,  water,  or  other  wells  located  on  the
lands covered by the Leases;
(c) All Property Costs and other costs which are for the account of Buyer pursuant to Section 11.2;
(d) The Suspense Funds;
17
(e)  Ad  valorem,  property,  severance  and  other  similar  taxes  or  assessments  based  upon  or  measured  by  the
ownership of the Assets or the production therefrom attributable to any period from and after the Effective Time;
(f) Any and all sales, use, transfer (including real property transfer), stamp, documentary, filing, recordation, and other
similar  fees  and  taxes,  together  with  any  interest,  additions,  or  penalties  with  respect  thereto  and  any  interest  in
respect of such additions or penalties, if any, imposed or required in connection with the sale of the Assets to Buyer
or the filing or recording of all assignments related to the sale of the Assets to Buyer; and
(g) Any and all Environmental Liabilities.
ARTICLE 3
PURCHASE PRICE
Section 3.1 Purchase Price. Subject to any adjustments that may be made pursuant to Section 11.2, the purchase
price  for  the  Assets  will  be  $95,000,000  (the  “Purchase  Price”).  Contemporaneously  with  the  execution  of  this
Agreement, Buyer has paid the Deposit Amount to Bank of Texas, N.A., a national banking association (the “Escrow
Agent”), and the Parties have entered into the Escrow Agreement. If the Closing occurs, the Deposit Amount shall be
applied  as  a  credit  towards  the  Purchase  Price  in  accordance  with  the  Escrow  Agreement.  If  the  Closing  does  not
occur  as  a  result  of  the  material  breach  by  Buyer  of  the  terms  of  this  Agreement  and  there  has  been  no  material
breach by the Seller Parties of the terms of this Agreement, then Goodrich LLC shall have the right, as its sole and
exclusive remedy for Buyer’s material breach of this Agreement, to retain the Deposit Amount as liquidated damages
(and not as a penalty). If the Closing does not occur for any other reason, the Deposit Amount shall be immediately
returned to Buyer.
Section 3.2 Allocation of Purchase Price. The Parties agree that the unadjusted Purchase Price is allocated among
the  Assets  in  the  amounts  set  forth  in Exhibit  F  (the  “Allocation  Schedule”).  The  “Allocated  Value”  for  any  Asset
equals the portion of the unadjusted Purchase Price allocated to such Asset on the Allocation Schedule. The Parties
agree (a) that the Allocated Values, as adjusted pursuant to this Agreement, shall be used by the Parties as the basis
for reporting Asset values and other items for purposes of all federal, state and local Tax Returns, including Internal
Revenue  Service  Form  8594,  which  the  Parties  shall  timely  file  with  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  (if  required  to  be
filed) and (b) that neither they nor their Affiliates will take positions inconsistent with such Allocated Values in notices
to Governmental Authorities, in audit or other proceedings with respect to Taxes, in notices to preferential purchase
right  holders  or  in  other  documents  or  notices  relating  to  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement  unless
required  to  do  so  by  a  final  determination  as  defined  in  Section  1313  of  the  Code.  The  Parties  shall  confer  and
cooperate  on  any  revisions  to  the  allocation  of  the  Purchase  Price,  including  reporting  any  matters  that  require
updating to be consistent with the agreed allocation.
18
ARTICLE 4
SELLER PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
The Seller Parties jointly and severally represent and warrant to Buyer as follows:
Section 4.1 Organization and Standing. Goodrich LLC is a limited liability company, duly organized, validly existing
and  in  good  standing  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  and  is  duly  qualified  to  carry  on  its  business  in  the
states  where  the  Assets  are  located.  Goodrich  Corp  is  a  corporation,  duly  organized,  validly  existing  and  in  good
standing under the laws of the State of Delaware and is duly qualified to carry on its business  in  each  State  where
failure  to  be  so  qualified  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  adversely  affect  the  Assets  or  consummation  of  the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
Section 4.2 Legal Power. Each Seller Party has all requisite power and authority to carry on its business as presently
conducted  and  to  execute,  deliver  and  perform  this  Agreement  (and  all  documents  required  to  be  executed  and
delivered  by  such  Seller  Party  at  Closing).  The  execution,  delivery  and  performance  of  this  Agreement  (and  such
documents)  and  the  consummation  of  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  (and  thereby)  will  not  violate,  or  be  in
conflict  with,  any  material  provision  of  any  Seller  Party’s  governing  documents  or  any  material  provisions  of  any
agreement  or  instrument  to  which  it  is  a  party  or  by  which  it  is  bound,  or,  to  Seller’s  Knowledge,  any  judgment,
decree, order, statute, rule or regulation applicable to any Seller Party.
Section 4.3 Authorization and Enforceability. The execution, delivery and performance by each Seller Party of this
Agreement  (and  all  documents  required  to  be  executed  and  delivered  by  any  Seller  Party  at  Closing),  and  the
consummation  of  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  and  thereby,  have  been  duly  and  validly  authorized  by  all
necessary action on the part of each Seller Party. This Agreement constitutes (and, at Closing, such documents shall
constitute) each Seller Party’s legal, valid and binding obligation, enforceable against such Seller Party in accordance
with its terms, subject, however, to the effects of bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium and other laws
for  the  protection  of  creditors,  as  well  as  to  general  principles  of  equity,  regardless  whether  such  enforceability  is
considered in a proceeding in equity or at law.
Section  4.4 Liability  for  Broker’s  Fees.  No  Seller  Party  has  incurred  any  liability,  contingent  or  otherwise,  for
brokers’ or finders’ fees relating to the transactions contemplated hereby for which Buyer will have any responsibility.
Section  4.5 No  Bankruptcy.  There  are  no  bankruptcy,  reorganization,  or  receivership  proceedings  pending,  being
contemplated by, or, to Seller’s Knowledge, threatened against any Seller Party by any third Person.
Section  4.6 No  Conflicts.  The  execution,  delivery,  performance  and  consummation  of  this  Agreement  (and  the
transactions contemplated hereby) do not and will not:
(a)  Violate,  conflict  with  or  constitute  a  default  or  an  event  that,  with  notice  or  lapse  of  time  or  both,  would  be  a
default, breach or violation under any term or provision
19
of any instrument, agreement, contract, commitment, license, promissory note, conditional sales contract, indenture,
mortgage, deed of trust, lease or other agreement, instrument or arrangement to which any Seller Party is a party or
by which any Seller Party or any of the Assets is bound (including the governing documents of any Seller Party);
(b) Violate, conflict or constitute a breach of any Law by which any Seller Party or any of the Assets is bound, or give
any Governmental Authority the right to revoke, withdraw, suspend, cancel, terminate, or modify any authorization or
Permit that relates to the Assets; or
(c)  Except  with  respect  to  the  Preferential  Rights  and  Transfer  Requirements  listed  on Schedule 4.22,  result  in  the
creation,  imposition  or  continuation  of  any  adverse  claim  or  interest,  or  any  lien,  encumbrance,  charge,  equity  or
restriction of any nature whatsoever, on or affecting any Seller Party or the Assets.
Section 4.7 Consents and Approvals. No filing or registration with, and no permit, authorization, certificate, waiver,
license, consent or approval of, any Governmental Authority is necessary for the execution, delivery or performance
by any Seller Party of this Agreement (other than existing permits and other existing approvals).
Section 4.8 Litigation.
(a) No Seller Party has received a written claim or written demand notice that has not been resolved and that would
materially adversely affect the Assets;
(b) There are no actions, suits, governmental investigations, written governmental inquiries or proceedings pending or,
to Seller’s Knowledge, threatened in writing against any Seller Party or any of the Assets, in any court or by or before
any Governmental Authority or arbitrator with respect to the Assets or that would affect the Seller Parties’ ability to
consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, or materially adversely affect the Assets; and
(c)  There  is  no  existing  award,  decision,  injunction,  order,  ruling,  subpoena,  or  verdict  entered,  issued,  made,  or
rendered by any court, administrative agency, or other Governmental Authority that materially and adversely affects
the use, ownership, and/or operation of the Assets.
Section 4.9 Insurance. Goodrich LLC maintains, and until the Closing Date shall maintain, with respect to the Seller
Operated Assets, at least the insurance coverage described on Schedule 4.9.
Section 4.10 Liens. Except for Permitted Encumbrances, the Assets shall be conveyed to Buyer at the Closing free
and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
Section  4.11 Judgments.  There  are  no  unsatisfied  judgments  or  injunctions  issued  by  a  court  of  competent
jurisdiction  or  other  Governmental  Authority  outstanding  against  any  Seller  Party  or  any  Asset  that  would  be
reasonably  expected  to  materially  interfere  with  the  operation  of  the  Assets  or  impair  any  Seller  Party’s  ability  to
consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
20
Section  4.12 Compliance  with  Law.  Goodrich  LLC’s  ownership  and  operation  of  the  Seller  Operated  Assets  is  in
material  compliance  with  all  applicable  Laws  (and,  to  Seller’s  Knowledge,  the  ownership  and  operation  of  the  Non-
Operated Assets is in material compliance with all applicable Laws). No Seller Party has received notice of a material
violation  of  any  Law,  or  any  judgment,  decree  or  order  of  any  court,  applicable  to  any  Seller  Party’s  business  or
operations that remains uncured, and that would, individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on
the Assets (taken as a whole).
Section 4.13 Rights to Production. Except with respect to Imbalances or as set forth on Schedule 4.13, no Person
has any call upon, right to purchase or to market, option to purchase or market, or similar rights with respect to any
portion of the Hydrocarbons produced from the Seller Operated Assets after the Effective Time that is not terminable
without penalty on less than three months’ notice.
Section  4.14 Take-or-Pay  Arrangements.  With  respect  to  the  Seller  Operated  Assets,  Goodrich  LLC  has  not
received  any  prepayments  or  buydowns,  or  entered  into  any  take-or-pay  or  forward  sale  arrangements,  such  that
Goodrich LLC will be obligated after the Effective Time to make deliveries of Hydrocarbons produced from the Assets
without receiving full payment therefor.
Section 4.15 Material Agreements. Except where a breach would not have a material adverse effect upon the Assets
taken as a whole, (i) all Material Agreements are listed on Exhibit C, (ii) each Material Agreement is in full force and
effect and represents the legal, valid and binding obligation of the parties thereto, enforceable in accordance with its
terms, (iii) no Seller Party is and, to Seller’s Knowledge, no other party is, in breach of any Material Agreement, and
(iv)  no  Seller  Party  has  received  or  delivered  notice  of  a  default  or  breach  with  respect  to  any  Material  Agreement.
Prior  to  the  date  of  this  Agreement,  the  Seller  Parties  have  made  available  to  Buyer  or  its  representatives  true  and
complete copies of each Material Agreement and all amendments and other modifications thereto.
Section  4.16 Compliance  With  Leases.  Goodrich  LLC  is  in  compliance  in  all  material  respects  with  the  Leases,
including  all  express  and  implied  covenants  thereunder,  and  no  written  demands  or  notices  of  default  or  non-
compliance have been issued to or received by the Seller Parties. Except proceeds attributable to interests being held
in suspense in accordance with prudent industry practice, all proceeds of production which Goodrich LLC is disbursing
or  is  required  to  disburse  to  third  parties  have  been  and  are  being  accounted  for  under  appropriate  division  orders,
transfer orders or similar documents signed by or otherwise clearly binding on the parties receiving such proceeds and
reflecting as to each party the decimal interest of such party.
Section 4.17 Payouts. No Wells are subject to a revision or other adjustment at some level of cost recovery or payout
other than as expressly set forth on Exhibit B.
21
Section  4.18 Non-Consent Operations. Goodrich LLC has not elected not to participate in any operation or activity
proposed  with  respect  to  any  Asset  which  could  result  in  any  of  Goodrich  LLC’s  (or,  after  the  Closing,  Buyer’s)
interest in such Asset becoming subject to a penalty or forfeiture as a result of such election.
Section  4.19 Royalties  and  Rentals.  All  bonuses,  delay  rentals,  minimum  royalties  and  royalties,  other  than
suspended royalties, with respect to the Seller Operated Assets (and, to Seller’s Knowledge, with respect to the Non-
Operated Assets) have been timely and correctly paid in accordance with applicable Leases and Laws.
Section 4.20 Permits. Goodrich LLC has maintained and is maintaining all material Permits with respect to the Seller
Operated  Assets.  The  Seller  Operated  Assets  (and,  to  Seller’s  Knowledge,  the  Non-Operated  Assets)  are  in
compliance  with  applicable  Laws,  Permits,  rules,  regulations,  ordinances  and  orders.  No  event  has  occurred  which
permits, or after the giving of notice or lapse of time or both would permit, the revocation or termination of any Permit
or the imposition of any restrictions of such a nature as may limit the operation or use of the Assets as historically
conducted.
Section  4.21 Imbalances.  Except  as  set  forth  on Schedule  4.21,  as  of  the  date  of  this  Agreement  there  are  no
Imbalances  attributable  to  the  Seller  Operated  Assets.  No  Seller  Party  has  received  a  notice  from  an  applicable
operator relating to any of the Assets that an Imbalance constitutes all of a Seller Party’s (or its Affiliate’s) share of
ultimately recoverable reserves in any balancing area.
Section  4.22 Preferential Rights and Transfer Requirements.  Except  as  set  forth  on Schedule 4.22,  there  are  no
Preferential Rights or Transfer Requirements attributable or with respect to any of the Assets (or attributable to or with
respect to any real or personal property of Goodrich LLC that would be an Asset but for such Transfer Requirements).
Section 4.23 Taxes and Assessments.
(a)  (i)  The  Seller  Parties  have  filed,  or  caused  to  be  filed  all  material  Tax  returns,  declarations,  reports,  claims  for
refund or information return or statements relating to Taxes (a “Tax Return”) that they have been required to file, either
separately or as a member of a consolidated group, pursuant to all applicable Laws, (ii) all Tax Returns filed by the
Seller  Parties  (or  that  include  a  Seller  Party  on  a  consolidated  basis)  are  true,  correct,  and  complete,  and  (iii)  the
Seller Parties have paid all Taxes that have become due pursuant to those Tax Returns or otherwise, or pursuant to
any assessment received by a Seller Party, to the extent not being contested in good faith.
(b) No Asset is subject to a Tax partnership agreement or provision requiring a partnership income Tax Return to be
filed under applicable Law.
(c) There are no Tax liens on any of the Assets except for Permitted Encumbrances.
22
Section  4.24 Wells  and  Equipment.  With  respect  to  the  Seller  Operated  Assets  (and,  to  Seller’s  Knowledge,  with
respect to the Non-Operated Assets):
(a)  All  Wells  have  been  drilled  and  completed  at  legal  locations  and  within  the  limits  permitted  by  all  applicable
Leases, contracts, and pooling or unit agreements;
(b) No Well is subject to penalties on allowables due to overproduction or any other violation of Law;
(c)  There  are  no  Wells  or  Facilities  located  on  the  Seller  Operated  Assets  (or,  to  Seller’s  Knowledge,  on  the  Non-
Operated  Assets)  that  (i)  Goodrich  LLC  or  its  Affiliate  (or  the  operator,  in  the  case  of  a  Non-Operated  Asset)  is
currently  obligated  by  any  Law  or  contract  to  currently  plug,  dismantle  or  abandon;  or  (ii)  have  been  plugged,
dismantled, or abandoned in a manner that does not comply in all material respects with applicable Law;
(d)  All  currently  producing  Wells  and  Facilities  are  in  an  operable  state  of  repair  adequate  to  maintain  normal
operations in accordance with past practices, ordinary wear and tear excepted, and, without limiting the foregoing, do
not  contain  junk,  fish,  or  other  obstructions  which  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  materially  interfere  with  drilling,
completion, and recompletion, stimulation, or other operations on, with respect to, or affecting the Properties;
(e)  The  Facilities  include  all  equipment  necessary  for  the  operation  of  the  Seller  Operated  Assets  in  the  ordinary
course as currently operated by Goodrich LLC; and
(f)  The  Assets  include  all  easements,  rights  of  way,  licenses,  and  authorizations  from  Governmental  Authorities
necessary  to  access,  construct,  operate,  maintain,  and  repair  the  Facilities  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  as
currently conducted and in compliance with all applicable Laws.
(g) Exhibit B contains a list of all inactive wells located on the Seller Operated Assets.
Section 4.25 Outstanding Capital Commitments.
(a) There are no outstanding AFEs that are binding on the Assets and that any Seller Party reasonably anticipates will
individually require expenditures by such Seller Party (or, if the Closing occurs, Buyer) or its successors in interest
from and after the Effective Time in excess of $25,000.
(b) No Leases (i) are currently held by payment of shut-in royalties, reworking operations, any substitute for production
in  paying  quantities,  or  any  other  means  other  than  production  in  paying  quantities,  or  (ii)  will  expire,  terminate,  or
otherwise be materially impaired absent actions (other than continued production in paying quantities) by or on behalf
of Goodrich LLC or Buyer, as applicable, within 60 days after the Closing Date.
23
Section 4.26 Absence of Certain Changes. Since the Effective Time (a) the ownership and operation of the Assets
has  been  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  consistent  with  past  practice,  and  (b)  no  Seller  Party  has  taken  any
action or permitted any occurrence with respect to the Assets that would have been prohibited by Section 6.1(c) had
such action or occurrence happened between the date hereof and Closing.
Section 4.27 Environmental Matters.
(a) No Seller Party (or any Affiliate thereof) has received any notice of violation of any Environmental Law relating to
the Assets where such violation has not been cured or otherwise remedied;
(b) No Seller Party (or Affiliate thereof) is in violation of any Environmental Law with respect to any Asset; and
(c) There has been no release into the environment of any Hazardous Material that could reasonably be expected to
cause any Asset to be subject to a material Remediation obligation pursuant to Environmental Laws.
ARTICLE 5
BUYER’S REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Buyer represents and warrants to the Seller Parties as follows:
Section  5.1 Organization and Standing. Buyer is a limited liability company duly organized, validly existing and in
good  standing  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Delaware  and  is  duly  qualified  to  carry  on  its  business  in  each  State
where failure to be so qualified could reasonably be expected to adversely affect the Assets or consummation of the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
Section 5.2 Power. Buyer has all requisite power and authority to carry on its business as presently conducted and to
execute,  deliver  and  perform  this  Agreement  (and  all  documents  required  to  be  executed  and  delivered  by  Buyer  at
Closing). The execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement (and such documents) and the consummation of
the transactions contemplated hereby (and thereby) shall not violate, or be in conflict with, any material provision of
Buyer’s governing documents or any material provisions of any agreement or instrument to which it is a party or by
which it is bound, or, to its knowledge, any judgment, decree, order, statute, rule or regulation applicable to Buyer.
Section 5.3 Authorization and Enforceability. The execution, delivery and performance by Buyer of this Agreement
(and  all  documents  required  to  be  executed  and  delivered  by  Buyer  at  Closing),  and  the  consummation  of  the
transactions  contemplated  hereby  (and  thereby),  have  been  duly  authorized  by  all  necessary  action  on  behalf  of
Buyer. This Agreement constitutes (and, at Closing, such documents shall constitute) Buyer’s legal, valid and
24
binding  obligation,  enforceable  against  Buyer  in  accordance  with  its  terms,  subject,  however,  to  the  effects  of
bankruptcy,  insolvency,  reorganization,  moratorium  and  similar  laws  for  the  protection  of  creditors,  as  well  as  to
general principles of equity, regardless whether such enforceability is considered in a proceeding in equity or at law.
Section 5.4 Liability for Brokers’ Fees. Buyer has not incurred any liability, contingent or otherwise, for brokers’ or
finders’  fees  relating  to  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement  for  which  any  Seller  Party  shall  have  any
responsibility whatsoever.
Section  5.5 Litigation.  There  is  no  action,  suit,  proceeding,  claim  or  investigation  by  any  Person  or  Governmental
Authority that impedes or is likely to impede Buyer’s ability to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby and
to assume the liabilities to be assumed by Buyer under this Agreement, including the Assumed Obligations.
Section 5.6 Securities Law, Access to Data and Information. Buyer is familiar with the Assets, is a knowledgeable,
experienced  and  sophisticated  investor  in  the  oil  and  gas  business,  and  is  an  “accredited  investor”  as  such  term  is
defined  in  Regulation  D  of  the  Securities  Act.  Buyer  understands  and  accepts  the  risks  and  absence  of  liquidity
inherent in ownership of the Assets. Buyer acknowledges that the Assets may be deemed to be “securities” under the
Securities  Act  and  certain  applicable  State  securities  or  Blue  Sky  laws,  and  that  resales  thereof  may  therefore  be
subject to the registration requirements of such acts. The Assets are being acquired solely for Buyer’s own account
for the purpose of investment and not with a view to resale, distribution or granting a participation therein in violation of
any securities Laws.
Section  5.7 Due Diligence.  Without  limiting  or  impairing  any  representation,  warranty,  covenant,  or  agreement  of  a
Seller Party contained in this Agreement, or Buyer’s right to rely thereon, Buyer represents that it has performed, or
shall perform before the Closing, such review and due diligence with respect to the Assets, which includes reviewing
well  data  and  other  files  in  performing  necessary  evaluations,  assessments,  and  other  tasks  involved  in  evaluating
the Assets as it deems necessary to enable it to make an informed decision to acquire the Assets under the terms of
this Agreement.
Section  5.8 Basis  of  Buyer’s  Decision.  Buyer  represents  that  by  reason  of  its  knowledge  and  experience  in  the
evaluation,  acquisition,  and  operation  of  oil  and  gas  properties,  Buyer  has  evaluated  the  merits  and  the  risks  of
purchasing  the  Assets  from  Goodrich  LLC,  and  has  formed  an  opinion  based  solely  on  Buyer’s  knowledge  and
experience,  Buyer’s  due  diligence,  and  the  Seller  Parties’  representations,  warranties,  covenants,  and  agreements
contained  in  this  Agreement,  and  not  on  any  other  representations  or  warranties  by  the  Seller  Parties.  Buyer
represents  that  it  has  not  relied  and  shall  not  rely  on  any  statements  by  a  Seller  Party  or  its  representatives  (other
than those representations, warranties, covenants, and agreements of the Seller Parties contained in this Agreement)
in making its decision to enter into this Agreement or to close the transactions contemplated hereby.
Section  5.9 Financial  Ability.  Buyer  has  or  will  have  at  Closing  sufficient  cash,  commitments  from  responsible
lending institutions, available lines of credit, or other sources of immediately available cash to enable it to deliver the
amounts  due  at  Closing  and  to  take  such  other  actions  as  may  be  required  to  consummate  the  transactions
contemplated hereby.
25
Section 5.10 Bargaining Position. Buyer expressly acknowledges and recognizes that the price for which the Seller
Parties  have  agreed  to  sell  the  Assets  and  perform  their  obligations  under  the  terms  of  this  Agreement  has  been
predicated  upon  the  inapplicability  of  the  Texas  Deceptive  Trade  Practices—Consumer  Protection  Act,  V.C.T.A.
BUS & COMM Ann. § 17.41 et seq. (the “DTPA”), or any similar statute, and this waiver of the DTPA, and any similar
statute,  by  Buyer. BUYER  FURTHER  RECOGNIZES  THAT  THE  SELLER  PARTIES,  IN  DETERMINING  TO  PROCEED  WITH
ENTERING INTO THIS AGREEMENT, HAVE EXPRESSLY RELIED ON THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE 5.
ARTICLE 6
COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
Section 6.1 Covenants and Agreements of the Seller Parties. The Seller Parties covenant and agree with Buyer as
follows:
(a) Access to Records; Physical Access to the Leases and Wells. From the date of this Agreement to the Closing,
Goodrich LLC will (and Goodrich Corp will cause Goodrich LLC to):
(i) Make the Records available to Buyer and its representatives for inspection and review at Goodrich Corp’s offices
during  normal  business  hours  to  permit  Buyer  to  perform  its  due  diligence  review.  Subject  to  the  consent  and
cooperation  of  third  Persons,  the  Seller  Parties  will  assist  Buyer  in  its  efforts  to  obtain,  at  Buyer’s  expense,  such
additional information from such Persons as Buyer may reasonably desire. Buyer may inspect the Records and such
additional  information  only  to  the  extent  it  may  do  so  without  violating  any  obligation  of  confidence  or  contractual
commitment of the Seller Parties to a third Person. If disclosure or access is prohibited, the Seller Parties shall use
commercially reasonable efforts to obtain permission to grant such access to Buyer and its representatives, and shall
provide  Buyer  with  as  much  information  or  access  concerning  the  matter  as  is  possible  while  still  complying  with
applicable Laws and the Seller Parties’ obligations; provided that the Seller Parties shall not be required to make any
payments  for  the  benefit  of  any  third  Person  in  order  to  do  so.  EXCEPT  AS  EXPRESSLY  PROVIDED  IN  THIS
AGREEMENT, THE SELLER PARTIES MAKE NO WARRANTY, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES
AS  TO  THE  ACCURACY  OR  COMPLETENESS  OF  THE  RECORDS  AND  OTHER  PERTINENT  DATA  AND
INFORMATION THAT THEY MAY PROVIDE TO BUYER.
(ii) Grant Buyer, by appointment, during normal business hours, physical access to the Properties to allow the Buyer
to conduct, at Buyer’s sole risk and expense, on site inspections and environmental assessments of the Properties.
In  connection  with  any  such  on  site  inspections,  Buyer  agrees  not  to  unreasonably  and  materially  interfere  with  the
normal operation of the Properties and agrees to comply with all requirements of the operators of the Wells. If Buyer
or its agents prepare an environmental assessment of any Lease or Well, Buyer
26
agrees to keep such assessment confidential, unless disclosure is required pursuant to applicable Law, and to furnish
copies  thereof  to  the  Seller  Parties.  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  GRANTING  SUCH  ACCESS,  BUYER  REPRESENTS
THAT  IT  IS  ADEQUATELY  INSURED  AND  WAIVES,  RELEASES  AND  AGREES  TO  INDEMNIFY  THE  SELLER
INDEMNITEES  AGAINST  ALL  CLAIMS  FOR  INJURY  TO,  OR  DEATH  OF,  PERSONS  OR  FOR  DAMAGE  TO
PROPERTY  ARISING  IN  ANY  WAY  FROM  THE  ACCESS  AFFORDED  TO  BUYER  HEREUNDER  OR  THE
ACTIVITIES  OF  BUYER,  REGARDLESS  OF  CAUSE,  INCLUDING  THE  CONCURRENT  NEGLIGENCE  OF  THE
SELLER  PARTIES  AND  THEIR  CONTRACTORS  AND  SUBCONTRACTORS  AND  THEIR  EMPLOYEES,  BUT
EXCLUDING  THE  GROSS  NEGLIGENCE  OR  WILLFUL  MISCONDUCT  OF  ANY  SUCH  PERSON.  THIS  WAIVER,
RELEASE AND INDEMNITY BY BUYER SHALL SURVIVE TERMINATION OF THIS AGREEMENT.
(b) Operation of the Assets. From the date of this Agreement to the Closing, Goodrich LLC shall (and Goodrich Corp
shall cause Goodrich LLC to):
(i)  Maintain  and  operate  the  Seller  Operated  Assets  as  a  reasonably  prudent  operator  in  the  ordinary  course  of
business;
(ii) Pay or cause to be paid its proportionate share of all costs and expenses incurred in connection with the operation
of the Assets;
(iii)  Pay  or  cause  to  be  paid  all  bonuses  and  rentals,  royalties,  overriding  royalties,  shut-in  royalties,  and  minimum
royalties and development and operating expenses, ad valorem, property, production, severance, excise, and similar
taxes,  and  other  payments  incurred  with  respect  to  the  Assets  except  (A)  royalties  held  in  suspense  as  a  result  of
title issues and that do not give any third party a right to cancel an interest in an Asset and (B) expenses or royalties
being contested in good faith, unless the nonpayment of such contested expenses or royalties could result in the loss
of  a  Lease,  in  which  case  Goodrich  LLC  shall  notify  Buyer  and  obtain  Buyer’s  approval  prior  to  withholding  such
payment;
(iv)  Comply  in  all  material  respects  with  all  applicable  Laws,  statutes,  ordinances,  rules,  regulations  and  orders
relating to the Assets;
(v) Maintain the personal property comprising part of the Seller Operated Assets in at least as good a condition as it is
on the date hereof, subject to ordinary wear and tear;
(vi) Keep Buyer reasonably informed regarding current and proposed activities and operations relating to the Assets;
and
(vii) Notify Buyer of ongoing activities and capital expenditures with respect to the Seller Operated Assets in excess
of  $25,000  per  activity  or  expenditure,  net  to  the  interest  constituting  part  of  the  Assets,  other  than  recompletions
(which in all cases are deemed approved by Buyer).
27
(c) Restriction on Operations. From the date of this Agreement to the Closing, Goodrich LLC shall not (and Goodrich
Corp. shall not permit Goodrich LLC to), without Buyer’s consent (which shall not be unreasonably withheld):
(i)  Take  any  action  that  would  cause  its  representations  or  warranties  under  this  Agreement  to  be  incorrect  in  any
material respect (or with respect to representations and warranties qualified by materiality or material adverse effect,
incorrect in any respect) as of the Closing Date;
(ii)  Abandon  any  Seller  Operated  Asset  (except  any  Lease  after  the  expiration  of  its  primary  term  if  not  capable  of
producing in paying quantities);
(iii) Commence, propose, or agree to participate in any single operation with respect to any of the Properties with an
anticipated net cost with respect to the Assets of greater than $25,000, except for emergency operations;
(iv) Enter into, terminate, cancel, or materially amend or modify any Material Agreement or Lease, or enter into any
new farmout, farmin or other similar contract affecting any Asset;
(v)  Make  any  change  to  a  division  order,  revenue  deck  or  expense  deck  relating  to  any  Seller  Operated  Asset  that
causes the Net Revenue Interest or Working Interest in such Asset to differ from that set forth for such Property on
Exhibit B;
(vi) Make any other material change to a division order, revenue deck or expense deck relating to any Seller Operated
Asset  without  written  notice  to  Buyer  (for  such  purposes,  a  customary  change  to  the  ownership  of  an  individual
interest arising from a transfer by sale, gift or death shall not constitute a material change);
(vii)  Make  any  written  or  oral  agreement  allowing  for  the  use  of  land  covered  by  the  Leases  or  the  Units  for  mining
purposes;
(viii) Sell, lease, sublease, transfer, farm out, dispose of or mortgage, pledge, or otherwise encumber all or any part of
the Assets (other than replacement of equipment, Permitted Encumbrances and sales of Hydrocarbons in the ordinary
course of business);
(ix) Permit the lapse of any insurance now in force with respect to the Assets,
28
(x)  Grant  or  create  any  preferential  right  to  purchase,  right  of  first  negotiation,  right  of  first  purchase,  Transfer
Requirement or similar right, obligation or requirement with respect to any Asset; or
(xi) Agree to do any of the foregoing.
(d) Marketing Contracts.  Unless  any  Seller  Party  obtains  the  prior  written  consent  of  Buyer  to  act  otherwise,  such
Seller  Party  shall  not  enter  into  any  new  marketing  contracts  or  agreements  providing  for  the  sale  of  Hydrocarbons
produced from the Seller Operated Assets for a term beyond December 31, 2012.
Section 6.2 Enforcement of Third Party Provisions. To the extent pertaining to the Assets, and from and after the
Effective Time until the first anniversary of the Closing, the Seller Parties shall, at Buyer’s request, use reasonable
efforts to enforce, for the benefit of Buyer, at Buyer’s cost and expense, all of the Seller Parties’ rights against third
Persons under any warranties, guarantees or indemnities given by such third Persons.
Section 6.3 Confidentiality.
(a) All data and information, whether written or oral, obtained from a Seller Party in connection with the transactions
contemplated  hereby,  including  the  Records,  whether  obtained  by  Buyer  before  or  after  the  execution  of  this
Agreement, and data and information generated by Buyer based on data or information obtained from a Seller Party in
connection with the transactions contemplated hereby (collectively, the “Information”), is deemed by the Parties to be
confidential.  Until  the  Closing,  except  as  required  by  Law,  Buyer  and  its  respective  officers,  agents  and
representatives shall hold in strict confidence all Information, except any Information which:
(i) At the time of disclosure by a Seller Party is in the public domain;
(ii) After disclosure by a Seller Party becomes part of the public domain by publication or otherwise, except by breach
of this commitment by Buyer;
(iii) Buyer can establish was rightfully in its possession at the time of disclosure by a Seller Party;
(iv) Buyer rightfully received from third Persons free of any obligation of confidence;
(v) Is developed independently by Buyer without the Information, provided that the Person or Persons developing the
data shall not have had access to the Information; or
(vi)  The  disclosure  of  which  is  reasonably  necessary  in  order  to  comply  with  applicable  Transfer  Requirements  or
Preferential  Rights,  notices  required  to  be  given  under  applicable  contracts  or  to  seek  approvals  and  consents  of
Governmental Authorities for the conveyance of any Assets or the transactions contemplated hereby.
29
(b) Return of Information. If Closing does not occur and this Agreement is terminated, Buyer shall: (i) return to each
Seller Party, as applicable, all copies of the Information in its possession obtained pursuant to any provision of this
Agreement,  which  Information  is  at  the  time  of  termination  required  to  be  held  in  confidence  pursuant  to  this
Section  6.3;  and  (ii)  destroy  any  and  all  notes,  reports,  studies  or  analyses  based  on,  or  incorporating,  the
Information. The terms of this Section 6.3 shall survive termination of this Agreement.
(c) Injunctive Relief. Buyer agrees that the Seller Parties shall not have an adequate remedy at law if Buyer violates
any of the terms of this Section 6.3. In such event, the Seller Parties shall have the right, in addition to any other they
may have, to obtain injunctive relief to restrain any breach or threatened breach of the terms of this Section 6.3, or to
obtain specific enforcement of such terms.
Section 6.4 Preferential Purchase Rights and Transfer Requirements.
(a) Buyer’s purchase of the Assets is expressly subject to all validly existing and applicable Preferential Rights and
Transfer Requirements. Promptly after the date hereof, Goodrich LLC shall prepare and send notices to holders of any
Preferential Rights and Transfer Requirements (which notices shall be in form and substance reasonably satisfactory
to Buyer), and otherwise initiate all procedures which in the Seller Parties’ good faith judgment are reasonably required
to  comply  with  or  obtain  the  waiver  of  all  Preferential  Rights  and  Transfer  Requirements  with  respect  to  the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement. The Seller Parties shall not be obligated to pay any consideration to (or
incur any cost or expense for the benefit of) the holder of any Preferential Right or Transfer Requirement in order to
obtain  the  waiver  thereof  or  compliance  therewith.  The  Seller  Parties  shall  use  commercially  reasonable  efforts  to
cause the holders of Transfer Requirements to consent to, or otherwise waive the Transfer Requirements applicable
to, the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
(b)  Any  Preferential  Right  must  be  exercised  subject  to  all  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  this  Agreement.  The
portion  of  the  Purchase  Price  to  be  allocated  to  any  Asset  or  portion  thereof  affected  by  a  Preferential  Right  (a
“Preferential Asset”) or that becomes a Retained Asset shall be the Allocated Value for such Asset. If a Preferential
Asset or a Retained Asset constitutes only a portion of an Asset and a portion of the Purchase Price has not been
allocated specifically to such portion of such Asset on the Allocation Schedule, then the portion of the Purchase Price
to be allocated to such Preferential Asset or Retained Asset shall be determined in a reasonable manner taking into
account  the  net  acreage  (or  net  acre  feet,  as  appropriate)  that  the  portion  of  such  Asset  consisting  of  such
Preferential Asset or Retained Asset bears to the net acreage (or net acre feet, as appropriate) in the entire Asset.
(c)  If  the  holder  of  a  Preferential  Right  who  has  been  offered  a  Preferential  Asset  pursuant  to Section 6.4(a)  elects
prior to Closing to purchase such Preferential
30
Asset in accordance with the terms of such Preferential Right, and the Parties receive written notice of such election
prior  to  the  Closing,  such  Preferential  Asset  shall  be  eliminated  from  the  Assets  and  the  Purchase  Price  shall  be
reduced by the portion of the Purchase Price allocated to such Preferential Asset pursuant to Section 6.4(b).
(d) If:
(i) a third Person brings any suit, action or other proceeding prior to the Closing seeking to restrain, enjoin or otherwise
prohibit  the  consummation  of  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  in  connection  with  a  claim  to  enforce  a
Preferential Right; or
(ii) an Asset is subject to a Transfer Requirement which provides that if prior consent to an assignment of such Asset
is not obtained, such assignment is void or of no force or effect or that otherwise divests the assignee’s right, title or
interest  in  or  to  such  Asset,  and  such  Transfer  Requirement  has  not  been  expressly  waived  or  otherwise  satisfied
prior to the Closing Date,
then,  unless  otherwise  agreed  by  the  Seller  Parties  and  Buyer,  the  Asset  or  portion  thereof  affected  by  such
Preferential Right or Transfer Requirement (a “Retained Asset”) shall be held back from the Assets to be transferred
and conveyed to Buyer at Closing and the Purchase Price to be paid at Closing shall be reduced by the portion of the
Purchase Price which is allocated to such Retained Asset pursuant to Section 6.4(b); provided, however, that, in the
event that a Retained Asset is an Asset other than a Property, and Buyer is assigned the Property or Properties to
which  such  Asset  relates,  but  such  Asset  is  not  transferred  to  Buyer  due  to  the  unwaived  Transfer  Requirement,
Buyer and the Seller Parties shall continue after Closing to use commercially reasonable efforts to obtain the waiver
or consent required under the Transfer Requirement so that such Asset may be transferred to Buyer upon receipt of
such consent and waiver, and, if permitted pursuant to applicable Law and agreement:
(A) Goodrich LLC shall continue to hold record title to such affected Assets as nominee for Buyer;
(B)  Buyer  shall  be  responsible  for  all  Assumed  Obligations  with  respect  to  the  affected  Lease(s)  and  other  affected
portions of the Assets as if Buyer were the record owner of such Assets as of the Closing Date; and
(C) Goodrich LLC shall act as Buyer’s nominee with respect to the affected Assets but shall be authorized to act only
upon and in accordance with Buyer’s written instructions with respect thereto.
(e)  Any  Retained  Asset  so  held  back  at  the  initial  Closing  shall  be  conveyed  to  Buyer  at  a  delayed  Closing  (which
shall become the new Closing Date, and 12:01 a.m. on such date shall be the Effective Time, with respect to such
Retained Asset), within ten
31
Business Days following the date on which the Transfer Requirement has been satisfied, the time for exercising the
Preferential Right has expired (without exercise or any action, or threat of action, to enforce such Preferential Right) or
the suit, action or other proceeding, if any, referenced in clause (d)(i) above is settled or a judgment is rendered (and
no longer subject to appeal) permitting transfer of the Retained Asset to Buyer pursuant to this Agreement, and the
Seller  Parties  obtain  a  waiver  of  or  notice  of  election  not  to  exercise  or  otherwise  satisfy  all  remaining  Preferential
Rights  and  Transfer  Requirements  with  respect  to  such  Retained  Asset  as  contemplated  by  this  Section.  At  the
delayed  Closing,  Buyer  shall  pay  Goodrich  LLC  a  purchase  price  equal  to  the  amount  by  which  the  Purchase  Price
was  reduced  on  account  of  the  holding  back  of  such  Retained  Asset  (as  adjusted  pursuant  to Section  11.2  with
respect  to  such  Asset  through  the  new  Closing  Date  therefor); provided, however,  if  all  such  Preference  Rights  and
Transfer  Requirements  with  respect  to  any  Retained  Asset  so  held  back  at  the  initial  Closing  are  not  obtained,
complied with, waived or otherwise satisfied as contemplated by this Section within 180 days after the initial Closing
has  occurred  with  respect  to  any  Assets,  then  such  Retained  Asset  shall  be  eliminated  from  the  Assets  and  this
Agreement  unless  Buyer  elects  (in  its  sole  discretion)  to  proceed  with  a  closing  on  such  Retained  Asset,  in  which
case Buyer shall be deemed to have waived any objection and shall be obligated to indemnify the Seller Indemnitees
for  all  claims,  losses  and  damages  with  respect  to  non-compliance  with  such  Preferential  Rights  and  Transfer
Requirements related to such Retained Asset.
Section  6.5 SEC  Matters.  Goodrich  LLC  acknowledges  that  Buyer  and  its  Affiliates  may  be  required  to  include
statements  of  revenues  and  direct  operating  expenses  and  other  financial  information  relating  to  the  Assets
(“Financial Statements”) in documents filed with the SEC by Buyer and its Affiliates pursuant to the Securities Act or
the  Exchange  Act,  and  that  such  Financial  Statements  may  be  required  to  be  audited.  In  that  regard,  the  Seller
Parties  shall  cooperate  with  Buyer,  and  provide  Buyer  reasonable  access  to  such  records  (to  the  extent  such
information is available) and personnel of the Seller Parties as Buyer may reasonably request to enable Buyer, and its
representatives  and  accountants,  at  Buyer’s  sole  cost  and  expense,  to  create  and  audit  any  Financial  Statements
that  Buyer  deems  necessary.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  herein,  the  Seller  Parties  shall  (i)  provide
Buyer  and  its  independent  accountants  with  access  to  any  and  all  existing  information,  books,  records,  and
documents  in  their  possession  that  relate  to  the  Assets  (subject  to  any  privilege  or  confidentiality  obligations)  and
other data delivered to Buyer by the Seller Parties pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement relevant to the periods
being audited and (ii) provide customary representations to the Buyer and its independent accountants with respect to
the  information  provided  by  the  Seller  Parties  to  Buyer  and  its  Affiliates  in  connection  with  the  revenues  and  direct
operating expenses and other financial information relating to the Assets.
Section 6.6 Casualty or Condemnation Loss. If, after the date of this Agreement but prior to the Closing Date, any
portion  of  the  Assets  is  destroyed  by  fire  or  other  casualty  or  is  taken  in  condemnation  or  under  right  of  eminent
domain  (“Casualty  Loss”),  Buyer  shall  nevertheless  be  required  to  close  (subject  to  the  other  provisions  of  this
Agreement), and the Seller Parties shall elect, by written notice to Buyer delivered at least five Business Days prior to
Closing, either (i) to cause the Assets affected by any Casualty Loss (other than condemnation or
32
eminent domain) to be repaired or restored to at least their condition prior to such Casualty Loss, at the Seller Parties’
sole cost, risk and expense, as promptly as reasonably practicable (which work may extend after the Closing Date),
(ii) to fully indemnify Buyer against any costs or expenses that Buyer reasonably incurs to repair or restore the Assets
subject to such Casualty Loss, or (iii) to remove and exclude such Asset or portion thereof from the “Assets” to be
transferred and conveyed to Buyer at Closing and, accordingly, to reduce the Purchase Price to be paid at Closing by
the Allocated Value of such Asset (or, if a portion of such Asset, such portion of such Allocated  Value  as  shall  be
determined  in  a  reasonable  manner  taking  into  account  the  net  acreage  (or  net  acre  feet,  as  appropriate)  that  the
portion of such Asset affected by such Casualty Loss bears to the net acreage (or net acre feet, as appropriate) in the
entire Asset). In each case, Goodrich LLC shall retain all rights to insurance and other claims against third Persons
with respect to the Casualty Loss, except to the extent the Parties otherwise agree in writing.
Section  6.7 Further Assurances.  Each  Party  shall  use  its  respective  commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  obtain  all
approvals and consents required by or necessary for the transactions contemplated hereby, and to ensure that all of
the conditions to its respective obligations contained in Article 9 or Article 10, as applicable, are satisfied as soon as
reasonably practicable.
Section 6.8 Notification. Between the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Buyer shall reasonably promptly
notify the Seller Parties in writing if Buyer obtains actual knowledge that any representation or warranty of the Seller
Parties contained in this Agreement is untrue in any material respect or will be untrue in any material respect as of the
Closing Date or that any covenant or agreement to be performed or observed by the Seller Parties prior to or on the
Closing Date has not been so performed or observed in any material respect; provided, that no such notice shall have
any  effect  on  any  determination  of  whether  any  condition  to  Buyer’s  obligation  to  close  in Article  10  has  been
satisfied,  on  Buyer’s  right  to  terminate  this  Agreement  pursuant  to Article 12,  or  on  the  Buyer  Indemnitees’  right  to
indemnification under Article 13. During the same period, a Seller Party shall promptly notify Buyer in writing if a Seller
Party obtains actual knowledge that any representation or warranty of Buyer contained in this Agreement is untrue in
any  material  respect  or  will  be  untrue  in  any  material  respect  as  of  the  Closing  Date  or  that  any  covenant  or
agreement  to  be  performed  or  observed  by  Buyer  prior  to  or  on  the  Closing  Date  has  not  been  so  performed  or
observed in any material respect; provided, that no such notice shall have any effect on any determination of whether
any condition to the Seller Parties’ obligation to close in Article 10 has been satisfied, on the Seller Parties’ right to
terminate this Agreement pursuant to Article 12, or on the Seller Indemnitees’ right to indemnification under Article 13.
If any of Buyer’s or the Seller Parties’ representations or warranties is untrue or shall become untrue in any material
respect between the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, or if any of Buyer’s or the Seller Parties’ covenants
or  agreements  to  be  performed  or  observed  prior  to  or  on  the  Closing  Date  shall  not  have  been  so  performed  or
observed  in  any  material  respect,  but  if  such  breach  of  representation,  warranty,  covenant  or  agreement  shall  be
cured by the Closing (subject to Buyer’s or the Seller Parties’ right to terminate this Agreement pursuant to Article 12),
then such breach shall be considered not to have occurred for all purposes of this Agreement.
33
Section 6.9 Amendment to Schedules. As of the Closing Date, all Schedules to this Agreement, as applicable, shall
be deemed amended and supplemented by the Seller Parties to include reference to any matter which results in an
adjustment to the Purchase Price as a result of the removal under the terms of this Agreement of any of the Assets.
Prior to Closing, the Seller Parties shall have the right to supplement their Schedules relating to the representations
and warranties set forth in Article 4 with respect to any matters discovered or occurring subsequent to the date of this
Agreement and such supplements shall, if the Closing occurs, be deemed to have been included in the Seller Parties’
representations  and  warranties  for  purposes  of  the  Seller  Parties’  indemnification  obligations  under Article  13;
provided,  however,  that  all  such  supplements  shall  be  disregarded  solely  for  purposes  of  determining  whether  the
condition to Purchaser’s obligation to close the transaction pursuant to Section 10.1 has been satisfied. If the Closing
occurs and the Seller Parties have supplemented their Schedules pursuant to this Section 6.9, Buyer will be deemed
to  have  waived  the  matters  relating  to  such  supplements  in  regard  to  Buyer’s  obligation  to  close  the  transactions
contemplated hereunder pursuant to Section 10.1.
Section  6.10 Replacement  of  Bonds,  Letters  of  Credit  and  Guaranties.  The  Parties  understand  that  none  of  the
bonds, letters of credit and guaranties, if any, posted by Goodrich LLC with Governmental Authorities and relating to
the Assets will be transferred to Buyer. Promptly following Closing, Buyer shall obtain, or cause to be obtained in the
name  of  Buyer,  replacements  for  such  bonds,  letters  of  credit  and  guaranties,  to  the  extent  such  replacements  are
necessary  to  permit  the  cancellation  of  the  bonds,  letters  of  credit  and  guaranties  posted  by  Goodrich  LLC  or  to
consummate  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement.  The  Seller  Parties  represent  that  all  such  bonds,
letters of credit and guaranties are described on Schedule 6.10.
Section 6.11 Non-Competition.
(a)  Subject  to  the  exclusions  and  limitations  set  forth  in Section  6.11(b),  for  the  period  of  time  beginning  on  the
Closing Date and ending at 5:00 p.m. Houston, Texas time on the day immediately before the first anniversary of the
Closing  Date,  no  Seller  Party  shall,  and  no  Seller  Party  shall  permit  any  of  its  Affiliates  to,  directly  or  indirectly,
(i) engage in the Restricted  Business  in  the  Territory;  or  (ii)  have  an  interest  in  any  Person  that  engages  directly  or
indirectly  in  the  Restricted  Business  in  the  Territory  in  any  capacity,  including  as  a  partner,  shareholder,  member,
employee, principal, agent, trustee or consultant.
(b)  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  Goodrich  LLC  shall  not  be  prohibited  from  owning  and/or  operating  the  Excluded
Assets and/or Retained Assets, and may fully engage in the Restricted Business in the Territory as to such Excluded
Assets and/or Retained Assets. Additionally, Goodrich LLC may own, directly or indirectly, solely as an investment,
securities of any Person traded on any national securities exchange if no Seller Party is a controlling Person of, or a
member of a group which controls, such Person and does not, directly or indirectly, own 1% or more of any class of
securities of such Person.
34
(c)  If  a  Seller  Party  breaches  any  of  the  provisions  of Section  6.11(a),  Buyer  shall  have  the  following  rights  and
remedies, each of which rights and remedies shall be independent of the others and severally enforceable, and each
of which is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other rights and remedies available to Buyer under law or in equity:
(i)  the  right  and  remedy  to  have  such  provision  specifically  enforced  by  any  court  having  jurisdiction,  it  being
acknowledged and agreed that any such breach or threatened breach may cause irreparable injury to Buyer and that
money damages may not provide an adequate remedy to Buyer; and
(ii) the right and remedy to recover from the Seller Parties all monetary damages suffered by Buyer as the result of
any acts or omissions constituting a breach of this Section 6.11.
(d) Each Seller Party acknowledges that the restrictions contained in this Section 6.11 are reasonable and necessary
to protect the legitimate interests of Buyer and constitute a material inducement to Buyer to enter into this Agreement
and consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement. In the event that any covenant contained in this
Section  6.11  should  ever  be  adjudicated  to  exceed  the  time,  geographic,  product  or  service,  or  other  limitations
permitted by applicable Law in any jurisdiction, then any court is expressly empowered to reform such covenant, and
such covenant shall be deemed reformed, in such jurisdiction to the maximum time, geographic, product or service, or
other limitations permitted by applicable Law. The covenants contained in this Section 6.11 and each provision hereof
are  severable  and  distinct  covenants  and  provisions.  The  invalidity  or  unenforceability  of  any  such  covenant  or
provision as written shall not invalidate or render unenforceable the remaining covenants or provisions hereof, and any
such  invalidity  or  unenforceability  in  any  jurisdiction  shall  not  invalidate  or  render  unenforceable  such  covenant  or
provision in any other jurisdiction.
ARTICLE 7
TITLE DEFECTS
Section 7.1 Title Examination and Access. Buyer may make or cause to be made at its expense such examination
as  it  may  desire  of  Goodrich  LLC’s  title  to  the  Assets.  For  such  purposes,  until  the  Defect  Notice  Time,  the  Seller
Parties shall give to Buyer and its Representatives full access, upon scheduled appointment, during their respective
regular hours of business to all of the files, records, contracts, correspondence, maps, data, reports, plats, abstracts
of  title,  lease  files,  well  files,  unit  files,  division  order  files,  production  marketing  files,  title  opinions,  title  files,  title
records, ownership maps, surveys, and any other information, data, records, and files that they have relating in any
way  to  the  title  to  the  Assets,  the  past  or  present  operation  thereof,  and  the  marketing  of  production  therefrom,
except, however, where restricted by license agreements or other agreements or contracts with a non-affiliated third
party.
Section 7.2 Title Defects.
35
(a) As used herein, the term “Title Defect”  shall  mean  any  matter  affecting  any  Asset  that  would  not  give  Goodrich
LLC  Defensible  Title  to  such  Asset.  Buyer  shall  notify  the  Seller  Parties  of  Title  Defects  (“Title Defect Notices”)  no
later than 5:00 p.m. Houston, Texas time on September 27, 2012 (the “Defect Notice Time”). Each Title Defect Notice
shall be in writing and  include:  (i)  a  specific  description  of  the  alleged  Title  Defect(s);  (ii)  the  Assets  affected;  (iii)  a
detailed explanation of the basis for the alleged Title Defect; (iv) supporting documents reasonably sufficient for the
Seller Parties to verify the existence of the alleged Title Defect(s); (v) the amount by which Buyer reasonably believes
in good faith the Allocated Values of the affected Asset(s) are reduced by the alleged Title Defect(s) (the “Title Defect
Value”); and (vi) the computations upon which Buyer’s belief is based.
(b)  Notwithstanding  anything  herein  to  the  contrary  but  excepting  the  special  warranty  of  title  in  the  Conveyance,
Buyer forever waives Title Defects not asserted by a Title Defect Notice by or before the Defect Notice Time.
Section 7.3 Title Defect Value. The Title Defect Value shall be determined pursuant to the following guidelines, where
applicable:
(a) If the Title Defect is that the actual Net Revenue Interest attributable to any Well (or the specified zone(s) therein)
is less than that stated in Exhibit B and there is a corresponding proportionate decrease in Working Interest, then the
Title Defect Value is the product of the Allocated Value of such Asset multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
is the difference between the Net Revenue Interest set forth in Exhibit B and the actual Net Revenue Interest, and the
denominator of which is the Net Revenue Interest stated in Exhibit B;
(b)  If  the  Title  Defect  results  from  (i)  a  Seller  Party  having  a  greater  Working  Interest  in  a  Well  (or  the  specified
zone(s) therein) than the Working Interest specified therefor in Exhibit B without a corresponding increase in the Net
Revenue Interest or (ii) a Seller Party having a lesser Net Revenue Interest in a Well (or the specified zone(s) therein)
than the Net Revenue Interest specified therefor in Exhibit B without a corresponding decrease in the Working Interest
for such Well, the Title Defect Value shall be equal to the present value (discounted at 10% compounded annually) of
the Parties’ agreed good faith estimate of the decreased value of such Well (or the specified zone(s) therein) for the
period from and after the Effective Time which is attributable to such increase in such Seller Party’s Working Interest
or decrease in such Seller Party’s Net Revenue Interest;
(c) If the Title Defect results from the existence of a lien, security interest, pledge, or collateral assignment, the Title
Defect  Value  shall  be  an  amount  sufficient  to  fully  discharge  such  lien,  security  interest,  pledge,  or  collateral
assignment;
(d) If the Title Defect results from any matter not described in paragraphs (a), (b), or (c) above, the Title Defect Value
shall be an amount equal to the difference
36
between the value of the Well(s) (or the specified zone(s) therein) or other Asset with such Title Defect and the value
of  the  Well(s)  (or  the  specified  zone(s)  therein)  or  other  Asset  without  such  Title  Defect  (taking  into  account  the
Allocated Value of the affected Asset);
(e)  If  a  Title  Defect  is  not  effective  or  does  not  affect  a  Well  (or  the  specified  zone(s)  therein)  or  other  Asset
throughout the entire productive life of such Well (or the specified zone(s) therein) or other Asset, such fact shall be
taken into account in determining the Title Defect Value.
In  no  event,  however,  shall  the  total  of  the  Title  Defect  Values  related  to  a  particular  Asset  exceed  the  Allocated
Value of such Asset.
Section 7.4 Procedure for Closing on Affected Assets. The following provisions shall apply with respect to closing
on Assets subject to Title Defect Notices:
(a) Buyer and the Seller Parties shall enter into an escrow agreement (reasonably acceptable to all Parties), with an
escrow  agent  (reasonably  acceptable  to  all  Parties),  and  at  Closing,  Buyer  shall  deposit  with  the  escrow  agent  an
amount  equal  to  the  aggregate  amount  of  all  downward  price  adjustments  for  Title  Defects,  after  application  of  the
applicable deductibles and thresholds set forth in this Agreement. Buyer and the Seller Parties shall proceed to close
on the affected Assets.
(b) For each Title Defect timely asserted in a Title Defect Notice, the Seller Parties shall have the option of (i) Curing
the Title Defect, (ii) contesting in good faith the Title Defect or Buyer’s good faith estimate of the Title Defect Value in
accordance with Section 7.5, (iii) adjusting the Purchase Price downward by Buyer’s good faith estimate of the Title
Defect  Value  set  forth  in  the  Title  Defect  Notice,  subject  to  the  limitations  set  forth  in  this Article 7,  whereupon  the
Parties  shall  instruct  the  escrow  agent  to  release  the  escrow  funds  applicable  to  such  Title  Defect  to  Buyer,  or
(iv) having Buyer reassign the affected Asset to the applicable Seller Party, whereupon Buyer shall be reimbursed for
such  Asset  by  the  Seller  Parties  and/or  the  escrow  agent,  as  applicable.  The  Seller  Parties  shall  notify  Buyer  in
writing  of  their  election  no  more  than  ten  (10)  Business  Days  after  Closing,  and  the  Seller  Parties’  failure  to  timely
deliver a notice shall be deemed an election under clause (iii) of the preceding sentence.
(c) If the Seller Parties elect to Cure a Title Defect, the Seller Parties shall have ten (10) Business Days after Closing
to  Cure  the  Title  Defect  to  Buyer’s  reasonable  satisfaction.  At  the  end  of  such  ten  (10)  Business  Day  period,  the
Parties  shall  instruct  the  escrow  agent  to  release  the  escrow  funds  attributable  to  such  Title  Defect  either  to  the
applicable  Seller  Party,  if  the  Seller  Parties  have  Cured  such  Title  Defect  to  Buyer’s  reasonable  satisfaction,  or  to
Buyer, if the Seller Parties have not Cured such Title Defect to Buyer’s reasonable satisfaction. If the Seller Parties
and Buyer are unable to agree on the sufficiency of the Cure, then no instructions shall be issued to the escrow agent,
and the matter shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to Section 7.5.
37
Section  7.5 Contested Title Defects.  With  respect  to  any  Title  Defect  timely  asserted  by  a  Title  Defect  Notice  not
cured  to  the  reasonable  satisfaction  of  Buyer  (“Cure”)  within  ten  (10)  Business  Days  after  Closing,  if  a  Seller  Party
contests in good faith the existence of such Title Defect or Buyer’s good faith estimate of the Title Defect Value or
Buyer’s rejection of the Seller Party’s Cure of such Title Defect, then such Seller Party shall so notify Buyer in writing
within such ten (10) Business Day period after Closing (a “Title Defect Rejection Notice”), which Title Defect Rejection
Notice shall state with reasonable specificity the basis of such Seller Party’s rejection of the Title Defect or of such
Title Defect Value or of Buyer’s rejection of the Seller Party’s Cure. For any Title Defect asserted by Buyer in a Title
Defect Notice by the Defect Notice Time, if a Seller Party fails to timely deliver a Title Defect Rejection Notice, then
such Seller Party shall be deemed to have accepted the validity of such Title Defect and such Title Defect Value, and
(subject to Section 7.6) the Purchase Price shall be reduced by an amount equal to such Title Defect Value (and the
Parties  shall  instruct  the  escrow  agent  to  release  the  escrow  funds  applicable  to  such  Title  Defect  to  Buyer).  If  a
Seller  Party  timely  delivers  a  Title  Defect  Rejection  Notice  with  respect  to  any  Title  Defect,  then  representatives  of
the  Parties,  knowledgeable  in  title  matters,  shall  promptly  meet  and  attempt  to  agree  on  whether  such  alleged  Title
Defect exists and, if so, the Title Defect Value applicable thereto. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement with
respect  to  any  Title  Defect,  then  the  Title  Defect  or  the  Title  Defect  Value  or  the  Cure  subject  to  the  Title  Defect
Rejection Notice shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 8.8,  and  all
amounts so deposited with the escrow agent shall be disbursed in accordance with such escrow agreement after the
resolution of such arbitration pursuant to the results of such arbitration.
Section  7.6 Limitations  on  Adjustments  for  Title  Defects.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of Section  7.2,
Section 7.4,  and Section 7.5,  the  Seller  Parties  shall  be  obligated  to  adjust  the  Purchase  Price  to  account  for  Title
Defects only to the extent the aggregate Title Defect Value of all Title Defects that the Seller Parties are obligated to
pay  pursuant  to  this Article 7  (the  “Aggregate  Title  Defect  Value”)  exceeds  a  deductible  (not  a  threshold)  equal  to
$1,000,000. In addition, if the  Title  Defect  Value  for  any  single  Asset  is  less  than  $10,000,  such  value  shall  not  be
considered in calculating the Aggregate Title Defect Value. The aggregated Title Defect Value(s) for any Asset shall
never exceed the Allocated Value of such Asset.
Section 7.7 Interest Additions.
(a) If a Seller Party discovers an increase in the Net Revenue Interest shown on Exhibit B with respect to an Asset
that  is  free  of  Title  Defects  (an  “Interest  Addition”),  then  such  Seller  Party  shall,  from  time  to  time  and  without
limitation, have the right to give Buyer written notice of such Interest Additions (an “Interest Addition Notice”), as soon
as  practicable  but  not  later  than  the  Defect  Notice  Time,  stating  with  reasonable  specificity  the  Asset  affected,  the
particular Interest Addition claimed, and such Seller Party’s good faith estimate of the amount the additional interest
increases the value of the affected Asset over and above that Asset’s Allocated Value (the “Interest Addition Value”).
(b)  The  Interest  Addition  Value  shall  be  determined  by  multiplying  the  Allocated  Value  of  the  subject  Well  (or  the
specified zone(s) therein) by a fraction, the
38
numerator of which is the increase in the Net Revenue Interest in such Well (or the specified zone(s) therein) over the
Net  Revenue  Interest  specified  therefor  in Exhibit  B,  and  the  denominator  of  which  is  the  Net  Revenue  Interest
specified for such Well (or the specified zone(s) therein) in Exhibit B. The Seller Parties shall conclusively be deemed
to  have  waived  any  additional  interest  not  asserted  by  an  Interest  Addition  Notice  on  or  before  the  Defect  Notice
Time.
(c)  If  an  Interest  Addition  Notice  is  timely  delivered  to  Buyer,  then  Buyer  and  the  Seller  Parties  shall  enter  into  an
escrow agreement (reasonably acceptable to all Parties), with an escrow agent (reasonably acceptable to all Parties),
and  at  Closing,  Buyer  shall  deposit  with  the  escrow  agent  an  amount  equal  to  the  aggregate  amount  of  all  Interest
Addition Values, after application of the applicable deductibles and thresholds set forth in this Agreement. Buyer and
the Seller Parties shall proceed to close on the affected Assets.
(d) With respect to any Interest Addition timely asserted by an Interest Addition Notice, if Buyer contests in good faith
the existence of the Interest Addition or such Seller Party’s good faith estimate of the Interest Addition Value, then
Buyer shall so notify such Seller Party in writing on or before the date that is ten (10) Business Days after the Closing
Date  (an  “Interest  Addition  Rejection  Notice”).  The  Interest  Addition  Rejection  Notice  shall  state  with  reasonable
specificity  the  basis  of  Buyer’s  rejection  of  the  Interest  Addition  or  of  Buyer’s  good  faith  estimate  of  the  Interest
Addition Value. If Buyer fails to timely deliver an Interest Addition Rejection Notice, Buyer shall be deemed to have
accepted  the  validity  of  the  Interest  Addition  and  such  Seller  Party’s  good  faith  estimate  of  the  Interest  Addition
Value,  and  the  Parties  shall  instruct  the  escrow  agent  to  release  the  Interest  Addition  Value  applicable  to  such
affected Asset to such Seller Party. If Buyer timely delivers an Interest Addition Rejection Notice with respect to any
Interest Addition, then representatives of the Parties, knowledgeable in title matters shall promptly meet and attempt
to agree to mutually reject the Interest Addition (in which case the Parties shall instruct the escrow agent to release
the  Interest  Addition  Value  applicable  to  such  affected  Asset  to  Buyer),  or  agree  on  the  validity  of  such  Interest
Addition  and  the  Interest  Addition  Value  (in  which  case  the  Parties  shall  instruct  the  escrow  agent  to  release  the
Interest  Addition  Value  applicable  to  such  affected  Asset  to  such  Seller  Party).  If  the  Parties  are  unable  to  reach
agreement with respect to any Interest Addition, then the Interest Addition or the Interest Addition Value subject to the
Interest  Addition  Rejection  Notice  shall  be  submitted  to  arbitration  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  set  forth  in
Section 8.8, and all amounts so deposited with the escrow agent shall be disbursed in accordance with such escrow
agreement after the resolution of such arbitration pursuant to the results of such arbitration.
(e) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section 7.7, Buyer shall be obligated to adjust the Purchase Price to
account  for  Interest  Additions  only  if  the  aggregate  Interest  Addition  Value  of  all  Interest  Additions  that  Buyer  has
agreed  to  pay  or  which  are  resolved  pursuant  to  this Section  7.7  exceeds  a  deductible  (not  a  threshold)  equal  to
$1,000,000. In addition, if the Interest Addition Value for any single Asset is less than $10,000, such value shall not
be considered in calculating any increase to the Purchase Price.
39
ARTICLE 8
ENVIRONMENTAL DEFECTS
Section 8.1 Buyer’s Environmental Assessment. Beginning on the date of this Agreement and ending at the Defect
Notice Time, Buyer shall have the right, at its sole cost, risk, and expense, to conduct an environmental assessment
of the Assets. During the Seller Parties’ regular hours of business and after providing the Seller Parties with written
notice of any such activities no less than one Business Day in advance (which written notice shall include the identity
of the operator (if other than a Seller Party) and any other third party whose permission is legally required, which Seller
Parties  shall  cooperate  with  Buyer  in  securing),  Buyer  and  its  representatives  shall  be  permitted  to  enter  upon  the
Assets,  inspect  the  same,  review  all  of  the  Seller  Parties’  files  and  records  (other  than  those  for  which  the  Seller
Parties  have  an  attorney-client  privilege)  relating  to  the  Assets,  and  generally  conduct  visual,  non-invasive  tests,
examinations, and investigations. No sampling or other invasive inspections of the Assets may be conducted without
the  Seller  Parties’  prior  written  consent,  which  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld.  The  Seller  Parties  will  have  the
right to (a) observe such investigation, and (b) promptly receive a copy of any final environmental report received by
Buyer  with  respect  to  the  Assets,  except  for  such  information  for  which  Buyer  has  an  attorney-client  privilege.  All
information  obtained  or  reviewed  by  Buyer  shall  be  maintained  as  confidential  by  Buyer  through  the  Environmental
Defect Closing Date.
Section 8.2 Environmental Defects. Buyer shall notify the Seller Parties in writing of any Environmental Defect (an
“Environmental Defect Notice”) no later than the Defect Notice Time. The Environmental Defect Notice shall include:
(i)  the  Asset(s)  affected;  (ii)  a  complete  and  reasonably  detailed  description  of  the  alleged  Environmental  Defect;
(iii) Buyer’s good faith estimate of the cost of Remediation of such Environmental Defect (the “Environmental Defect
Value”);  and  (iv)  appropriate  documentation  substantiating  Buyer’s  claim.  Notwithstanding  anything  herein  to  the
contrary,  other  than  the  representations  made  by  the  Seller  Parties  in Section  4.27,  Buyer  forever  waives
Environmental Defects not asserted by an Environmental Defect Notice no later than the Defect Notice Time.
Section  8.3 Seller  Parties’  Right  to  Remediate.  The  Seller  Parties  shall  have  the  right,  but  not  the  obligation,  to
attempt (at their sole cost) to Remediate any alleged Environmental Defect at any time before October 10, 2012 (the
“Environmental Defect Closing Date”).
Section 8.4 Remedies for Environmental Defects.
(a)  For  any  Environmental  Defect  asserted  in  an  Environmental  Defect  Notice  and  not  Remediated  to  Buyer’s
reasonable satisfaction before Closing, the Parties shall exclude the Assets affected thereby from the “Assets” to be
conveyed  to  Buyer  at  Closing  (with  the  Purchase  Price  adjusted  downward  by  the  Allocated  Values  thereof  (such
aggregate  downward  adjustment  amount  being  the  “Environmental  Purchase  Price”)),  and  shall  proceed  to  a
subsequent  closing  on  such  Assets  on  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  (pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this
Article 8), which shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions set forth in Article 11, as applicable.
40
(b)  For  any  Environmental  Defect  asserted  in  an  Environmental  Defect  Notice  and  not  Remediated  to  Buyer’s
reasonable  satisfaction  before  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  (and  subject  to  the  Seller  Parties’  right  to
contest the existence of any Environmental Defect or the amount of any Environmental Defect Value as set forth in
Section 8.5), the Seller Parties, in their sole discretion, shall have the option of:
(i)  Subject  to Section 8.6,  reducing  the  Environmental  Purchase  Price  by  the  Environmental  Defect  Value  for  such
Environmental Defect; or
(ii) Assuming joint and several responsibility for Remediating the Environmental Defect.
The Seller Parties must notify Buyer in writing of their such election with respect to each such Environmental Defect
at  least  four  Business  Days  before  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  (and,  if  such  election  is  under  clause
(ii)  with  respect  to  any  Environmental  Defect,  such  notice  must  also  include  a  detailed  description  of  the  Seller
Parties’ proposed plan and timing for such Remediation); the failure to so timely notify Buyer with respect to any such
Environmental  Defect  shall  be  deemed  an  election  by  the  Seller  Parties  under  clause  (i)  of  the  preceding  sentence
with  respect  to  such  Environmental  Defect.  If  the  Seller  Parties  have  timely  notified  Buyer  in  writing  of  an  election
under clause (i) with respect to any Environmental Defect, Buyer shall be deemed to have assumed responsibility for
Remediation  of  such  Environmental  Defect,  and  all  Obligations  with  respect  thereto  shall  be  deemed  to  constitute
Assumed  Obligations.  If  the  Seller  Parties  have  timely  and  properly  notified  Buyer  in  writing  of  an  election  under
clause (ii) with respect to any Environmental Defect, Buyer shall at least one Business Day before the Environmental
Defect Closing Date notify the Seller Parties in writing whether Buyer approves the Seller Parties’ proposed plan and
timing for Remediation of such Environmental Defect. If Buyer does not so notify the Seller Parties, Buyer shall be
deemed  to  have  not  approved  such  plan.  If  Buyer  approves  the  Seller  Parties’  plan  for  Remediation  of  any
Environmental  Defect,  the  Seller  Parties  shall  use  their  best  efforts  to  implement  such  Remediation  in  a  manner
consistent with the requirements of Environmental Laws and such plan, and shall have access to the affected Assets
after  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  to  implement  and  complete  such  Remediation,  and  the  Seller  Parties
shall  remain  liable  for  all  Damages  arising  out  of  or  in  connection  with  such  Environmental  Defect  and  such
Remediation  until  such  time  as  the  Remediation  is  completed  to  Buyer’s  reasonable  satisfaction.  If  Buyer  does  not
approve (or is deemed not to have approved) the Seller Parties’ proposed plan for Remediation of any Environmental
Defect, then Buyer shall have the option to remove and exclude the Asset(s) subject to such Environmental Defect
(together with other Assets that are appurtenant thereto) from the “Assets,” and upon such election the Environmental
Purchase Price shall be reduced by the Allocated Values of the Assets so removed and excluded from the “Assets.”
41
(c) If any Asset is subject to an Environmental Defect, the Environmental Defect Value of which is greater than the
Allocated  Value  of  such  Asset,  Buyer  shall  have  the  right  (in  its  sole  discretion),  exercised  by  delivery  of  written
notice to the Seller Parties at least one Business Day before the Environmental Defect Closing Date, to remove and
exclude such Asset that is subject to such Environmental Defect, together with all Assets appurtenant thereto, from
the “Assets” in which case the Environmental Purchase Price shall be reduced by an amount equal to the Allocated
Values of the Assets so removed and excluded from the “Assets.”
Section  8.5 Contested  Environmental  Defects.  With  respect  to  any  Environmental  Defect  timely  asserted  by  an
Environmental  Defect  Notice  not  waived  in  writing  by  Buyer  or  Remediated  to  the  reasonable  satisfaction  of  Buyer
before  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date,  if  the  Seller  Parties  contest  in  good  faith  the  existence  of  such
Environmental Defect or Buyer’s good faith estimate of the Environmental Defect Value, then the Seller Parties shall
so  notify  Buyer  in  writing  at  least  four  Business  Days  before  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  (an
“Environmental  Defect  Rejection  Notice”),  which  Environmental  Defect  Rejection  Notice  shall  state  with  reasonable
specificity the basis of the Seller Parties’ rejection of the Environmental Defect or of Buyer’s good faith estimate of
the  Environmental  Defect  Value.  For  any  Environmental  Defect  asserted  by  Buyer  in  an  Environmental  Title  Defect
Notice by the Defect Notice Time, if the Seller Parties fail to timely deliver an Environmental Defect Rejection Notice,
then  the  Seller  Parties  shall  be  deemed  to  have  accepted  the  validity  of  such  Environmental  Defect  and  such
Environmental  Defect  Value,  and  (subject  to Sections  8.4(c)  and  8.6)  the  Environmental  Purchase  Price  shall  be
reduced by an amount equal to such Environmental Defect Value unless such Environmental Defect is Remediated to
the reasonable satisfaction of Buyer before the Environmental Defect Closing Date. If the Seller Parties timely deliver
an  Environmental  Defect  Rejection  Notice  with  respect  to  any  Environmental  Defect,  then  representatives  of  the
Parties, knowledgeable in environmental matters, shall promptly (but in any event at least two Business Days before
the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date)  meet  and  attempt  to  agree  on  whether  such  alleged  Environmental  Defect
exists and, if so, the Environmental Defect Value applicable thereto. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement with
respect to any Environmental Defect:
(a) The Environmental Defect or the Environmental Defect Value subject to the Environmental Defect Rejection Notice
shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 8.8;
(b)  If  such  arbitration  is  completed  by  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date,  then  the  Asset(s)  subject  to  such
arbitration shall be subject to the provisions of Section 8.4 and may  be  removed  and  excluded  from,  or  included  in,
the “Assets” to be conveyed on the Environmental Defect Closing Date, and the Environmental Purchase Price shall
be adjusted, accordingly (if applicable); and
(c) If such arbitration is not completed by the Environmental Defect Closing Date:
42
(i)  Buyer  may  (in  its  sole  discretion)  elect  to  either  (1)  remove  and  exclude  the  Asset  affected  by  such  contested
Environmental Defect (together with other Assets that are appurtenant thereto) from the “Assets” to be conveyed on
the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date,  accordingly  reduce  the  Environmental  Purchase  Price  by  the  Allocated
Values of such Assets, and terminate such arbitration or (2) retain the Asset within the “Assets” to be conveyed on
the Environmental Defect Closing Date and accordingly (subject to Section 8.6) reduce the Environmental Purchase
Price by Buyer’s good faith estimate of the Environmental Defect Value set forth in the relevant Environmental Defect
Notice;
(ii)  If  Buyer  retained  such  Asset  within  the  “Assets”  conveyed  on  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  and  the
arbitrator  determines  that  such  Environmental  Defect  does  not  exist,  Buyer  shall  promptly  after  such  determination
pay to the Seller Parties an amount equal to the amount by which the Environmental Purchase Price was reduced for
such Environmental Defect; and
(iii)  If  Buyer  retained  such  Asset  within  the  “Assets”  conveyed  on  the  Environmental  Defect  Closing  Date  and  the
arbitrator determines that the Environmental Defect Value for such Environmental Defect was less than the amount by
which the Environmental Purchase Price was adjusted for such Environmental Defect, Buyer shall promptly after such
determination pay to the Seller Parties an amount equal to the difference between such actual amount and the amount
by which the Environmental Purchase Price was reduced for such Environmental Defect.
Section  8.6 Limitation.  Notwithstanding  the  other  provisions  of  this Article  8,  no  adjustment  to  the  Environmental
Purchase  Price  for  Environmental  Defect  Values  shall  be  made  unless  and  until  the  aggregate  value  of  all
Environmental  Defect  Values  (the  “Aggregate  Environmental  Defect  Value”)  exceeds  a  deductible  (not  a  threshold)
equal to $1,000,000. If the Environmental Defect Value with respect to any single Environmental Defect is less than
$10,000, such cost shall not be considered in calculating the Aggregate Environmental Defect Value.
Section  8.7 Exclusive  Remedies.  The  rights  and  remedies  expressly  granted  to  Buyer  in  or  pursuant  to  this
Agreement  are  the  exclusive  rights  and  remedies  against  the  Seller  Parties  related  to  any  Environmental  Defect  or
Title  Defect,  or  losses  related  thereto.  Buyer  expressly  waives  any  and  all  other  rights  and  remedies  it  may  have
under Environmental Laws against the Seller Parties regarding the environmental conditions of the Assets, whether for
contribution,  indemnity,  or  otherwise,  regardless  of  the  fault  or  negligence  of  the  claiming  party,  including  strict  or
statutory liability of that Party under applicable Law.
Section  8.8 Limited  Arbitration.  It  is  agreed,  as  a  severable  and  independent  arbitration  agreement  separately
enforceable  from  the  remainder  of  this  Agreement,  that  all  disputes  under Article 7  or Article 8  shall  be  finally  and
exclusively submitted to, and
43
determined by, binding arbitration. The arbitration proceedings shall be held in Houston, Texas. The arbitration shall be
conducted before a single arbitrator (who shall be selected by mutual agreement of the Parties) pursuant to the then
current Commercial Arbitration  Rules  of  the  American  Arbitration  Association  (the  “AAA”); provided, however,  that  if
disputes exist with respect to both title and environmental matters, and the Parties cannot agree on a single arbitrator
with  experience  in  both  such  matters,  the  Parties  agree  to  conduct  separate  arbitration  proceedings  with  the  title
disputes and environmental disputes being submitted to separate arbitrators. If the Parties are unable to agree on any
arbitrator,  the  Houston  office  of  the  AAA  shall  select  the  arbitrator.  No  arbitrator  shall  be  selected  who  has  had  an
affiliation with either Party or any Affiliate of either Party within the five year period preceding the arbitration, or have
any financial interest in the dispute, controversy, or claim. Each arbitrator must be a licensed and practicing attorney
(including  any  attorney  practicing  in-house  for  a  company,  with  an  outside  law  firm,  as  a  solo  practitioner,  or  as  a
professional arbitrator) or a retired judge of a state or federal court. If any arbitrator should die, withdraw, or otherwise
become incapable of serving, or refuse to serve, a successor arbitrator shall be selected and appointed in the same
manner  as  the  original  arbitrator.  In  the  event  of  any  conflict  between  the  Commercial  Arbitration  Rules  of  the  AAA
and the provisions of this Section 8.8, the provisions of this Section 8.8 shall govern and control. Each arbitrator shall
apply the laws of the State of Texas (without regard to conflict of law rules) to the dispute, controversy, or claim. With
respect to each matter submitted to the arbitrator pursuant to this Section 8.8, the arbitrator must resolve such matter
by  choosing  one  Party’s  proposed  resolution,  and  may  not  resolve  such  matter  in  any  other  manner.  To  the  extent
that  they  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  Commercial  Arbitration  Rules  of  the  AAA,  evidentiary  questions  shall  be
governed  by  the  Texas  Rules  of  Evidence.  Any  arbitration  shall  proceed  in  the  absence  of  a  Party  who,  after  due
notice, fails to answer or appear; provided, however, that an award shall not be made solely on the default of a Party,
but  the  arbitrator  shall  require  the  Party  who  is  present  to  submit  such  evidence  as  the  arbitrator  may  determine  is
reasonably  required  to  make  an  award.  Each  arbitrator’s  award  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  set  forth  findings  and
conclusions  upon  which  the  arbitrator  based  the  award.  The  prevailing  Party  in  each  arbitration  shall  be  entitled  to
recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs, and expenses incurred in connection with the arbitration, as determined
by  the  arbitrator.  Consequential,  indirect,  special,  exemplary  or  punitive  damages  of  a  Party  shall  not  be  awarded
under any circumstances. Any award pursuant to any arbitration shall be final and binding upon the Parties.
ARTICLE 9
SELLER PARTIES’ CONDITIONS TO CLOSE
The obligations of the Seller Parties to consummate the transactions provided for herein are subject to the fulfillment
or (in the Seller Parties’ sole discretion) waiver at or prior to the Closing of each of the following conditions:
Section 9.1 Representations. The representations and warranties of Buyer herein contained shall be true and correct
in  all  material  respects  (and  in  all  respects,  in  the  case  of  representations  and  warranties  qualified  by  materiality  or
material adverse effect) as of the Closing Date as though made on and as of such date.
44
Section 9.2 Performance. Buyer shall have performed or complied with in all material respects (and in all respects, in
the  case  of  obligations,  covenants  and  agreements  qualified  by  materiality)  all  obligations,  covenants,  and
agreements contained in this Agreement to be performed or complied with by it at or prior to the Closing.
Section  9.3 Pending Matters. No suit, action or other proceeding shall be pending or threatened, and no injunction,
order  or  award  shall  have  been  issued,  that  seeks  to  restrain,  enjoin  or  otherwise  prohibit,  or  recover  material
damages with respect to, the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, excluding any such
matter initiated by a Seller Party or its Affiliate.
Section  9.4 Execution  and  Delivery  of  the  Closing  Documents.  Buyer  shall  have  executed,  acknowledged  and
delivered, or shall stand ready to execute, acknowledge and deliver, as appropriate, to the Seller Parties all closing
deliverables described in Section 11.5.
Section  9.5 Adjustments.  (a)  The  net  sum  of  all  upward  and  downward  adjustments  to  the  Purchase  Price  to  be
made at Closing pursuant to Article 7, Article 8,  and Section 6.6 shall be less than 20% of the unadjusted Purchase
Price,  and  (b)  the  total  value  of  Environmental  Defects  and  Title  Defects  (i)  for  which  the  Parties  are  pursuing
arbitration, or (ii) with respect to which the Seller Parties have agreed to Remediate or Cure after Closing, shall be less
than 20% of the unadjusted Purchase Price.
Section 9.6 Casualty Losses. The aggregate losses from casualties to the Assets and takings of Assets under right
of eminent domain shall be less than 20% of the unadjusted Purchase Price.
ARTICLE 10
BUYER’S CONDITIONS TO CLOSE
The  obligations  of  Buyer  to  consummate  the  transactions  provided  for  herein  are  subject  to  the  fulfillment  or  (in
Buyer’s sole discretion) waiver at or prior to the Closing of each of the following conditions:
Section 10.1 Representations. The representations and warranties of the Seller Parties herein contained shall be true
and  correct  in  all  material  respects  (and  in  all  respects,  in  the  case  of  representations  and  warranties  qualified  by
materiality  or  material  adverse  effect),  as  of  the  Closing  Date  as  though  made  on  and  as  of  such  date,  other  than
representations and warranties that refer to a specified date, which need only be true and correct as of such date.
Section 10.2 Performance. The Seller Parties shall have performed in all material respects (and in all respects, in the
case  of  obligations,  covenants  and  agreements  qualified  by  materiality)  all  obligations,  covenants  and  agreements
contained in this Agreement to be performed or complied with by them at or prior to the Closing, including all Cure and
Remediation obligations undertaken to be completed before Closing by the Seller Parties.
Section 10.3 Pending Matters. No suit, action or other proceeding shall be pending or threatened, and no injunction,
order  or  award  shall  have  been  issued,  that  seeks  to  restrain,  enjoin  or  otherwise  prohibit,  or  recover  material
damages with respect to, the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, excluding any such
matter initiated by Buyer or any of its Affiliates.
45
Section  10.4 Execution  and  Delivery  of  the  Closing  Documents.  The  Seller  Parties  shall  have  executed,
acknowledged  and  delivered,  or  shall  stand  ready  to  execute,  acknowledge  and  deliver,  as  appropriate,  to  Buyer  all
closing documents described in Section 11.4.
Section  10.5 Adjustments.  (a)  The  net  sum  of  all  upward  and  downward  adjustments  to  the  Purchase  Price  to  be
made at Closing pursuant to Article 7, Article 8,  and Section 6.6 shall be less than 20% of the unadjusted Purchase
Price,  and  (b)  the  total  value  of  Environmental  Defects  and  Title  Defects  (i)  for  which  the  Parties  are  pursuing
arbitration, or (ii) with respect to which the Seller Parties have agreed to Remediate or Cure after Closing, shall be less
than 20% of the unadjusted Purchase Price.
Section 10.6 Casualty Losses. The aggregate losses from casualties to the Assets and takings of Assets under right
of eminent domain shall be less than 20% of the unadjusted Purchase Price.
ARTICLE 11
THE CLOSING
Section  11.1 Time  and  Place  of  the  Closing.  If  the  conditions  referred  to  in Article  9  and Article  10  have  been
satisfied or waived in writing, and subject to any extensions provided for herein, including, if applicable, the extension
provided  for  in Section 8.4  with  respect  to  Environmental  Defects,  the  closing  of  the  transactions  contemplated  by
this Agreement (the “Closing”)  shall  take  place  at  the  offices  of  Akin,  Gump,  Strauss,  Hauer  &  Feld,  L.L.P.,  whose
address  is  1111  Louisiana,  44th  Floor,  Houston,  TX  77002,  at  10:00  a.m.  Houston,  Texas  time  on  or  before
September 28, 2012, or if all such conditions have not been satisfied or waived by that date, then on such other date
that is mutually agreed by the Parties (the “Closing Date”).
Section 11.2 Adjustments to Purchase Price at the Closing.
(a)  All  adjustments  to  the  Purchase  Price  shall  be  made  (i)  according  to  the  provisions  set  forth  in  this  Agreement,
(ii) in accordance with GAAP as consistently applied in the oil and gas industry, and (iii) without duplication.
(b) At the Closing, the Purchase Price shall be increased by the following amounts, without duplication:
(i) the aggregate amount of all Purchase Price increases required with respect to Interest Additions under Article 7;
(ii)  an  amount  equal  to  the  value  of  all  net  amounts  owed  to  the  Seller  Parties  with  respect  to  the  Assets  for  the
Estimated Imbalances (and, where any Imbalances are calculated on a per barrel or per Mcf basis rather than a cash
basis, such amount will be determined using the product of the volume associated with such Imbalances and $4.50
per Mcf and $95.55 per barrel, as applicable);
46
(iii) the aggregate amount of all non-reimbursed Property Costs which are attributable to the Assets for the period from
and after the Effective Time and that have been paid by Goodrich LLC;
(iv)  the  value  (using  $95.55  per  barrel  and  $4.50  per  Mcf)  of  all  Hydrocarbons  in  storage  or  existing  in  stock  tanks,
less applicable deductions (including royalties payable out of such production) in each case at the Effective Time;
(v)  the  net  amount  of  all  prepaid  expenses  related  to  the  Properties  (including  prepaid  production  taxes,  severance
taxes,  and  other  taxes  measured  by  units  of  production;  bonuses;  rentals;  cash  calls  to  third  Person  operators;
insurance premiums; and scheduled payments) attributable to periods from and after the Effective Time;
(vi)  the  amount  of  all  Taxes,  if  any,  prorated  to  Buyer  in  accordance  with  this  Agreement  but  paid  by  the  Seller
Parties; and
(vii) such other amounts as may be mutually agreed upon by the Parties.
(c) At the Closing, the Purchase Price shall be decreased by the following amounts, without duplication:
(i) the aggregate amount of all Purchase Price reductions required with respect to Title Defects pursuant to Article 7;
(ii) the aggregate amount of all Purchase Price reductions required with respect to Environmental Defects pursuant to
Article 8;
(iii) the value allocated to any Retained Asset pursuant to Section 6.4;
(iv) the aggregate amount of all Purchase Price reductions required pursuant to Section 6.6;
(v)  an  amount  equal  to  the  value  of  all  net  amounts  owed  by  Goodrich  LLC  with  respect  to  the  Assets  for  the
Estimated Imbalances (and, where any Imbalances are calculated on a per barrel or per Mcf basis rather than a cash
basis, such amount will be determined using the product of the volume associated with such Imbalances and $4.50
per Mcf and $95.55 per barrel, as applicable);
(vi) the aggregate amount of all non-reimbursed Property Costs which are attributable to the Assets for the period prior
to the Effective Time and that have been paid by Buyer;
47
(vii)  an  amount  equal  to  all  proceeds  received  by  Goodrich  LLC  or  any  of  their  Affiliates  for  the  sale  of  the
Hydrocarbons produced from the Assets from and after, or in storage or existing in stock tanks at, the Effective Time,
and  any  other  amounts  received  by  Goodrich  LLC  or  any  of  their  Affiliates  to  which  Buyer  would  be  entitled  under
Section 2.4(a);
(viii) the amount of the Suspense Funds; and
(ix) such other amounts as may be mutually agreed upon by the Parties.
The adjustments described in this Section 11.2 are hereinafter referred to as the “Purchase Price Adjustments.”
Section 11.3 Closing Statement; Post-Closing Adjustment.
(a) At least five Business Days prior to the Closing Date, Goodrich LLC shall prepare and deliver to Buyer a statement
of  the  Estimated  Imbalances  and  the  estimated  Purchase  Price  Adjustments  taking  into  account  the  foregoing
principles, and using and based upon the best information available to Goodrich LLC (the “Statement”). At the Closing,
Buyer  shall  pay  the  Purchase  Price  (less  the  Deposit  Amount),  as  adjusted  by  the  estimated  Purchase  Price
Adjustments reflected on the Statement.
(b)  As  soon  as  reasonably  practicable  after  the  Closing  but  not  later  than  the  90th  day  following  the  Closing  Date,
Goodrich LLC shall prepare and deliver to Buyer a draft statement setting forth the final calculation of the Purchase
Price and showing the calculation of each adjustment under Section 11.2, based on the most recent actual figures for
each adjustment, and using the actual Imbalance amounts rather than the Estimated Imbalances. Goodrich LLC shall
provide  reasonable  documentation  to  support  the  final  calculation.  As  soon  as  reasonably  practicable,  but  not  later
than the 30th day following receipt of such statement from Goodrich LLC, Buyer shall deliver to Goodrich LLC a written
report containing any changes that Buyer proposes be made to such statement. If Buyer does not deliver such report
to  Goodrich  LLC  on  or  before  the  end  of  such  30  day  period,  Buyer  shall  be  deemed  to  have  agreed  with  Goodrich
LLC’s statement, and such statement shall become binding upon the Parties.
(c)  The  Parties  shall  undertake  to  agree  on  the  final  statement  of  the  Purchase  Price  no  later  than  60  days  after
delivery  of  Goodrich  LLC’s  statement.  If  the  Parties  cannot  reach  agreement  within  such  period  of  time,  any  Party
may  refer  the  items  of  adjustment  which  are  in  dispute  to  a  nationally-recognized  independent  accounting  firm  or
consulting firm mutually acceptable to both Buyer and Goodrich LLC (the “Accounting Arbitrator”), for review and final
determination by arbitration. The Accounting Arbitrator shall conduct the arbitration proceedings in Houston, Texas in
accordance with the Commercial Arbitration Rules of the AAA, to the extent such rules do not conflict with the terms
of  this Article 11.  The  Accounting  Arbitrator’s  determination  shall  be  made  within  45  days  after  submission  of  the
matters  in  dispute  and  shall  be  final  and  binding  on  all  Parties,  without  right  of  appeal.  In  determining  the  proper
amount of any adjustment to the Purchase Price, the Accounting Arbitrator shall
48
be bound by the terms of this Agreement and may not increase the Purchase Price more than the increase proposed
by  Goodrich  LLC  nor  decrease  the  Purchase  Price  more  than  the  decrease  proposed  by  Buyer,  as  applicable.  The
Accounting  Arbitrator  shall  act  as  an  expert  for  the  limited  purpose  of  determining  the  specific  disputed  aspects  of
Purchase Price adjustments submitted by any Party and may not award damages, interest or penalties to any Party
with  respect  to  any  matter  (other  than  the  interest  provided  for  in  this Section 11.3).  Goodrich  LLC  and  Buyer  shall
each  bear  their  own  legal  fees  and  other  costs  of  presenting  its  case.  Goodrich  LLC  shall  bear  one-half  and  Buyer
shall bear one-half of the costs and expenses of the Accounting Arbitrator. Within ten days after the earlier of (i) the
expiration of Buyer’s 30 day review period without delivery of any written report or (ii) the date on which the Parties or
the Accounting Arbitrator finally determine the Purchase Price, Buyer shall pay to Goodrich LLC the amount by which
the  Purchase  Price  exceeds  the  amount  paid  pursuant  to Section 11.3(a)  or  Goodrich  LLC  shall  pay  to  Buyer  the
amount by which the amount paid pursuant to Section 11.3(a) exceeds the Purchase Price, as applicable. Any post-
Closing payment pursuant to this Section 11.3 shall bear interest from the Closing Date to the date of payment at the
lesser of (x) the annual rate of interest published as the “Prime Rate” in the “Money Rates” section of The Wall Street
Journal on the last Business Day prior to the Effective Date plus 3% and (y) the maximum rate allowed by applicable
Law.
Section 11.4 Actions of the Seller Parties at the Closing. At the Closing, the Seller Parties (as applicable) shall:
(a) execute, acknowledge and deliver to Buyer counterparts of the Conveyance and such other instruments (in form
and  substance  agreed  upon  by  the  Parties)  as  may  be  reasonably  necessary  to  convey  the  Assets  to  Buyer  in
sufficient duplicate originals to allow recording in all appropriate jurisdictions and offices;
(b) deliver notice required under the Escrow Agreement;
(c) deliver to Buyer possession of the Assets (except the Suspense Funds, which shall be conveyed to Buyer by way
of a downward adjustment to the Purchase Price as provided in Section 11.2(c)(viii));
(d)  execute  and  deliver  to  Buyer  an  affidavit  attesting  to  the  non-foreign  status  of  each  Seller  Party  in  the  form
prescribed in Treasury Regulation Section 1.1445-2(b)(2);
(e)  execute  and  deliver  letters-in-lieu  of  division  order  to  reflect  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby,  which  letters
shall be on forms prepared by the Seller Parties and reasonably acceptable to Buyer;
(f)  deliver  to  Buyer  a  certificate,  duly  executed  by  an  authorized  officer  of  each  Seller  Party,  certifying  on  behalf  of
each Seller Party that the conditions set forth in Section 10.1 and Section 10.2 have been fulfilled;
49
(g) where notices of  approval,  consent,  or  waiver  are  received  by  the  Seller  Parties  pursuant  to Section 6.4,  deliver
copies of those notices of approval;
(h) execute and deliver to Buyer the Transition Services Agreement;
(i)  deliver  to  Buyer  duly  executed  and  acknowledged  releases  and  terminations  of  any  mortgages,  deeds  of  trust,
assignments of production, financing statements, fixture filings, and other encumbrances and interests burdening the
Assets (or any thereof), in sufficient duplicate originals to permit recording in all relevant jurisdictions; and
(j) execute, acknowledge and deliver any other agreements provided for herein or necessary or desirable to effectuate
the transactions contemplated hereby.
Section 11.5 Actions of Buyer at the Closing. At the Closing, Buyer shall:
(a) deliver to Goodrich LLC the Purchase Price (as adjusted), less the Deposit Amount, by wire transfer to an account
designated in writing by Goodrich LLC;
(b)  deliver  to  the  escrow  agent  the  amount  equal  to  (i)  the  aggregate  amount  of  all  downward  price  adjustments  for
Title  Defects  pursuant  to Section  7.4(a)  and  (ii)  the  aggregate  amount  of  all  Interest  Addition  Values  for  Interest
Additions pursuant to Section 7.7(c), in each case, as applicable;
(c) deliver notice required under the Escrow Agreement;
(d) take possession of the Assets;
(e) [Intentionally Omitted];
(f)  deliver  to  the  Seller  Parties  a  certificate,  duly  executed  by  an  authorized  officer  of  Buyer,  certifying  on  behalf  of
Buyer that the conditions set forth in Section 9.1 and Section 9.2 have been fulfilled;
(g)  where  notices  of  approval,  consent,  or  waiver  are  received  by  Buyer  pursuant  to Section 6.4,  deliver  copies  of
those notices of approval;
(h) execute and deliver to Goodrich LLC the Transition Services Agreement;
(i)  execute  and  acknowledge  counterparts  of  the  Conveyance  and  such  other  instruments  (in  form  and  substance
agreed upon by the Seller Parties and Buyer) as may be reasonably necessary to convey the Assets to Buyer; and
(j) execute, acknowledge and deliver any other agreements provided for herein or necessary or desirable to effectuate
the transactions contemplated hereby.
50
ARTICLE 12
TERMINATION
Section  12.1 Right of Termination.  This  Agreement  and  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  may  be  completely
terminated at any time at or prior to the Closing:
(a) by mutual written consent of the Parties;
(b) by either the Seller Parties or Buyer if the Closing shall not have occurred on or before October 31, 2012; provided,
however, that no Party shall have the right to terminate this Agreement pursuant to this clause (b) if such Party is at
such time in material breach of its representations and warranties set forth in this Agreement or negligently or willfully
failed to perform or observe its covenants and agreements herein in any material respect;
(c) by either the Seller Parties or Buyer if any Governmental Authority shall have issued an order, judgment or decree
or taken any other action challenging, delaying, restraining, enjoining, prohibiting or invalidating the consummation of
any of the transactions contemplated herein;
(d)  by  either  the  Seller  Parties  or  Buyer  if  the  other  is  in  material  breach  of  this  Agreement,  has  received  notice  of
such breach by the asserting Party and has not cured such breach on or before October 26, 2012, unless such breach
has been waived by the asserting Party.
(e)  Subject  to  the  limitations  on  Buyer’s  right  to  terminate  described  below  in  this Section 12.1(e),  if  the  sum  (the
“Walkaway Sum”) of (i) the  Aggregate  Title  Defect  Value  (which  shall  include  any  unresolved  disputed  Title  Defects
and any Title Defects that have not been Cured, whether or not the Seller Parties have elected to attempt to Cure),
plus  (ii)  the  Aggregate  Environmental  Defect  Value  (which  shall  include  any  unresolved  disputed  Environmental
Defects  and  any  Environmental  Defects  that  have  not  been  Remediated,  whether  or  not  the  Seller  Parties  have
elected to attempt to Remediate), plus (iii) the aggregate costs to repair or replace any portion of the Assets subject
to  a  Casualty  Loss  or  condemnation  that  occurs  after  the  date  of  this  Agreement  and  prior  to  the  Closing  and  any
other  Damages  related  thereto,  exceeds  20%  of  the  unadjusted  Purchase  Price,  then  either  the  Seller  Parties  or
Buyer may terminate this Agreement upon written notice to the other Parties. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence,
if the Seller Parties elect to Cure any asserted Title Defects, Remediate any asserted Environmental Defects, and/or
contest any asserted Title Defects, Title Defect Values, Environmental Defects, or Environmental Defect Values, and
if the Curing, Remediating, and/or successfully contesting of such Title Defects, Title Defect Values, Environmental
Defects, or Environmental Defect Values could reduce the Walkaway Sum to 20% or less of the unadjusted Purchase
Price,  then  the  Seller  Parties  shall  have  until  October  31,  2012,  to  Cure,  Remediate,  and/or  contest  such  Title
Defects, Title Defect Values, Environmental Defects, and/or Environmental Defect Values. At such time, if the Seller
Parties  have  not  Cured,  Remediated,  and/or  successfully  contested  sufficient  Title  Defects,  Title  Defect  Values,
Environmental Defects, and/or Environmental Defect Values to reduce the Walkaway Sum below 20% or less of the
unadjusted Purchase Price, then either the Seller Parties or Buyer may terminate this Agreement upon written notice
to the other Parties.
51
Section 12.2 Effect of Termination. In the event that the Closing does not occur as a result of any Party exercising
its right  to  terminate  pursuant  to Section 12.1,  then  except  as  set  forth  in Section 6.3, Article 1  and Article 15,  this
Agreement shall be null and void, but such termination shall not impair nor restrict the rights of either Party against
the other with respect to the Deposit Amount, or under Article 13.
ARTICLE 13
OBLIGATIONS AND INDEMNIFICATION
Section 13.1 Retained Obligations. Provided that the Closing occurs, the Seller Parties shall retain the following (the
“Retained Obligations”):
(a)  Any  and  all  Obligations  in  any  way  relating  to  the  ownership  and/or  operation  of  the  Excluded  Assets  and  the
Retained Assets;
(b)  All  Property  Costs  and  other  costs  which  are  for  the  account  of  Goodrich  LLC  pursuant  to Section  2.4(a)  or
Section 11.2;
(c)  Ad  valorem,  property,  severance  and  other  similar  taxes  or  assessments  based  upon  or  measured  by  the
ownership of the Assets or the production therefrom attributable to any period prior to the Effective Time;
(d) Excluded Taxes;
(e) All litigation relating to the Assets existing as of the Closing Date;
(f) Any liability to third parties for personal injury or death to the extent occurring before the Closing Date as a result of
the ownership and/or operation of the Assets;
(g)  Any  payment  obligations  relating  to  the  ownership  and  operation  of  the  Assets,  to  the  extent  attributable  to  the
period  prior  to  the  Effective  Time,  other  than  those  related  to  the  Suspense  Funds,  Environmental  Liabilities,  and
plugging,  abandonment,  and  surface  restoration  of  the  oil,  gas,  injection,  water,  or  other  wells  located  on  the  lands
covered by the Leases;
(h) The disposal or transportation by any Seller Party (or any of their Affiliates) of any Hazardous Substances to any
location not on the Assets or lands pooled or unitized therewith in violation of any Environmental Law; and
(i)  All  Obligations  attributable  to  or  arising  out  of  (i)  the  Seller  Parties’  or  their  Affiliates’  employment  of  their
employees, (ii) the Seller Parties’ or their Affiliates’ employee benefit plans, or (iii) the Seller Parties’ or their Affiliates’
responsibilities  under  the  Employee  Retirement  Income  Security  Act  of  1974,  as  amended,  in  respect  of  employee
benefit plans applicable to their employees.
52
Section 13.2 Buyer’s Indemnification. Provided that the Closing occurs, Buyer shall release, defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the Seller Indemnitees from and against any and all Losses suffered by such Seller Indemnitees arising
out of or related to:
(a) The Assumed Obligations;
(b) Buyer’s breach of any covenant or agreement made by Buyer in Article 6; or
(c) The breach of any representation or warranty made by Buyer in Article 5.
Section 13.3 Seller Parties’ Indemnification. Provided that the Closing occurs and subject to the other provisions of
this Article 13, the Seller Parties shall jointly and severally release, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Buyer
Indemnitees from and against any and all Losses arising out of or relating to:
(a) The Retained Obligations;
(b) Any Seller Party’s breach of any covenant or agreement made in Article 6;
(c) The breach of any of the Fundamental Representations;
(d) The breach of any other (non-Fundamental Representations) representation or warranty made by the Seller Parties
in Article 4 or Section 6.10; and/or
(e) Any federal, state and local income or franchise tax liabilities attributable to the ownership and/or operation of the
Assets  prior  to  the  Closing  Date,  including  any  income  or  franchise  tax  liabilities  arising  under  Treasury  Regulation
Section  1.1502-6  and  any  similar  provision  from  state,  local  or  foreign  applicable  law,  by  contract,  as  successor,
transferred or otherwise and which income tax is attributable to having been a member of any consolidated, combined
or unitary group prior to the Closing Date;
Section 13.4 Limitations for the Seller Parties’ Indemnification.
(a) Time Limitations. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein:
(i)  The  Seller  Parties’  indemnification  obligations  under Section  13.3(c)  and Section  13.3(d)  shall  only  apply  with
respect  to  any  breach  of  any  representation  or  warranty  if  Buyer  has  provided  the  Seller  Parties  with  written  notice
claiming indemnification therefor on or before the date on which such representation or warranty expires pursuant to
Section 14.2; and
(ii)  The  Seller  Parties’  indemnification  obligations  under Section 13.3(e)  shall  only  apply  to  any  claim  thereunder  if
Buyer has provided the Seller Parties with written notice claiming indemnification for such claim on or before the 60th
day after the expiration of any applicable statute of limitations.
53
(b) Deductible. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no claim may be made against the Seller Parties for
indemnification under Section 13.3(d) until the aggregate dollar amount of the Losses suffered or incurred by Buyer for
which Buyer would otherwise be entitled to indemnification thereunder exceeds a deductible (not a threshold) of 2% of
the unadjusted Purchase Price; after such time the Seller Parties shall be liable for only the amount by which the total
of  such  Losses  exceeds  such  deductible,  not  to  exceed,  however,  50%  of  the  unadjusted  Purchase  Price.
Notwithstanding the foregoing and anything to the contrary in the Agreement, no limit on liability, and no deductible or
liability  cap,  shall  be  applied  to  reduce  the  Seller  Parties’  obligations  under Section  13.3(a)  -  13.3(c)  and
Section 13.3(e).
(c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, any representation, warranty, covenant or agreement
that  is  qualified  by  materiality  or  material  adverse  effect  shall  be  deemed  not  to  be  so  qualified  for  purposes  of
indemnification pursuant to this Section 13.4. The Parties shall treat, for Tax purposes, any amounts paid pursuant to
this Article 13 as an adjustment to the Purchase Price.
Section 13.5 Notices and Defense of Indemnified Matters.
(a) Each Party seeking indemnification (each, an “Indemnified Party”)  pursuant  to  this Article 13 agrees that within a
reasonable period of time after it shall become aware of facts giving rise to a claim for indemnification pursuant to this
Article 13, it will provide notice thereof in writing to the Parties from whom indemnification is sought pursuant to this
Article  13  (each,  an  “Indemnifying  Party”)  specifying  the  nature  of  and  specific  basis  for  such  claim; provided,
however, that failure to timely provide such notice shall not affect the right of the Indemnified Party’s indemnification
hereunder, except to the extent the Indemnifying Party is materially prejudiced by such delay or omission.
(b)  The  Indemnifying  Party  shall  have  the  right  to  control  all  aspects  of  the  defense  of  (and  any  counterclaims  with
respect to) any claims brought against the Indemnified Party that are covered by the indemnification set forth in this
Article  13,  including  the  selection  of  counsel  (provided  that  such  counsel  shall  be  reasonably  acceptable  to  the
Indemnified Parties), determination of whether to appeal any decision of any court and the settling of any such matter
or  any  issues  relating  thereto; provided, however,  that  no  such  settlement  shall  be  entered  into  without  the  consent
(which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld,  conditioned  or  delayed)  of  the  Indemnified  Parties  unless  it
includes a full release of the Indemnified Parties and their respective Subsidiaries from such matter or issues, as the
case may be.
(c)  The  Indemnified  Parties  agree  to  cooperate  fully  with  the  Indemnifying  Parties  with  respect  to  all  aspects  of  the
defense  of  any  claims  covered  by  the  indemnification  set  forth  in Article 13,  including  the  prompt  furnishing  to  the
Indemnifying Parties of any correspondence or other notice relating thereto that the
54
Indemnified  Parties  may  receive,  permitting  the  names  of  the  Indemnified  Parties  to  be  utilized  in  connection  with
such  defense,  the  making  available  to  the  Indemnifying  Parties  of  any  files,  records  or  other  information  of  the
Indemnified  Parties  that  Indemnifying  Parties  consider  relevant  to  such  defense  and  the  making  available  to
Indemnifying  Parties  of  any  employees  of  the  Indemnified  Parties; provided, however,  that  in  connection  therewith
Indemnifying  Parties  agree  to  use  reasonable  efforts  to  minimize  the  impact  thereof  on  the  operations  of  the
Indemnified  Parties  and  further  agrees  to  reasonably  maintain  the  confidentiality  of  all  files,  records  and  other
information furnished by the Indemnified Parties pursuant to this Section 13.5. In no event shall the obligation of the
Indemnified  Parties  to  cooperate  with  Indemnifying  Parties  as  set  forth  in  the  immediately  preceding  sentence  be
construed as imposing upon the Indemnified Parties an obligation to hire and pay for counsel in connection with the
defense  of  any  claims  covered  by  the  indemnification  set  forth  in  this Article  13;  provided,  however,  that  the
Indemnified  Parties  may,  at  their  option,  cost  and  expense,  hire  and  pay  for  counsel  in  connection  with  any  such
defense.  The  Indemnifying  Parties  agree  to  keep  any  such  counsel  hired  by  the  Indemnified  Parties  reasonably
informed as to the status of any such defense, but Indemnifying Parties shall have the right to retain sole control over
such defense.
(d)  In  determining  the  amount  of  any  Losses  for  which  the  Indemnified  Parties  are  entitled  to  indemnification  under
this Agreement, the gross amount of the indemnification will be reduced by (i) any insurance proceeds realized by the
Indemnified  Parties,  and  such  correlative  insurance  benefit  shall  be  net  of  any  incremental  insurance  premium  that
becomes due and payable by the Indemnified Parties as a result of such claim and (ii) all amounts recovered by the
Indemnified  Parties  under  contractual  indemnities  from  third  parties.  The  Indemnified  Parties  hereby  agree  to  use
commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  realize  any  applicable  insurance  proceeds  or  amounts  recoverable  under  such
contractual  indemnities; provided,  however,  that  the  costs  and  expenses  (including  court  costs  and  reasonable
attorneys’,  accountants’,  and  experts’  fees)  of  the  Indemnified  Parties  in  connection  with  such  efforts  shall  be
promptly  reimbursed  by  the  Indemnifying  Parties.  To  the  extent  that  Indemnifying  Parties  have  made  any
indemnification  payment  hereunder  in  respect  of  a  claim  for  which  the  Indemnified  Parties  have  asserted  a  related
claim for insurance proceeds or under a contractual indemnity, Indemnifying Parties shall be subrogated to the rights
of the Indemnified Parties to receive the proceeds of such insurance or contractual indemnity.
ARTICLE 14
LIMITATIONS ON REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section  14.1 Disclaimers  of  Representations  and  Warranties.  The  express  representations  and  warranties  of  the
Seller  Parties  contained  in  this  Agreement  are  exclusive  and  are  in  lieu  of  all  other  representations  and  warranties,
express,  implied  or  statutory.  EXCEPT  FOR  THE  EXPRESS  REPRESENTATIONS  AND  WARRANTIES  OF  THE
SELLER  PARTIES  IN  THIS  AGREEMENT  OR  THE  CONVEYANCE,  BUYER  ACKNOWLEDGES  THAT  THE
SELLER  PARTIES  AND  THEIR  REPRESENTATIVES  HAVE  NOT  MADE,  AND  THE  SELLER  PARTIES  HEREBY
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM AND NEGATE, AND BUYER HEREBY EXPRESSLY WAIVES, ANY REPRESENTATION
OR WARRANTY, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, AT COMMON LAW, BY STATUTE OR OTHERWISE RELATING TO:
(a) TITLE TO THE ASSETS;
55
(b) PRODUCTION RATES, RECOMPLETION OPPORTUNITIES, DECLINE RATES, OR THE QUALITY, QUANTITY
OR VOLUME OF THE RESERVES OF HYDROCARBONS, IF ANY, ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE ASSETS;
(c)  THE  ACCURACY,  COMPLETENESS  OR  MATERIALITY  OF  ANY  INFORMATION,  DATA  OR  OTHER
MATERIALS  (WRITTEN  OR  ORAL)  NOW,  HERETOFORE  OR  HEREAFTER  FURNISHED  TO  BUYER  BY  OR  ON
BEHALF OF THE SELLER PARTIES; AND
(d) THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION OF THE ASSETS.
EXCEPT FOR THE EXPRESS REPRESENTATIONS OF THE SELLER PARTIES IN THIS AGREEMENT OR THE
CONVEYANCE, THE SELLER PARTIES EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM AND NEGATE, AND BUYER HEREBY WAIVES,
AS  TO  PERSONAL  PROPERTY,  EQUIPMENT,  INVENTORY,  MACHINERY  AND  FIXTURES  CONSTITUTING  A
PART OF THE ASSETS (i) ANY IMPLIED OR EXPRESS WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, (ii) ANY IMPLIED
OR  EXPRESS  WARRANTY  OF  FITNESS  FOR  A  PARTICULAR  PURPOSE,  (iii)  ANY  IMPLIED  OR  EXPRESS
WARRANTY  OF  CONFORMITY  TO  MODELS  OR  SAMPLES  OF  MATERIALS,  (iv)  ANY  RIGHTS  OF  BUYER
UNDER  APPROPRIATE  STATUTES  TO  CLAIM  DIMINUTION  OF  CONSIDERATION  OR  RETURN  OF  THE
PURCHASE  PRICE,  (v)  ANY  IMPLIED  OR  EXPRESS  WARRANTY  OF  FREEDOM  FROM  DEFECTS,  WHETHER
KNOWN OR UNKNOWN, (vi) ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES EXISTING UNDER APPLICABLE LAW, AND
(vii)  ANY  IMPLIED  OR  EXPRESS  WARRANTY  REGARDING  ENVIRONMENTAL  LAWS,  THE  RELEASE  OF
MATERIALS INTO THE ENVIRONMENT, OR PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT OR HEALTH, IT BEING THE
EXPRESS INTENTION OF THE PARTIES THAT (EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY COVERED BY A REPRESENTATION
OR WARRANTY CONTAINED IN THIS AGREEMENT) THE PERSONAL PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT, INVENTORY,
MACHINERY  AND  FIXTURES  INCLUDED  IN  THE  ASSETS  SHALL  BE  CONVEYED  TO  BUYER,  AND  BUYER
SHALL  ACCEPT  SAME,  AS  IS,  WHERE  IS,  WITH  ALL  FAULTS  AND  IN  THEIR  PRESENT  CONDITION  AND
STATE  OF  REPAIR,  AND  BUYER  REPRESENTS  TO  THE  SELLER  PARTIES  THAT  BUYER  SHALL  MAKE  OR
CAUSE TO BE MADE SUCH INSPECTIONS WITH RESPECT TO SUCH PERSONAL PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT,
INVENTORY,  MACHINERY  AND  FIXTURES  AS  BUYER  DEEMS  APPROPRIATE.  THE  PARTIES  AGREE  THAT,
TO  THE  EXTENT  REQUIRED  BY  APPLICABLE  LAW  TO  BE  EFFECTIVE,  THE  DISCLAIMERS  OF  CERTAIN
WARRANTIES CONTAINED IN THIS SECTION ARE “CONSPICUOUS” DISCLAIMERS FOR THE PURPOSES OF
ANY APPLICABLE LAW, RULE OR ORDER.
Section  14.2 Survival. The representations and warranties of Buyer in Article 5 shall survive Closing for a period of
one year from the Closing, after which Buyer shall have no
56
liability  or  obligation  in  relation  thereto  except  as  to  matters  for  which  a  Seller  Party  has  provided  Buyer  a  specific
written  claim  on  or  before  such  termination  date.  The  Seller  Parties’  representations  and  warranties  in Section  4.23
shall  survive  the  Closing  until  60  days  after  the  expiration  of  the  applicable  statute  of  limitations  period.  The
Fundamental Representations shall survive Closing for a period of three years from the Closing and the remainder of
the Seller Parties’ representations and warranties in Article 4 shall survive Closing for a period of one year from the
Closing, after which, in each case, the Seller Parties shall have no liability or obligation in relation thereto except as to
matters for which Buyer has provided the Seller Parties a specific written claim on or before such termination date. All
other  covenants  and  obligations  contained  in  this  Agreement  shall  survive  the  Closing  indefinitely,  except  as
specifically provided herein.
ARTICLE 15
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 15.1 Expenses. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Escrow Agreement or any document to
be  executed  pursuant  hereto,  regardless  of  whether  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement  occur,  each
Party shall be solely responsible for all expenses, including due diligence expenses, incurred by it in connection with
the  transactions  contemplated  hereby,  and  neither  Party  shall  be  entitled  to  any  reimbursement  for  such  expenses
from the other Party; provided, that Buyer shall be responsible for one half, and the Seller Parties shall be responsible
for one half, of the costs and expenses of the Escrow Agreement.
Section  15.2 Document  Retention.  As  used  in  this Section  15.2,  the  term  “Documents”  shall  mean  all  files,
documents, books, records and other data delivered to Buyer by the Seller Parties pursuant to the provisions of this
Agreement (other than those that the Seller Parties have retained either the original or a copy of), including: financial
and tax accounting records; land, title and division of interest files; contracts; engineering and well files; and books
and  records  related  to  the  operation  of  the  Assets  prior  to  the  Closing  Date.  Buyer  shall  retain  and  preserve  the
Documents for a period of no less than seven years following the Closing Date (or for such longer period as may be
required  by  law  or  governmental  regulation),  and  shall  allow  the  Seller  Parties  or  their  representatives,  at  the  Seller
Parties’ expense, to inspect the Documents at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice during regular business
hours  during  such  time  period.  The  Seller  Parties  shall  have  the  right  during  such  period  to  make  copies  of  the
Documents at their expense.
Section  15.3 Entire Agreement.  This  Agreement,  the  Escrow  Agreement,  the  documents  to  be  executed  pursuant
hereunto,  and  the  Exhibits  and  Schedules  attached  hereto  constitute  the  entire  agreement  between  the  Parties
pertaining  to  the  subject  matter  hereof  and  supersede  all  prior  agreements,  understandings,  negotiations  and
discussions, whether oral or written, of the Parties pertaining to the subject matter hereof.
Section  15.4 Amendments.  No  amendment  or  modification  of  this  Agreement  shall  be  binding  unless  executed  in
writing by the Parties and specifically referencing this Agreement and identified as an amendment or modification.
Section  15.5 Waiver.  No  waiver  or  consent,  express  or  implied,  by  any  Party  of  or  to  any  breach  or  default  by  any
Person in the performance by such Person of its obligations
57
hereunder  shall  be  deemed  or  construed  to  be  a  consent  or  waiver  of  or  to  any  other  breach  or  default  in  the
performance by such Person of the same or any other obligations of such Person hereunder. Failure on the part of a
Party to complain of any act of any Person or to declare any Person in default, irrespective of how long such failure
continues, shall not constitute a waiver by such Party of its rights hereunder until the applicable statute of limitations
period has run. Any waiver shall be effective only if in a writing executed and delivered by the applicable Party.
Section  15.6 Publicity.  The  Parties  hereto  shall  consult  with  each  other  and  no  Party  shall  issue  any  public
announcement  or  statement  with  respect  to  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  without  the  consent  of  the  other
Parties, unless such announcement or statement is required by applicable law or stock exchange requirements.
Section  15.7 No  Third  Party  Beneficiaries.  Except  as  provided  in Section  13.2  and Section  13.3,  nothing  in  this
Agreement  shall  provide  any  benefit  to  any  third  Person  or  entitle  any  third  Person  to  any  claim,  cause  of  action,
remedy or right of any kind, it being the intent of the Parties that this Agreement shall otherwise not be construed as a
third  Person  beneficiary  contract.  The  provisions  of  this  Agreement  are  enforceable  solely  by  the  Parties  (including
any permitted assignee), and no limited partner or member of Buyer or other Person shall have the right, separate and
apart from the Parties hereto, to enforce any provision of this Agreement or to compel any Party to comply with the
terms of this Agreement.
Section  15.8 Assignment.  Neither  this  Agreement  nor  any  of  the  rights,  interests  or  obligations  hereunder  may  be
assigned,  by  operation  of  law  otherwise,  by  any  Party  without  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  other  Parties  (which
consent may be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the other Party), and any attempted assignment without
such  consent  shall  be  void; provided,  that  Buyer  may  in  its  sole  discretion  assign  this  Agreement,  or  the  right  to
purchase all or any of the Assets hereunder, to any of its Affiliates. Subject to the foregoing, this Agreement shall be
binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties and their respective successors and assigns.
Section  15.9 Governing  Law.  This  Agreement,  other  documents  delivered  pursuant  hereto  and  the  legal  relations
between  the  Parties  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  and  enforced  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  State  of
Texas, without giving effect to principles of conflicts of law that would result in the application of the laws of another
jurisdiction. The Parties hereto irrevocably submit to the jurisdiction of the courts of the State of Texas and the federal
courts of the United States of America located in Harris County, Texas over any dispute between the Parties arising
out  of  this  Agreement  or  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby,  and  each  Party  irrevocably  agrees  that  all  such
claims  in  respect  of  such  dispute  shall  be  heard  and  determined  in  such  courts  (except  to  the  extent  a  dispute,
controversy,  or  claim  arising  out  of  or  in  connection  with  determination  of  Purchase  Price  adjustments  pursuant  to
Section 11.3(c) is referred to an expert pursuant to that Section). The Parties hereto irrevocably waive, to the fullest
extent permitted by law, any objection which they may now or hereafter have to the venue of any dispute arising out
of this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby being brought in such court or any defense of inconvenient
forum for the maintenance of such dispute. Each Party agrees that a judgment in any such dispute may be enforced
in other jurisdictions by a suit on the judgment or any other manner provided by law. The Parties hereby waive trial
by  jury  in  any  action,  proceeding  or  counterclaim  brought  by  any  Party  against  another  in  any  matter
whatsoever arising out of or in relation to or in connection with this Agreement.
58
Section  15.10 Specific Performance.  The  Parties  acknowledge  and  agree  that  the  remedy  of  specific  performance
shall be available to Buyer in the event that a Seller Party willfully breaches this Agreement.
Section  15.11 Notices.  Any  notice,  communication,  request,  instruction  or  other  document  by  any  Party  to  another
required or permitted hereunder shall be given in writing and delivered in person or sent by U.S. Mail postage prepaid,
return  receipt  requested,  overnight  courier,  facsimile  or  electronic  mail  to  the  respective  address  of  the  applicable
Party set forth below. Any such notice shall be effective only upon receipt; provided, that notice given by electronic
mail  or  facsimile  transmission  shall  be  confirmed  by  appropriate  answer-back  and  shall  be  effective  upon  actual
receipt if received during the recipient’s normal business hours, or at the beginning of the recipient’s next Business
Day after receipt if not received during the recipient’s normal business hours.
The Seller Parties:
Goodrich Petroleum Company, L.L.C.
801 Louisiana, Suite 700
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Michael J. Killelea
Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate Secretary
Phone: (713) 780-9494
Fax: (713) 780-9254
E-mail: Mike.Killelea@goodrichpetroleum.com
With a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
Baker & McKenzie LLP
Attention: Michael J. Byrd
711 Louisiana, Suite 3400
Houston, Texas 77002
Phone: (713) 427-5021
Fax: (713) 427-5099
E-mail: Michael.byrd@bakermckenzie.com
Buyer:
Memorial Production Operating LLC
c/o Memorial Production Partners LP
1301 McKinney Street, Suite 2100
Houston, TX 77010
Attention: General Counsel
Phone: (713) 588-8300
Fax: (713) 588-8301
E-mail: kroane@memorialrd.com
With a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, L.L.P.
Attention: John Goodgame
1111 Louisiana Street, 44th Floor
Houston, Texas 77002
Phone: (713) 220-8144
Fax: (713) 236-0822
Email: jgoodgame@akingump.com
59
Either Party may, by written notice so delivered to the other Party, change its address for notice purposes hereunder.
Section 15.12 Severability. If any term or other provision of this Agreement is held to be invalid, illegal or incapable
of  being  enforced  by  any  rule  of  law  or  public  policy,  all  other  conditions  and  provisions  of  this  Agreement  shall
nevertheless remain in full force and effect, and the Parties shall negotiate in good faith to modify this Agreement so
as  to  effect  their  original  intention  as  closely  as  possible  in  an  acceptable  manner  to  the  end  that  the  transactions
contemplated hereby are fulfilled to the extent possible.
Section 15.13 Time of the Essence. Time shall be of the essence with respect to all time periods and notice periods
set forth in this Agreement. If the date specified in this Agreement for giving any notice or taking any action is not a
Business Day (or if the period during which any notice is required to be given or any action taken expires on a date
which is not a Business Day), then the date for giving such notice or taking such action (and the expiration of such
period during which notice is required to be given or action taken) shall be the next day which is a Business Day.
Section  15.14 Counterpart  Execution.  This  Agreement  may  be  executed  in  any  number  of  counterparts.  If
counterparts  of  this  Agreement  are  executed,  the  signature  pages  from  various  counterparts  may  be  combined  into
one  composite  instrument  for  all  purposes.  All  counterparts  together  shall  constitute  only  one  Agreement,  but  each
counterpart  shall  be  considered  an  original.  No  Party  shall  be  bound  until  all  Parties  have  executed  a  counterpart.
Facsimile  or  other  electronic  copies  of  signatures  shall  constitute  original  signatures  for  all  purposes  of  this
Agreement and any enforcement hereof.
Section  15.15 Further Assurances. After Closing, each of the Seller Parties and Buyer agrees to take such further
actions  and  to  execute,  acknowledge  and  deliver,  without  further  consideration,  all  such  further  documents  as  are
reasonably  requested  by  the  other  for  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement  or  of  any  document  delivered
pursuant to this Agreement.
60
Section  15.16 Transfer  Taxes.  Buyer  shall  be  responsible  for  and  pay  all  sales,  transfer,  use  and  similar  Taxes
arising  from  or  associated  with  the  transfer  of  the  Assets  (other  than  Taxes  based  on  income)  and  all  costs  and
expenses  (including  recording  fees  and  real  estate  transfer  taxes  and  real  estate  transfer  stamps)  incurred  in
connection with obtaining or recording title to the Assets.
[Signature Pages Follow]
61
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Seller Parties and Buyer have executed and delivered this Agreement as of the date
first set forth above.
SELLER PARTIES:
GOODRICH PETROLEUM COMPANY, L.L.C.
/s/ Michael J. Killelea
By:
Name: Michael J. Killelea
Title:
Senior  Vice  President  –  General
Counsel and Corporate Secretary
GOODRICH PETROLEUM CORPORATION
/s/ Michael J. Killelea
By:
Name: Michael J. Killelea
Title:
Senior  Vice  President  –  General
Counsel and Corporate Secretary
BUYER:
MEMORIAL PRODUCTION OPERATING LLC
By:
By:
Memorial  Production  Partners  LP,  its
sole member
Memorial  Production  Partners  GP  LLC,
its general partner
By:
/s/ Kyle N. Roane
/s/ Kyle N. Roane
By:
Name: Kyle N. Roane
Title:
General Counsel
Purchase and Sale Agreement
Signature Page