
EX-4.30 3 ex430.htm MANAGEMENT SERVICES AGREEMENT ex430.htm
Exhibit 4.30
MANAGEMENT SERVICES AGREEMENT
This Management Services Agreement made as of the • day of •, •.
BETWEEN:
OLYMPUS PACIFIC MINERALS INC., a Canadian company having its head office at 10 King
Street East, Suite 500, Toronto, Ontario M5C 1C3, Canada
(the "Company")
OF THE FIRST PART
AND:
[insert name of consultant], a [country of location] company having its head office at [address]
(the "Consultant")
OF THE SECOND PART
BACKGROUND:
A.At the request of the Company the Consultant has agreed to provide the services of • (the "•")
to provide senior executive services for the Company as may be required by the Company for
the  proper  management  and  advancement  of  the  Company's  business,  upon  the  terms  and
conditions set out below.
WHEREAS:
A.The Company wishes to engage the services of the Consultant on the terms and conditions of
this Agreement.
B.The Consultant represents that it possesses the necessary expertise to provide management
and consulting services and shall be responsible for the employment or engagement of the
Manager  to  be  made  available  to  the  Company  for  the  purposes  of  providing  the  services
pursuant to this Agreement and unless otherwise agreed shall pay all remuneration payable to
the Manager and keep all records in relation to such personnel and make all deductions from
the remuneration as required by law.
C.The Consultant and the Company have agreed to enter into this Agreement to ensure that the
Consultant will continue to provide services to the Company and further to evidence the fees
and other benefits to be received by the Consultant in respect to such services.
D. The Manager has acknowledged and consented to the terms of this Agreement.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and premises herein contained, in
consideration of the Consultant continuing to provide its services to the Company, and for other
good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged
by the parties) the Consultant and the Company hereby agree as follows:
1.                       Interpretation
For all purposes of this Agreement, except as otherwise expressly provided or unless the context
otherwise requires:
(a) “affiliate”  and  “associate”  have  the  meanings  given  to  them  by  the Canada  Business
Corporations Act;
(b)  “Agreement” means this management services agreement as from time to time supplemented
or amended pursuant to the applicable provisions hereof;
(c)  “Board” means the Board of Directors of the Company;
(d)  “Good Reason” means, in the context of the termination of this Agreement by the Consultant
pursuant  to  section  5(c)  hereof,  the  occurrence  of  one  of  the  following  events  without  the
Consultant’s express written consent:
(i)  the nature of the duties, requirements and arrangements of the Consultant or Manager are
substantially changed from those set out herein or in any position description applicable to the
Manager such that the nature of the work that is required to be performed is not work which is
consistent  with  the  work  ordinarily  required  to  be  performed  for  a  position  similar  to  that
assumed by the Manager for a publicly listed mining company;
(ii)  the Manager’s title is changed without the written agreement of the Consultant;
(iii)  a reduction by the Company in the Consultant's Annual Fee;
(iv)  a change in the executive office of the Company designated pursuant to section 2(d) hereof
to a location more than fifty (50) kilometres from the location of such office as at the date
hereof;
(v)  the requirement by the Company that the Manager be based anywhere other than within a
fifty (50) kilometre radius of the location or locations set out in section 2(d) hereof; or
- 2 -
(vi)  the  failure  by  the  Company  to  continue  in  effect,  or  a  change  of  the  Consultant’s  or  the
Manager's  participation  in  benefits  under  any  bonus  or  incentive  compensation  or  benefit
plan, any stock ownership, stock purchase, stock option or other equity incentive plan, any
life,  health,  accident,  disability  or  similar  plan  providing  welfare  benefits  or  any  plan  or
program  of  fringe  benefits  in  which  the  Consultant  or  the  Manager  are  participating  (the
"Existing Plans"),  the  effect  of  which  would  be  to  materially  reduce  the  total  value,  in  the
aggregate, of the Consultant’s or the Manager's benefits under all the Existing Plans and all
amendments thereto and plans substituted therefor, as compared to the Consultant’s or the
Manager's benefits under the Existing Plans then in effect.
(e)  “Notice  of  Termination”  means  a  notice  of  termination  pursuant  to  Section  5  hereof  which
shall  indicate  the  specific  termination  provision  of  this  Agreement  relied  upon  and,  in  the
case  of  a  notice  of  termination  for  cause  under  Section  5(d),  shall  set  forth  in  reasonable
detail  the  facts  and  circumstances  claimed  to  provide  a  basis  for  termination  of  the
Consultant's engagement.
(f)  “Term” means the period of the engagement of the Consultant as set out in section 2(b);
(g)  unless otherwise specified, the words “herein”, “hereof” and “hereunder” and other words of
similar  import  refer  to  this  Agreement  as  a  whole  and  not  to  any  particular  paragraph,
subparagraph or other subdivision;
(h)  unless otherwise provided, all references to currency shall mean Canadian dollars;
(i)  a reference to an entity includes any entity that is a successor to such entity;
(j)  the headings are for convenience only and are not intended as a guide to interpretation of this
Agreement or any portion hereof; and
(k)  a reference to a statute includes all regulations made pursuant thereto, all amendments to the
statute  or  regulations  in  force  from  time  to  time,  and  any  statute  or  regulation  which
supplements or supersedes such statute or regulations.
2.                      Engagement
(a)  The Company hereby engages the Consultant to provide for the Manager to render full-time
services  to  the  Company  and  the  Consultant  hereby  accepts  such  engagement  by  the
Company upon and subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth.
(b)  Such  engagement  will  be  for  a  term  of •  commencing  on  the  date  of  this  Agreement  and
continuing until • unless earlier terminated as hereinafter provided.
- 3 -
(c)  The  Manager  shall  serve  in  the  position  of •  reporting  to  the  Company’s  Chief  Executive
Officer.  The  Consultant’s  (and  as  appropriate,  the  Manager’s)  responsibilities,  duties  and
authority  shall  be  as  hereinafter  set  forth  and  as  provided  for  in  any  position  description
established by the Board or a committee thereof subject to the overall policies and direction
of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.
(d)  The  Consultant  shall  procure  that  the  Manager  shall  be  based  at  and  perform  its  duties
principally  in •  or  as  otherwise  mutually  agreed  upon  between  the  Consultant  and  the
Company,  but,  recognizing  that  the  position  will  require  a  considerable  level  of  travel,  the
Manager shall be present at and perform his duties in other jurisdictions with such frequency
and for such duration as is reasonably necessary for the proper and timely performance of the
Consultant’s duties hereunder, provided that:
(i)  the Consultant must first provide its consent to any relocation of the Manager for a term of
greater than three (3) months; and
(ii)  The Manager cannot be required to be on the road traveling for the Company on business
more than sixty (60) calendar days in any one year.
The Consultant’s designated executive office shall be •.
(e)  The Consultant shall procure that the Manager act honestly and in good faith with a view to
the best interests of the Company and exercise the care, diligence and skill that a reasonably
prudent  person  would  exercise  in  comparable  circumstances.  Provided  that  there  is  no
conflict with the Manager's obligations pursuant to this Agreement, with prior notice to and the
consent  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board,  the  Manager  may  act  as  a  director  for  other
corporations and organizations. The Consultant shall further procure that the Manager will
comply in all material respects with any Company policies that may apply to the Manager
from time to time.
(f)  The  Consultant  may  not  replace  the  Manager  with  another  employee  of  the  Consultant
without the prior written approval of the Company.
(g)  The  Consultant  and  the  Manager  will  perform  all  services  on  behalf  of  the  Company
hereunder  as  an  independent  contractor,  and  neither  the  Consultant  nor  Manager  will  be
considered for any reason to be a partner, employee or servant of the Company or, except to
the extent expressly permitted hereunder, an agent of the Company.  To the extent necessary
to  permit  the  Consultant  to  perform  the  services  required  hereunder,  the  Company  will
provide  evidence  of  the  authority  of  the  Manager  or  its  representatives  as  agent  for  the
Company hereunder.
- 4 -
3.           Fees
(a)  The Consultant will be paid a fee of $• per annum. The Consultant’s fee may be increased
from time to time by the Board during the term of this Agreement (the amount of the annual
fee determined by the Board or a subcommittee thereof pursuant to this section at any time
being the “Annual Fee”).
(b)  The Consultant will be entitled to participate in the Company’s stock option plan and shall
receive such grants thereunder as may be determined by the Board from time to time. Any
stock options granted to the Consultant (or as the Consultant may direct) at any time during
this Agreement shall vest, terminate and be exercisable on the terms set out in the form of
stock option agreement in use by the Company at the time of such grant and in accordance
with the terms of the Company’s stock option plan, subject to any necessary regulatory and
Board approval.
(c)  The  Consultant  shall  also  be  entitled  to  receive  additional  fees  as  participation  in  the
Company’s short-term incentive plan and in any successor plan. Subject to adjustment from
time to time by the Board or a subcommittee thereof, the Consultant’s target incentive rate will
be •% for achievement of the threshold level, •% for achievement of the target level and •% for
achievement of the maximum level which rates shall be measured with reference to corporate
key performance indicator objectives reviewed and determined annually by the Board or a
committee thereof.
(d)  The Consultant acknowledges that all taxes (except GST or HST, if any) and other charges
arising  in  relation  to  the  remuneration  of  the  Consultant  are  the  responsibility  of  the
Consultant. The Consultant agrees and indemnifies the Company against any such taxes or
other  charges  arising  under  this  Agreement.    Income  taxes  payable  by  the  Consultant  or
Manager in any jurisdiction in which the Consultant or Manager is required to pay income
taxes  are  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  Consultant  or  Manager,  as  applicable,  and  not  the
responsibility  of  the  Company.  If  the  location  or  locations  that  the  Consultant  or  Manager
performs its duties is outside of Canada, the Company may deduct and pay income tax as
directed by the Consultant or Manager if requested by the Consultant or Manager to deduct
and pay such income tax.  The Company will make the deductions required by law prior to
payment  with  details  provided  to  the  Consultant  per  payment  and  per  annum.  Any  such
deductions shall constitute remuneration paid to the Consultant in satisfaction of the amounts
owing to the Consultant hereunder in addition to any amounts paid directly to the Consultant.
(e)  The Consultant shall be solely responsible, as an independent contractor, for complying with
all  applicable  laws,  rules  and  regulations,  including,  if  applicable,  without  limitation  the
requirements of the Income Tax Act (Canada), the Employment Insurance Act (Canada) and
the Canada Pension Plan Act or similar legislation in other jurisdictions. The Consultant shall
be  responsible  for  deducting  all  applicable  federal  and  provincial  income  taxes,  Canada
Pension  Plan  deductions  and  Employment  Insurance  premiums  on  any  remuneration
provided by the Company to the Consultant and for remitting same, if applicable, to Canada
Revenue Agency or such other governmental authorities as prescribed by law.
- 5 -
(f)  In addition to the foregoing, the Company will reimburse the Consultant for all reasonable and
documented  expenses  actually  and  properly  incurred  by  the  Consultant  or  the  Manager  in
connection  with  the  business  of  the  Company  and  any  of  its  subsidiaries.  The  Consultant
shall  render  expense  accounts  requesting  reimbursement  of  expenses  hereunder  within  a
reasonable  period  of 
in  accordance  with  such
documentation and verification as the Company from time to time may require.
following  such  expense  and
time
(g)  Nothing herein will disentitle the Consultant from participating in any profit sharing or bonus
program,  pension,  stock  option,  stock  purchase,  stock  appreciation,  and  health  or  medical
insurance,  or  other  benefit  plans  or  retirement  rights  from  time  to  time  established  by  the
Company and to which executives of the Company or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates are
from time to time entitled. As a term of its engagement, the Manager will be enrolled in the
Company's benefit plans effective the date of the signing of this Agreement.
4.           Annual Commitment
During the Term of this Agreement the Consultant agrees to provide the services of the Manager
for  forty-eight  (48)  weeks  in  each  year  to  be  mutually  agreed  between  the  Company  and  the
Consultant. If the Manager works for more than forty-eight (48) weeks in any calendar year, the
Consultant may at its sole discretion accept on behalf of the Manager a cash payout equal to the
fee that would be payable for those days.
5.           Termination
(a)  Subject to section 5(c), the Consultant may terminate this Agreement and the services being
provided by it hereunder by giving the Company at least three (3) months prior written notice
(the "Consultant's Termination Notice"),  provided  that  the  Company  shall  have  the  right  to
give written notice to the Consultant that the Company is waiving the full notice period and is
permitting this Agreement and the services of the Consultant to be terminated upon a date
that  is  less  than  three  months  after  the  date  of  the  Consultant's  Termination  Notice  as
determined by the Company (the “Company’s Waiver of Notice”) and further provided that all
obligations of the Company to the Consultant hereunder shall cease upon the date specified
in  the  Consultant’s  Termination  Notice  or  the  Company’s  Waiver  of  Notice,  whichever  is
applicable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Company provides the Company’s Waiver of
Notice,  it  will  be  obligated  to  pay  fees  up  to  and  including  the  date  specified  in  the
Consultant’s Termination Notice at the rate of the Consultant’s Annual Fee in effect at the
time of the notice subject to a maximum of three (3) months payment.
- 6 -
(b)  The  Consultant  shall  be  entitled  to  terminate  this  Agreement  immediately  upon  serving
written notice to the Company in the event that:
(i)  a receiver or liquidator is appointed in respect of the Company; or
(ii)  the Company fails to pay any moneys payable hereunder within fourteen (14) calendar days
of the due date and shall further fail to pay such moneys within fourteen (14) calendar days of
receiving written notice of such failure from the Consultant.
(c)  Notwithstanding  Section  5(a),the  Consultant  may  terminate  the  agreement  at  any  time  for
Good  Reason  by  giving  the  Company  at  least  seven  (7)  days’  notice  in  which  case  the
Company shall be obligated to pay the following amounts to the Consultant on or before the
fifth  calendar  day  following  the  date  the  Consultant  actually  ceases  to  be  engaged  by  the
Company (the “Date of Termination”):
(i)  the Consultant's fees through to the Date of Termination at the rate of the Consultant’s then
existing Annual Fee at the time notice of resignation or notice of termination was given, plus
the amount of any expenses reimbursable pursuant to the terms hereof;
(ii)  in lieu of further fees for periods subsequent to the Date of Termination, a payment equal to •
months at the rate of the Consultant’s then existing Annual Fee;
(iii)  an amount equal to one and a half times the average of (i) the target bonus payable under
the Company’s short-term incentive plan to the Consultant for the current fiscal year, and (ii)
the greater of the bonuses actually paid to the Consultant in each of the previous two fiscal
years; and
(iv)  subject to Section 5(c)(v), in lieu of common shares of the Company issuable upon exercise
of  options,  if  any,  previously  granted  to  the  Consultant  under  the  Company's  incentive
programs and remaining unexercised at 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on the fourth calendar day
following  the  Date  of  Termination,  which  options  shall  be  cancelled  upon  the  payment
referred to herein, a cash amount equal to the aggregate difference between the exercise
price  of  all  options  held  by  the  Consultant,  whether  or  not  then  fully  exercisable,  and  the
average of the closing prices of the Company's common shares as reported on the Toronto
Stock Exchange and Australian Securities Exchange for thirty (30) calendar days preceding
the Date of Termination; and
(v)  Notwithstanding Section 5(c)(iv), the Consultant shall have the right, exercisable up to the
fourth  calendar  day  following  the  Date  of  Termination,  to  elect  to  waive  the  application  of
Section 5(c)(iv) following the Date of Termination. The Consultant may exercise this election
on  or  before  5:00  p.m.  Toronto  time  on  such  fourth  calendar  day  by  delivering  a  notice  in
writing to the Company of such waiver whereupon:
- 7 -
(A)  in accordance with the Company’s stock option plan, the Consultant’s unvested options on
shares of the Company shall immediately vest and all of the Consultant's options on shares
of the Company will expire within ninety (90) days of the Date of Termination; and
(B)  The  Company  shall  be  relieved  of  any  obligation  in  connection  with  termination  of  the
Consultant's engagement to make the payment in Section 5(c)(iv).
Termination of the Agreement in accordance with this section shall relieve the Company from
any and all obligations, liabilities or claims by the Consultant, exclusive of monies owing to the
Consultant up to the date of termination as set out in this section.
The Consultant agrees to accept such compensation in full satisfaction of any and all claims the
Consultant  or  Manager  has  or  may  have  against  the  Company  and  the  Consultant  agrees  to
execute and deliver, and to cause the Manager to execute and deliver, a full and final release in
writing  of  the  Company  with  respect  to  the  same  upon  payment  of  said  sum,  except  monies
owing by either party to the other up to the Date of Termination.
(d)  The Company may terminate this Agreement and the engagement of the Consultant at any
time without cause in which case the Company shall be obligated to pay the Consultant the
following amounts on or before the fifth (5th) calendar day following the date of the Notice of
Termination:
(i)  the Consultant's fees through to the date of termination at the rate of the Consultant’s then
existing Annual Fee at the time the Notice of Termination was given plus the amount of any
expenses reimbursable pursuant to the terms hereof;
(ii)  in  lieu  of  further  fees  for  periods  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  Notice  of  Termination,  a
payment equal to • months at the rate of the Consultant’s then existing Annual Fee;
(iii)  an amount equal to one and a half times the average of (i) the target bonus payable under
the Company’s short-term incentive plan to the Consultant for the current fiscal year, and (ii)
the greater of the bonuses actually paid to the Consultant in each of the previous two fiscal
years; and
(iv)  the Consultant's options on shares of the Company shall remain in full force and effect for the
earlier  of  the  expiry  date  of  such  options  or  twelve  (12)  months  following  the  Notice  of
Termination  and  the  option  agreements  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  amended,  to  the
extent required, to the effect that any provision which would otherwise terminate such options
as a result of the termination of the Consultant’s services shall be null and void.
- 8 -
Termination of the Agreement in accordance with this section shall relieve the Company from
any and all obligations, liabilities or claims by the Consultant, exclusive of monies owing to the
Consultant up to the date of termination as set out in this section.
The Consultant agrees to accept such compensation in full satisfaction of any and all claims the
Consultant  or  Manager  has  or  may  have  against  the  Company  and  the  Consultant  agrees  to
execute and deliver, and to cause the Manager to execute and deliver, a full and final release in
writing  of  the  Company  with  respect  to  the  same  upon  payment  of  said  sum,  except  monies
owing by either party to the other up to the date of termination.
(e)  The Company may at any time terminate the services of the Consultant and this Agreement
for  any  just  cause  that  would  in  law  permit  the  Company  to,  without  notice,  terminate  the
Consultant, in which event the Consultant shall not be entitled to the payment in sections 5(d)
(ii) or (iii) or the benefit of section 5(d)(iv), but shall be entitled to receive the full amount of the
Consultant's fees due through to the date of the notice of termination as set out in section 5(d)
(i).
(f)  Any termination by the Company pursuant to Section 5(d) or (e) shall be communicated by
written Notice of Termination. For purposes of this Agreement, no such purported termination
shall be effective without such notice.
(g)  On the termination of this engagement for any reason, the Consultant agrees to deliver up to
the Company all equipment, documents, financial statements, records, plans, drawings and
papers of every nature in any way relating to the affairs of the Company and its associated or
affiliated companies which may be in its possession or under its control and, if applicable and
requested  by  the  Company,  the  Manager's  resignation  as  a  Director  or  Officer  of  the
Company and any subsidiary or other affiliated entity of the Company, effective immediately.
Except  as  provided  in  this  Agreement,  the  Consultant  will  not  be  entitled  to  receive  any
additional compensation for such loss of office or otherwise.
(h)  The  Consultant  shall  not  be  required  to  mitigate  the  amount  of  any  payment  provided  for
under any paragraph of this Section 5 by seeking other engagement or otherwise nor shall
the  amount  of  any  payment  provided  for  in  this  Section  5  be  reduced  by  any  other
compensation earned by the Consultant as a result of engagement by another client after the
date of termination or otherwise.
(i)  The Company shall have full rights to offset any money properly due by the Consultant or the
Manager to the Company against any amounts payable by the Company to the Consultant
hereunder.
- 9 -
(j)  The Manager will cease to be enrolled in any Company benefit plan after the last day of any
notice period given.
6.           Successors, Binding Agreement
This Agreement shall enure to the benefit of and be binding upon and shall be enforceable by
and against the Company's successors and assigns. The Company shall require any successor
(whether direct or indirect, by purchase, merger, consolidation or otherwise) to all, or substantially
all, of the business or assets of the Company, by agreement in form and substance satisfactory to
the Consultant, to expressly assume and agree to perform this Agreement in the same manner
and to the same extent that the Company would be required to perform if no such succession had
taken place. As used in this Agreement, the "Company" shall be defined in the preamble to this
Agreement and include any successor to its business or assets which executes and delivers the
agreement provided for in this Section 6 or which otherwise becomes bound by all the terms and
provisions of this Agreement by operation of law. This Agreement shall enure to the benefit of
and be enforceable by the Consultant's heirs, administrators, executors and successors to the
extent permitted herein.
7.           Notices
For the purposes of this Agreement, notices and all other communications provided for herein
shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given on the first following calendar
day  when  delivered,  emailed  or  faxed  or  on  the  fifth  following  calendar  day  when  mailed  in
Canada by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, addressed as
follows:
(a)  If to the Consultant:
[insert address]
Email: •
(b)  If to the Company:
Olympus Pacific Minerals Inc.
10 King Street East, Suite 500
Toronto, Ontario
M5C lC3 Canada
Fax: (416) 572-4202
Email: jseton@olympuspacific.com
or to such other address as any party may have furnished to the others in writing in accordance
herewith, except that notices of change of address shall be effective only upon receipt.
 
 
 
- 10 -
8.           Governing Law
The validity, interpretation, construction and performance of this Agreement shall be governed by
the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada.
9.           Miscellaneous
No  provisions  of  this  Agreement  may  be  modified,  waived  or  discharged  unless  such  waiver,
modification or discharge is agreed to in writing signed by the Consultant and the Company and,
if requested by the Company, acknowledged by the Manager.  No waiver by either party hereto at
any time of any breach by the other party hereto of, or compliance with any condition or provision
of this Agreement to be performed by such other party shall be deemed a waiver of similar or
dissimilar provisions or conditions at the same or at any prior or subsequent time.
10.           Severability
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provisions of this Agreement shall not affect the validity
or enforceability or any other provision of this Agreement, which shall remain in full force and
effect.
11.           Counterparts and Facsimile
This Agreement may be executed in one or more counterparts and by facsimile transmission,
each of which shall be deemed to be an original but all of which together will constitute one and
the same Agreement.
12.           Assignability
Neither  of  the  parties  hereto  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the  other,  assign  or  transfer  this
Agreement  or  any  rights  or  obligations  hereunder,  except  as  provided  in  Section  6.  Without
limiting  the  foregoing,  the  Consultant's  right  to  receive  payments  hereunder  shall  not  be
assignable or transferable, whether by pledge, creation of a security interest or otherwise, and in
the event of any attempted assignment or transfer contrary to this paragraph, the Company shall
have no liability to pay any amount so attempted to be assigned or transferred.  Notwithstanding
the generality of the foregoing, the Consultant may assign its rights and obligations pursuant to
this  Agreement  to  a  company  or  other  entity  wholly  controlled  by  the  Consultant  which
undertakes  to  the  Company  to  make  the  Consultant's  services  available  to  the  Company  on
identical terms and conditions as this Agreement.
13.           Competitive Activity
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, during the Term of this Agreement and for a period of
twelve (12) months following the date of termination of this Agreement, neither the Consultant
nor the Manager shall:
- 11 -
(i)  be directly or indirectly engaged in any company or firm which is a direct competitor to the
Company  in  any  province  in  Canada  or  any  country  where  the  Company  is  carrying  on
business;
(ii)  be  employed  by  another  company  which  may  be  formed  as  a  direct  competitor  to  the
Company in Canada or any country where the Company is carrying on business;
(iii)  intentionally act in any manner that is detrimental to the relations between the Company and
its customers, employees or investors; and
(iv)  solicit any of the customers, employees and investors of the Company or be connected with
any  person,  firm  or  corporation  soliciting  or  servicing  any  other  customers,  employees  or
investors of the Company.
14.           Confidentiality
Neither the Consultant nor the Manager shall either during the Term of this Agreement or at any
time  thereafter  divulge,  publish  or  otherwise  reveal  either  directly  or  indirectly  or  through  any
person,  firm  or  corporation  the  private  affairs  or  secrets  of  the  Company,  its  subsidiaries  or
affiliates to any person or persons other than the Directors of the Company and shall not without
the prior written consent of the Company either during the continuance of this Agreement or at
any time thereafter use for its own purpose or any purpose other than those of the Company any
information it may acquire in relation to the business and affairs of the Company. The Consultant
agrees,  during  the  Term  of  this  Agreement  and  at  all  times  thereafter  to  keep  confidential  all
information and material provided to it by the Company, excepting only such information as is
already  known  to  the  public,  and  including  any  such  information  and  material  relating  to  any
customer, vendor or other party transacting business with the Company, and not to release, use
or  disclose  the  same  except  with  the  prior  written  permission  of  the  Company.    The  within
understanding shall survive the termination or cancellation of this Agreement, even if occasioned
by  the  Company's  breach  or  wrongful  termination.  Each  of  the  Consultant  and  the  Company
agree to keep the financial terms of this Agreement confidential, except to the extent as may be
required for compliance with applicable regulatory and securities rules, regulations and laws.
15.           Time of the Essence
Time shall be of the essence of this Agreement.
16.           Entire Agreement
This  Agreement  represents  the  entire  agreement  between  the  Consultant  and  the  Company
concerning 
the  subject  matter  hereof  and  supersedes  any  previous  oral  or  written
communications, representations, understandings or agreements with the Company or any of its
officers or agents.
 
 
 
- 12 -
17.           Independent Advice
The Consultant acknowledges this Agreement has been prepared by the Company and that the
Consultant  and  the  Manager  have  had  time  to  review  the  Agreement  thoroughly,  including
enough  time  to  obtain  independent  legal,  financial  and  taxation  advice  concerning  the
interpretation and effect of the Agreement prior to its execution. By signing or acknowledging and
consenting to this Agreement, as the case may be, the Consultant and Manager represent and
warrant that each has read and understood this Agreement and executed this Agreement of its
free will and act.
[remainder of page left intentionally blank]
- 13 -
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed and delivered
as of the day and year first above set forth.
OLYMPUS PACIFIC MINERALS INC.
 
 
By: __________________________________
Name:
Title:
John A. G. Seton
Chief Executive Officer
[insert name of consultant]
 
 
By: __________________________________
Name:
Title:
_____________________________________________________
  •
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
Acknowledged and
Consented to by •:
- 14 -