
PREC14A 1 d250812dprec14a.htm PREC14A PREC14A
Table of Contents
PRELIMINARY COPY—SUBJECT TO COMPLETION DATED AUGUST 29, 2016
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, DC 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
(RULE 14a-101)
SCHEDULE 14A INFORMATION
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Filed by the Registrant  x
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant  ¨
Check the appropriate box:
x   Preliminary Proxy Statement
¨
¨
¨
¨
Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
  Definitive Proxy Statement
  Definitive Additional Materials
  Soliciting Material Pursuant to § 240.14a-12
SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
(Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
Copies to:
Robert F. Gray, Jr.
Andrew J. Stanger
Mayer Brown LLP
700 Louisiana Street, Suite 3400
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 238-2600
Payment of Filing Fee (check the appropriate box):
x   No fee required.
¨
Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
(1)
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)
(3)
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange
Act Rule 0-11 (set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it
was determined):
Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(4)
Total fee paid:
(5)
¨
Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
¨
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and
identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing
by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)
Amount Previously Paid:
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(2)
Filing Party:
(3)
Date Filed:
(4)
Table of Contents
PRELIMINARY COPY—SUBJECT TO COMPLETION DATED AUGUST 29, 2016
SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
Compass Bank, Trust Department
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
Dear Unit Holder:
As you may be aware, Southwest Bank and Robert Lansford, a senior business development
officer at Southwest Bank (which we refer to together as “Southwest Bank”), are soliciting written
consents from unit holders (“Unit Holders”) of the San Juan Basin Royalty Trust (the “Trust”) to
, 2016
call a special meeting of the Unit Holders. If a meeting is called, Southwest Bank intends to
propose that the Unit Holders vote to remove Compass Bank as trustee of the Trust and elect
Southwest Bank as the successor trustee.
Southwest Bank purports to hold only 2,000 Trust units, constituting 0.004% of the outstanding
units. No other Unit Holders are identified as participants in its solicitation.
We strongly believe that Southwest Bank’s effort to call a special meeting is not in the best
interests of the Trust or the Unit Holders. A special meeting is unnecessary because Unit Holders
may contact Compass Bank directly to the extent that they desire to identify potential concerns in
the administration of the Trust. Unfortunately, Southwest Bank, motivated by evident self-interest
in having itself elected trustee, has opted to forego direct engagement with Compass Bank
regarding any potential issues and instead has commenced a costly and time-consuming
solicitation process. We believe that this wasteful effort demonstrates that Southwest Bank is
willing to expand its business portfolio at any cost.
We believe that even if a special meeting is called, Southwest Bank cannot offer the Unit Holders
compelling reasons for taking the radical step of removing Compass Bank and electing
Southwest Bank as trustee. As trustee of the Trust for over a decade, Compass Bank remains
committed to serving the Unit Holders and maximizing Unit Holder value. Compass Bank’s team
of trust officers and professionals, some of whom have worked with the Trust for nearly 25 years,
are intimately familiar with all aspects of administering the Trust. Compass Bank’s
comprehensive, fully-integrated management model includes in-depth trust and fiduciary
services designed to address any unique business circumstance. The primary trust officer
assigned to the Trust is a Texas-licensed attorney who has served as an oil and gas manager at
Compass Bank for several years. In light of low commodity prices and the pending litigation with
the operator of the subject interests of the Trust, Compass Bank believes that continuity of
administration is important, which is yet another reason why we oppose a change in trusteeship.
Notably, Southwest Bank points to no specific shortcomings in Compass Bank’s performance as
trustee. Rather, Southwest Bank makes vague allegations about Compass Bank, while failing to
provide Unit Holders with specific details as to what Southwest Bank would do differently as
trustee. We believe that Unit Holders will easily see through Southwest Bank’s apparent self-
interest in expanding its business portfolio by having itself appointed trustee.
You may have received a white request card from Southwest Bank. Please note that you
are not required to consent to calling a special meeting, and you are not required to
complete or deliver any request card to Southwest Bank. We recommend that you do the
following:
1. Take no action in response to the solicitation by Southwest Bank and do not sign
any white request card sent to you by Southwest Bank;
2.
If you have signed Southwest Bank’s white request card, you may revoke that
consent by signing, dating and mailing the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card; and
3. Even if you have not submitted a white request card to Southwest Bank, you may
nevertheless communicate that you do not believe a special meeting is necessary
or express your opposition to calling a special meeting by submitting the
accompanying BLUE Revocation Card to Compass Bank.
Table of Contents
BLUE Revocation Cards may be mailed using the enclosed pre-paid envelope or by mailing to:
Compass Bank
Attention: San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
We believe that Unit Holders should be fully aware of their right and ability to express their views
to Compass Bank directly rather than by means of a special meeting. Compass Bank strives to
maintain constructive, ongoing communications with all of its Unit Holders and welcomes and
values their input.
Regardless of the number of units of the Trust that you own, your views are very important. Thank
you for your consideration.
Sincerely yours,
Joshua R. Peterson
Vice President and Senior Trust
Officer,
Compass Bank
If you have questions or need assistance revoking any white request card you may have
previously submitted, please contact:
Kaye Wilke
Investor Relations, San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
Call Toll-Free: (866) 809-4553
E-mail: sjt.us@bbva.com
Table of Contents
PRELIMINARY COPY—SUBJECT TO COMPLETION DATED AUGUST 29, 2016
SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
REVOCATION SOLICITATION STATEMENT
IN RESPONSE TO A SOLICITATION
OF WRITTEN REQUESTS FOR A SPECIAL MEETING OF UNIT HOLDERS
BY SOUTHWEST BANK AND ROBERT LANSFORD
, 2016
Please sign, date and mail the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card today.
This Revocation Solicitation Statement of the San Juan Basin Royalty Trust (the “Trust”) and the
accompanying BLUE revocation card (the “BLUE Revocation Card”) are being furnished by the
Trust and Compass Bank, as trustee of the Trust (sometimes referred together as “we” or “our”), to
the holders of the Trust (the “Unit Holders”). This Revocation Solicitation Statement and the
enclosed BLUE Revocation Card are first being mailed to Unit Holders on or about             , 2016.
You may have received a solicitation statement from Southwest Bank and Robert Lansford, a
senior business development officer at Southwest Bank (which we refer to together as
“Southwest Bank”), accompanied by a white written consent request card (a “White Request
Card”). We are sending you this Revocation Solicitation Statement and BLUE Revocation Card
in opposition to the solicitation by Southwest Bank.
Through its solicitation statement and White Request Card, Southwest Bank is asking you to call
a special meeting of the Unit Holders in which Southwest Bank proposes that the Unit Holders
vote to remove Compass Bank as trustee of the Trust and elect Southwest Bank as the
successor trustee. We recommend that you take no action with regard to Southwest Bank’s
White Request Card and to not sign or deliver to Southwest Bank the White Request Card.
We strongly believe that Southwest Bank’s effort to call a special meeting is not in the best
interests of the Trust or the Unit Holders. A special meeting is unnecessary because Unit Holders
may contact Compass Bank directly, to the extent that they desire to identify potential concerns in
the administration of the Trust. Unfortunately, Southwest Bank, motivated by evident self-interest
in having itself elected trustee, has opted to forego direct engagement with Compass Bank
regarding any potential issues and instead has commenced a costly and time-consuming
solicitation process. We believe that this wasteful effort demonstrates that Southwest Bank is
willing to expand its business portfolio at any cost.
As described in more detail in this Revocation Solicitation Statement, we believe that even if a
special meeting is called, Southwest Bank does not offer the Unit Holders compelling reasons for
taking the radical step of removing Compass Bank and electing Southwest Bank as trustee.
Compass Bank has served as the trustee of the Trust for over a decade. During that time it has
always sought to act in the best interest of the Unit Holders and aggressively protect Unit
Holders’ interests. Southwest Bank does not provide any allegations of mismanagement, breach
of fiduciary duty or defects in the performance by Compass Bank during its long tenure.
You may have received a White Request Card from Southwest Bank. Please note that you
are not required to consent to calling a special meeting, and you are not required to
complete or deliver any request card to Southwest Bank. We recommend that you do the
following:
1. Take no action in response to the solicitation by Southwest Bank and do not sign
any White Request Card sent to you by Southwest Bank;
2.
If you hav e signed Southwest Bank’s White Request Card, you may revoke that
consent by signing, dating and mailing the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card
immediately; and
3. Even if you have not submitted a White Request Card to Southwest Bank, you may
nevertheless communicate that you do not believe a special meeting is necessary
or express your opposition to calling a special meeting by signing, dating and
mailing the accompanying BLUE Revocation Card to Compass Bank.
Table of Contents
BLUE Revocation Cards may be mailed using the enclosed pre-paid envelope or by mailing to:
Compass Bank
Attention: San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
Compass Bank serves as agent for certain customer accounts. As of August 22, 2016, Compass
Bank could be deemed to beneficially own 5,500 Trust units related to these accounts, or less
than one percent of the outstanding units. Compass Bank has sole voting power over all of these
units. Compass Bank does not intend to sign a White Request Card with respect to any of these
units.
For additional information regarding the mechanics of the consent solicitation, see “The Special
Meeting Request Procedure.”
We strongly urge Unit Holders to communicate their views directly to Compass Bank and
consider carefully the risks, costs and alternatives to a special meeting when determining
whether to support Southwest Bank’s solicitation.
If you have questions or need assistance revoking any White Request Card you may have
previously submitted, please contact:
Kaye Wilke
Investor Relations, San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
Call Toll-Free: (866) 809-4553
E-mail: sjt.us@bbva.com
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THIS REVOCATION SOLICITATION
STATEMENT
DESCRIPTION OF THE SOUTHWEST SOLICITATION
REASONS TO REJECT THE SOUTHWEST SOLICITATION
BACKGROUND OF THE SOUTHWEST SOLICITATION
THE SPECIAL MEETING REQUEST PROCEDURE
The Special Meeting
Effect of BLUE Revocation Card
Results of Solicitation
APPRAISAL RIGHTS
SOLICITATION OF REVOCATIONS
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
Security Ownership of Trustee
DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS TO UNIT HOLDERS SHARING AN ADDRESS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING THE INTERNET AVAILABILITY OF
REVOCATION MATERIALS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
IMPORTANT
BLUE REVOCATION CARD
Table of Contents
1
Page
1  
 
4  
 
5  
 
8  
 
9  
 
9  
 
 
9  
  10  
  10  
  10  
  11  
  11  
  12  
  12
12  
  12  
  13  
1
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THIS REVOCATION SOLICITATION STATEMENT
Who is making this solicitation?
This solicitation is made on behalf of the Trust by Compass Bank as trustee of the Trust.
Why am I receiving this Revocation Solicitation Statement?
You may have received a solicitation statement from Southwest Bank accompanied by a White
Request Card. Because we believe that Southwest Bank’s actions are not in the best interests of
the Trust or the Unit Holders, we oppose their solicitation of written consents. We have sent you
this Revocation Solicitation Statement with the accompanying BLUE Revocation Card to explain
the Trust’s position and to solicit your support in opposing Southwest Bank.
We strongly urge you to do the following:
1. Take no action in response to the solicitation by Southwest Bank and do not sign
any White Request Card sent to you by Southwest Bank;
2.
If you have signed Southwest Bank’s White Request Card, you may revoke that
consent by signing, dating and mailing the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card
immediately; and
3. Even if you have not submitted a White Request Card to Southwest Bank, you may
nevertheless communicate that you do not believe a special meeting is necessary
or express your opposition to calling a special meeting by signing, dating and
mailing the accompanying BLUE Revocation Card to Compass Bank.
You may mail the BLUE Revocation Card without cost by using the enclosed pre-paid envelope
to:
Compass Bank
Attention: San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
Who is Southwest Bank?
For purposes of this Revocation Solicitation Statement, “Southwest Bank” refers collectively to
Southwest Bank, a north Texas regional bank, and Robert Lansford, a senior business
development officer at Southwest Bank. In Southwest Bank’s solicitation statement, Mr. Lansford
states that he holds only 0.004% of the Trust units outstanding. Southwest Bank does not report
owning any units of the Trust. Southwest Bank is alone in making its solicitation, and no other
Unit Holders are identified as participants in Southwest Bank’s solicitation statement. Southwest
Bank serves as a trustee for other royalty trusts and may be viewed as a competitor of Compass
Bank for providing trustee services.
What is Southwest Bank’s purpose in calling a special meeting?
If sufficient Unit Holders consent to call a special meeting, Southwest Bank states in its
solicitation statement and related materials filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”) that it will propose that the Unit Holders vote to approve the following
proposals:
Proposal 1: to remove Compass Bank as the trustee of the Trust;
Proposal 2: if Proposal 1 prevails, to nominate Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the
Trust; and
Proposal 3: if Proposals 1 and 2 prevail, to elect Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the
Trust.
Table of Contents
1
How many Unit Holders must consent to call a special meeting?
Pursuant to Section 8.02 of the Trust’s Amended and Restated Royalty Trust Indenture (the
“Indenture”), Southwest Bank must obtain the written consent of Unit Holders owning not less
than 15% of the outstanding units.
If you refrain from delivering the White Request Card to Southwest Bank or if you sign, date and
mail the BLUE Revocation Card, your units will not be counted toward the required 15% of
outstanding units required to call a special meeting.
If a special meeting is called, when would it be held?
Pursuant to Section 8.02 of the Indenture, if the trustee receives White Request Cards from the
requisite number of Unit Holders, then a special meeting must be held at such time and place as
is designated in a notice of a special meeting to be signed by the trustee. Such notice of a
special meeting must be given to Unit Holders in person or by mail not more than 60 nor less
than 20 days before the special meeting.
Should I oppose Southwest Bank’s efforts to call a special meeting?
Yes. We strongly urge you NOT to sign any WHITE request card sent to you by Southwest
Bank.
If I have already delivered a White Request Card, is it too late for me to change my mind?
No. You have the right to revoke your White Request Card by delivering a BLUE Revocation
Card. We strongly urge you to do so.
What is the effect of delivering a BLUE Revocation Card?
If you sign, date and mail the BLUE Revocation Card, your units will not be counted toward the
required 15% of outstanding units required to call a special meeting, and you will revoke any
earlier dated consent that you may have delivered to Southwest Bank. Even if you have not
submitted a White Request Card to Southwest Bank, we urge you to submit a BLUE Revocation
Card. Submitting a BLUE Revocation Card will have no legal effect if you have not previously
submitted a White Request Card, but it will allow us to keep track of the consent process.
What happens if I do nothing?
If you do not send in a White Request Card that Southwest Bank may send you and you do not
return the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card, you will effectively be voting AGAINST Southwest
Bank’s attempt to hold a special meeting. However, we urge you to communicate your view that
you do not support Southwest Bank’s request for a special meeting and sign, date and deliver the
enclosed BLUE Revocation Card, by mail (using the enclosed pre-paid envelope) to:
Compass Bank
Attention: San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
Does the revocation have any effect on matters other than the Southwest Bank
solicitation?
No. At the present time, we are asking you only to oppose Southwest Bank’s effort to call a
special meeting. In the event that a special meeting is called, we will deliver to you additional
materials explaining the Trust’s position and urging you to vote against Southwest Bank’s
proposals in the special meeting.
Who is entitled to consent, withhold consent or revoke a previously given consent with
respect to the solicitation?
Only Unit Holders are entitled to consent, withhold consent or revoke White Request Cards in
connection with Southwest Bank’s solicitation. Persons beneficially owning the Trust’s units (but
not holders of record), such as
Table of Contents
2
persons whose ownership of units is through a broker, bank, financial institution or other nominee
holder, may wish to contact such broker, bank, financial institution or other nominee holder and
instruct such person to execute the BLUE Revocation Card on their behalf. Any failure to submit
a White Request Card will have the same effect as submitting a BLUE Revocation Card.
Who should I call if I have questions about the solicitation?
Kaye Wilke
Investor Relations, San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
Call Toll-Free: (866) 809-4553
E-mail: sjt.us@bbva.com
3
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF THE SOUTHWEST SOLICITATION
As set forth in Southwest Bank’s solicitation statement and related materials filed with the SEC,
Southwest Bank states that it is soliciting your White Request Card to call a special meeting of
the Trust’s Unit Holders to submit for Unit Holder approval the following proposals:
Proposal 1: to remove Compass Bank as the trustee of the Trust;
Proposal 2: if Proposal 1 prevails, to nominate Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the
Trust; and
Proposal 3: if Proposals 1 and 2 prevail, to elect Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the
Trust.
For the reasons described below, we strongly believe that Southwest Bank’s effort to call a
special meeting is not in the best interests of the Trust or the Unit Holders. We recommend that
you take no action with regard to Southwest Bank’s White Request Card and to not sign or
deliver to Southwest Bank the White Request Card.
Table of Contents
4
REASONS TO REJECT THE SOUTHWEST SOLICITATION
As trustee of the Trust for over a decade, Compass Bank remains committed to serving the Unit
Holders and maximizing Unit Holder value. Compass Bank’s team of trust officers and
professionals, some of whom have worked with the Trust for nearly 25 years, are intimately
familiar with all aspects of administering the Trust. Compass Bank’s comprehensive, fully-
integrated management model includes in-depth trust and fiduciary services designed to address
any unique business circumstance. We believe that Compass Bank’s record as trustee of the
Trust speaks for itself.
We strongly believe that Southwest Bank’s effort to call a special meeting is not in the best
interests of the Trust or the Unit Holders. Southwest Bank’s consent solicitation is an
unnecessary and costly alternative to resolving any potential concerns directly with Compass
Bank. Moreover, even if a special meeting were to be called, we believe that Southwest Bank’s
stated grounds for removing Compass Bank are pretextual and thinly mask a brazen effort by
Southwest Bank to expand its trust portfolio. Southwest Bank has not identified any specific
failings in Compass Bank’s administration of the Trust and, more importantly, does not provide
details as to its plan for the Trust or how it would administer the Trust differently.
A Special Meeting is Unnecessary, Costly and Disruptive
We believe that the calling and holding of a special meeting of the Unit Holders is premature and
unnecessary at this time. If Southwest Bank were to have true reservations about Compass
Bank’s service as trustee, we believe the better course of action would be to first raise those
concerns with Compass Bank. In that way, any concerns could be resolved with little or no cost to
the Trust or the Unit Holders and could result in a productive dialogue. It is regrettable that, prior
to filing its preliminary consent solicitation statement with the SEC on August 16, 2016,
Southwest Bank elected not to engage with Compass Bank regarding any of the proposals that
Southwest Bank is seeking to bring at a special meeting and did not raise with Compass Bank
any of the concerns it identifies in its solicitation statement. We welcome Southwest Bank’s input
but do not believe that engaging in a debate through dueling consent solicitations or in the
context of a special meeting is effective or will maximize Unit Holder value.
Compass Bank strives to maintain constructive, ongoing communications with all of its Unit
Holders and is in regular and continuing contact with its Unit Holders. Compass Bank has
always welcomed and valued Unit Holder input on how Compass Bank can further enhance Unit
Holder value. Unit Holders are encouraged to share their perspectives directly with Compass
Bank and should not view a call of a special meeting as a substitute for direct engagement with
Compass Bank.
We believe that a special meeting will be a costly and time-consuming distraction to the Trust
and Compass Bank, as trustee of the Trust. If Southwest Bank is successful in soliciting consents
to call a special meeting, we believe it is likely that the Trust will be required to pursue two
separate solicitations within the span of several months, one for this consent revocation
solicitation and one for the special meeting itself. Two separate solicitations will, in our view, be
significantly distracting at a time when we believe the full focus and energy of Compass Bank, as
trustee, should be on administering the Trust. In addition to the costs arising from the diversion
and distraction, we also believe that successive solicitations would require the Trust to incur
additional financial costs, including with respect to certain third-party advisory fees, printing,
mailing and solicitation expenses and other costs, in order for Compass Bank to fulfill its fiduciary
obligations.
On July 31, 2014, the Trust filed a lawsuit in New Mexico state court against Burlington
Resources Oil & Gas Company LP, which is the operator of the subject interests underlying the
Trust and an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of ConocoPhillips. The parties are working to
schedule a mediation date before September 30, 2016, with the case currently scheduled for a
non-jury trial in March 2017. We believe that a change in trustee could be disruptive to the
litigation and mediation process and may, therefore, negatively impact the Trust and the value of
the Trust units.
Compass Bank is Well-Equipped to Serve as Trustee
In addition, we believe that a special meeting is unnecessary because Southwest Bank has
failed to articulate sufficient grounds for Unit Holders to accept its proposals. Compass Bank has
administered the Trust for over a
5
Table of Contents
decade through a team of trust officers, experts and other personnel, some of which have been
working with the Trust for nearly 25 years. Compass Bank continues to recruit experienced trust
officers and expand its wealth management and trust capabilities. The primary trust officer
assigned to the Trust is a Texas-licensed attorney who has served as an oil and gas manager at
Compass Bank for several years.
In light of low commodity prices and the pending litigation with the operator of the subject
interests of the Trust, Compass Bank believes that continuity of administration is in the best
interests of the Unit Holders, which is why we oppose a change in trusteeship and Southwest
Bank’s consent solicitation. We also believe it is in the best interests of the Unit Holders for
Compass Bank to continue its longstanding service as trustee of the Trust. Compass Bank will
continue to vigorously pursue claims of alleged underpayments and overcharges made by the
operator of the subject interests.
In pursuing the radical measure of removing Compass Bank as a long-standing trustee through a
costly and time-consuming consent solicitation and special meeting process, Unit Holders
should have expected Southwest Bank to identify significant defects in Compass Bank’s
administration of the Trust. Southwest Bank, however, has not done this. Instead, Southwest
Bank only raised vague concerns about Compass Bank’s experience, focus and potential
conflicts of interest. We believe Compass Bank’s record rebuts these claims.
•  Trust management is a core business of Compass Bank. Compass Bank employs 42
trust personnel and holds approximately $4.5 billion in managed assets and $3.9 billion
in non-managed assets in 2,533 fiduciary accounts as of July 31, 2016. Although the
Trust is the only publicly traded royalty trust administered by Compass Bank, our long
record demonstrates that we have the capability to effectively administer royalty trusts. In
our view, because each royalty trust is unique in terms of its Unit Holder mix, geology,
audit processes, operator relationships and operating history, we believe that an
individualized approach to trust administration is optimal.
Furthermore, we are aware that James D. Finley, CEO of Finley Resources, Inc. is also a
member of Southwest Bank’s Board of Directors. According to its website, Finley Resources, Inc.
operates approximately 1,000 wells and owns 2,500 properties in nine states, including New
Mexico. Mr. Finley is also an owner in Mesa Well Servicing, LP, Rod Systems, LLC, and ATD,
LLC, which provide well services and equipment in various areas, including New Mexico. Since
ConocoPhillips is the largest operator in the San Juan Basin, we believe there is an increased
potential of a conflict of interest at Southwest Bank, which may consider the Trust to be less
important than Mr. Finley’s business interests.
•  We believe that our size is an asset. Compass Bank and its parent, Banco Bilbao
Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A. (“BBVA”), operate 688 branches in the United States with total
capital of approximately $9.0 billion, compared to Southwest Bank’s approximately $224
million in total capital, as stated in their respective Consolidated Reports of Condition and
Income dated June 30, 2016 to the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council.
While Southwest Bank alleges we may be subject to conflicts of interest, neither
Compass Bank nor BBVA is aware of any potential or existing conflict of interest relating
to the Trust. If anything, Compass Bank’s record of litigation in pursing claims for
underpayment and other matters against the operator of the Trust’s subject interests
should provide assurance to Unit Holders that Compass Bank is not hampered by
conflicts of interest.
•  Southwest Bank claims that Compass Bank lacks experience, apparently because a
single trust officer, Lee Ann Anderson, left Compass Bank in 2015 to join Southwest
Bank. To the contrary, we believe our ability to serve has not been impacted by Ms.
Anderson’s departure and is as strong as ever. During her tenure with Compass Bank,
Ms. Anderson was part of a team of trust officers, professionals and experts that helped
oversee the administration of the Trust. Compass Bank continues to administer the Trust
with a similar team comprised of members who served with Ms. Anderson and other
experienced personnel who have since joined Compass Bank. Since Ms. Anderson left
Compass Bank, we believe that Compass Bank continues to offer a high level of service,
including aggressively auditing royalty payments and pursuing existing claims against
the operator of the Trust’s subject interests.
Although Southwest Bank claims that Ms. Anderson would be important to the administration of
the Trust, they do not explain how she would administer the Trust differently and cannot give
assurance as to Ms. Anderson’s continued employment with Southwest Bank.
Table of Contents
6
If you are not convinced that Southwest Bank’s special meeting is the appropriate path or
you believe a special meeting is unnecessary and wish to oppose the call of a special
meeting, please sign, date and deliver the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card using the
enclosed pre-paid envelope as promptly as possible, whether or not you have previously
signed the White Request Card from Southwest Bank.
Table of Contents
7
BACKGROUND OF THE SOUTHWEST SOLICITATION
The following is a chronology of the events and circumstances that preceded the filing of this
Revocation Solicitation Statement:
On November 1, 1980, the Trust was formed under the administration of The Fort Worth National
Bank, as trustee. After several successor trustees, Compass Bank became the trustee in March
2006 when Compass Bancshares Inc., a parent company of Compass Bank, acquired the then-
current trustee in March 2006. In September 2007, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria acquired
Compass Bancshares, and Compass Bank continued to serve as trustee.
In August 2014, Southwest Bank unilaterally contacted Compass Bank to propose that
Southwest Bank take over as trustee of the Trust. Although Compass Bank met with Southwest
Bank to discuss the proposal, Compass Bank declined to accept the offer, believing that the
trusteeship of the Trust was an important part of Compass Bank’s trust business. In Compass
Bank’s view, Southwest Bank was relatively new to royalty trusts, was attempting to rapidly
expand its royalty trust business and lacked Compass Bank’s experience with the Trust,
particularly with ongoing audit and litigation matters involving the operator of the subject
interests.
In October 2015, Lee Ann Anderson, the primary Compass Bank trust officer administering the
Trust, resigned from Compass Bank and subsequently joined the trust department and royalty
trust group of Southwest Bank. Prior to her departure, Ms. Anderson presented Compass Bank
with a draft agreement that she had prepared by which Compass Bank would resign as trustee of
the Trust. Compass Bank declined to sign the agreement.
On August 5, 2016, Mr. Lansford submitted a letter to Compass Bank pursuant to Section 11.01
of the Indenture requesting access to certain books and records of the Trust, including a
complete list of the Unit Holders.
On August 16, 2016, without advance notice or any engagement with the Trust regarding the
proposals described in Southwest Bank’s preliminary consent solicitation, Southwest Bank filed
preliminary consent solicitation materials with the SEC.
On August 19, 2016, the Trust issued a press release in response to Southwest Bank’s filing of
preliminary consent solicitation materials with the SEC.
On August 26, 2016, the Trust responded to Southwest Bank’s request by providing a list of the
Unit Holders.
On August 29, 2016, the Trust filed this preliminary Revocation Solicitation Statement with the
SEC.
Table of Contents
8
THE SPECIAL MEETING REQUEST PROCEDURE
For the special meeting to be properly requested in accordance with Section 11.02 of the
Indenture, a written request in favor of calling the special meeting must be executed and
delivered to the trustee of the Trust by Unit Holders representing at least fifteen percent (15%) of
the outstanding units (or their agents duly authorized in writing). As a result, Unit Holders
representing 6,991,320 units will need to submit executed and unrevoked White Request Cards
in order to request a special meeting. Only Unit Holders are entitled to consent, withhold consent
or revoke White Request Cards in connection with Southwest Bank’s solicitation. Persons
beneficially owning the Trust’s units (but not holders of record), such as persons whose
ownership of units is through a broker, bank, financial institution or other nominee holder, may
wish to contact such broker, bank, financial institution or other nominee holder and instruct such
person to execute the BLUE Revocation Card on their behalf. Any failure to submit a White
Request Card will have the same effect as submitting a BLUE Revocation Card.
Additionally, even if you have not already submitted a White Request Card, you may elect to
execute and submit the BLUE Revocation Card to communicate that you do not believe a
special meeting is necessary or to express your opposition to a special meeting.
Effectiveness of White Request Cards
If White Request Cards have been delivered from Unit Holders (or their agents duly authorized in
writing) representing less than fifteen percent (15%) of the outstanding units, then the Trust is not
obligated to call a special meeting.
In accordance with Section 8.02 the Trust Indenture, if a special meeting is duly requested by
Unit Holders representing at least fifteen percent (15%) of the outstanding units, the Trust is
required to cause notice to be given that a special meeting will be held, not less than twenty (20)
nor more than sixty (60) days before the special meeting is to be held.
The filing or distribution of this Revocation Solicitation Statement is not intended as and should
not be taken as an admission by the Trust of the validity of Southwest Bank’s solicitation or a
waiver of any provisions of the Indenture or of any rights of the Trust.
The Special Meeting
If Southwest Bank is successful in its efforts to solicit White Request Cards from the requisite Unit
Holders and the Trust is required to hold a special meeting, the Trust will advise Unit Holders of
its recommendation as to any matters to be considered at such special meeting.
Effect of BLUE Revocation Card
A Unit Holder may revoke any previously signed White Request Card by signing, dating and
returning to the Trust a BLUE Revocation Card. A White Request Card may also be revoked by
delivery of a written revocation of your request to Southwest Bank. Unit Holders are urged,
however, to return all request revocations in the pre-paid envelope provided or by mail to
Compass Bank, Attention: San Juan Basin Royalty Trust, 300 W. 7th Street, Suite B, Fort Worth,
Texas 76102. The Trust requests that if a revocation is instead delivered to Southwest Bank, a
copy of the revocation also be returned in the envelope provided so that the Trust will be aware
of all revocations.
By signing and delivering the BLUE Revocation Card, you will be deemed to have revoked any
White Request Card for a special meeting.
Any BLUE Revocation Card may itself be revoked by marking, signing, dating and delivering a
written revocation of your BLUE Revocation Card to the Trust, or to Southwest Bank, or by
delivering to Southwest Bank a subsequently dated White Request card that Southwest Bank
sent to you.
Table of Contents
9
The revocation of any previously delivered White Request Card or BLUE Revocation Card must
be signed and have a date subsequent to the previously delivered White Request Card or BLUE
Revocation Card. The revocation is not required to state the number of units held unless you
wish to revoke your White Request Card with respect to less than all units as to which you
previously requested the special meeting, in which case you must state the number of units to
which your revocation relates. In addition, if you have more than one account with respect to
which you have delivered a White Request Card, the revocation should identify the relevant
account for which the White Request Card is being revoked.
If any units that you owned on the record date were held for you in an account with a brokerage
firm, bank nominee or other similar “street name” holder, you are not entitled to sign a White
Request Card with respect to such units directly, but rather must give instructions to the
brokerage firm, bank nominee or other “street name” holder to grant or revoke a White Request
Card for the units held in your name. Accordingly, you should follow the instructions on the BLUE
Revocation Card to make a request with respect to your units. Alternatively, you can contact the
person responsible for your account and direct him or her to execute the enclosed BLUE
Revocation Card on your behalf. You are urged to confirm in writing your instructions to the
person responsible for your account and provide a copy of those instructions to the Trust at the
address set forth above so that the Trust will be aware of your instructions and can attempt to
ensure each instruction is followed.
You have the right to revoke any White Request Card you may have previously given to
Southwest Bank. To do so, you need only sign, date and return in the enclosed pre-paid
envelope the BLUE Revocation Card accompanying this Revocation Solicitation
Statement.
You should carefully review this Revocation Solicitation Statement. YOUR TIMELY RESPONSE
IS IMPORTANT. You may reject Southwest Bank’s solicitation by promptly completing, signing,
dating and returning the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card in the pre-paid envelope provided.
Please be aware that if you sign a White Request Card, you will be deemed to have requested a
special meeting in accordance with Southwest Bank’s solicitation statement.
Results of Solicitation
The Trust intends to notify Unit Holders by press release as to whether the requisite White
Request Cards have been received for calling a special meeting following receipt by Compass
Bank of written notice and confirmation of such White Request Cards.
APPRAISAL RIGHTS
Unit Holders of the Trust do not have appraisal rights under Texas law in connection with
Southwest Bank’s solicitation or this solicitation by the Trust.
SOLICITATION OF REVOCATIONS
As an expense associated with carrying out Compass Bank’s fiduciary duties, the cost of this
Revocation Solicitation Statement will be borne by the Trust. We expect such costs to consist of
mailing and legal fees of approximately $            . Compass Bank has not retained a proxy agent,
solicitor or advisor in connection with this Revocation Solicitation Statement. If a special meeting
is called, Compass Bank may retain a proxy solicitor. Although the cost of a proxy solicitor would
customarily be borne by the Trust as an expense associated with carrying out Compass Bank’s
fiduciary duties pursuant to the Indenture, Compass Bank has determined that in order to
conserve Trust funds and to avoid any appearance of self-interested actions, Compass Bank
would bear the fees and expenses of a proxy solicitor.
In addition to the use of the mail, revocation requests may be solicited by the Trust by facsimile,
telephone, email and other electronic channels of communications, in-person discussions and by
advertisements. The Trust will reimburse brokerage houses, banks, custodians and other
nominees and fiduciaries for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in forwarding the Trust’s
Revocation Solicitation Statement materials to, and obtaining instructions relating to such
materials from, beneficial owners of the units.
Table of Contents
10
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
The table below sets forth as of August 29, 2016, information with respect to the Unit Holders
who were known to the trustee to be the beneficial owners of more than five percent (5%) of the
outstanding units.
The amounts and percentages of units beneficially owned are reported on the basis of
regulations of the SEC governing the determination of beneficial ownership of securities. Under
the rules of the SEC, a person is deemed to be a “beneficial owner” of a security if that person
has or shares “voting power,” which includes the power to vote or to direct the voting of such
security, or “investment power,” which includes the power to dispose of or to direct the disposition
of such security. A person is also deemed to be a beneficial owner of any securities of which that
person has a right to acquire beneficial ownership within 60 days. Under these rules, more than
one person may be deemed a beneficial owner of the same securities and a person may be
deemed a beneficial owner of securities as to which he has no economic interest.
As of August 29, 2016, 46,608,796 units of the Trust were outstanding.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
First Eagle Investment Management, LLC
1345 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10105(1)
Seymour Schulich
20 Eglinton Avenue West, Suite 1900
Toronto ON, Canada M4R 1K8(2)
Beck, Mack & Oliver LLC
360 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10017(3)
Number of Units
Beneficially Owned     Percent
5,444,968
11.68%
3,600,000
7.29%
2,585,335
5.55%
(1) This information was provided in a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC on February 5,
2016, by First Eagle Investment Management, LLC, and which stated First Eagle
Investment Management, LLC beneficially holds such units on behalf of its investment
advisory clients and is deemed to have sole voting power with respect to 5,323,031 of the
units and sole power to dispose or to direct the disposition of 5,444,968 of the units. The
First Eagle Global Fund, a registered investment company for which First Eagle
Investment Management, LLC acts as investment adviser, may be deemed to beneficially
own 3,908,035 of these 5,444,968 units, or 8.38% of the outstanding units.
(2) This information was provided to the SEC and to the trustee in a Schedule 13G filed with
the SEC on January 7, 2015, on behalf of Seymour Schulich.
(3) This information was provided in a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC on February 1,
2016, by Beck, Mack & Oliver LLC, and which stated Beck, Mack & Oliver LLC
beneficially holds such units on behalf of its investment advisory clients and is deemed to
have sole voting power with respect to 2,496,301 of the units and shared power to
dispose or to direct the disposition of 2,585,335 of the units.
Security Ownership of Trustee
Compass Bank serves as agent for certain customer accounts. As of August 22, 2016, Compass
Bank could be deemed to beneficially own 5,500 Trust units related to these accounts, or less
than one percent of the outstanding units. Compass Bank has sole voting power over all of these.
Compass Bank does not intend to deliver any White Request Card with respect to any of these
units.
11
Table of Contents
DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS TO UNIT HOLDERS SHARING AN ADDRESS
The SEC has adopted rules that permit companies and intermediaries (e.g., brokers) to satisfy
the delivery requirements for proxy statements with respect to two or more Unit Holders sharing
the same address by delivering a single proxy statement addressed to those Unit Holders. This
process, which is commonly referred to as “householding,” potentially means extra convenience
for Unit Holders and cost savings for the Trust.
A single Revocation Solicitation Statement will be delivered to multiple Unit Holders sharing an
address unless contrary instructions have been received from the affected Unit Holders. Once
you have received notice from your broker that it will be “householding” communications to your
address, “householding” will continue until you are notified otherwise or until you revoke your
consent. If, at any time, you no longer wish to participate in “householding” and would prefer to
receive a separate Revocation Solicitation Statement, please notify your broker. Unit Holders
who currently receive multiple copies of the Revocation Solicitation Statement at their address
and would like to request “householding” of their communications should contact their broker.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Revocation Solicitation Statement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning
of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act.
These forward-looking statements are identified by their use of terms and phrases such as
“anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “predict,”
“project,” “should” and other similar terms and phrases, including references to assumptions and
forecasts of future results. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance
and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual
results to differ materially from those anticipated at the time the forward-looking statements are
made. These risks include, but are not limited to, those described in “Risk Factors” and
elsewhere in the Trust’s Annual Report on Form 10-K and other filings with the SEC. Although
the Trust believes the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are based upon
reasonable assumptions, it can give no assurance that the expectations will be attained or that
any deviation will not be material. The Trust undertakes no obligation to update any forward-
looking statement contained herein to conform the statement to actual results or changes in the
Trust’s expectations, except as otherwise required by the federal securities laws.
IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING THE INTERNET AVAILABILITY OF REVOCATION
MATERIALS
The consent revocation materials for the Trust’s solicitation of consent revocations, including this
Revocation Solicitation Statement, are available on our website at www.sjbrt.com. Information on
the Trust’s website does not constitute part of the Trust’s consent revocation materials.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
The Trust is required to file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the
SEC. You may read and copy any document we file at the SEC’s public reference room located
at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-
0330 for further information on the public reference room. Our SEC filings are also available to
the public at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. You also may obtain free copies of the
documents the Trust files with the SEC by going our website at www.sjbrt.com. The information
provided on our website is not part of this Revocation Solicitation Statement, and therefore is not
incorporated by reference.
Table of Contents
12
IMPORTANT
We urge you NOT to return any White Request Card solicited from you by Southwest Bank. If you
have previously returned any White Request Card, you have every right to revoke your consent.
Simply complete, sign, date and mail the enclosed BLUE Revocation Card in the postage-paid
envelope provided, whether or not you previously returned the White Request Card.
If you have questions or need assistance revoking any White Request Card you may have
previously submitted, please contact:
Kaye Wilke
Investor Relations, San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
Call Toll-Free: (866) 809-4553
E-mail: sjt.us@bbva.com
Regardless of the number of units of the Trust that you own, your views are very important. Thank
you for your consideration.
Table of Contents
13
PRELIMINARY COPY—SUBJECT TO COMPLETION DATED AUGUST 29, 2016
BLUE REVOCATION CARD
REVOCATION OF WRITTEN REQUEST
FOR A SPECIAL MEETING OF UNIT HOLDERS
This revocation of written request is solicited on behalf of the San Juan Basin Royalty Trust (the
“Trust”) by Compass Bank as trustee of the Trust in opposition to the solicitation by Southwest
Bank and Robert Lansford, a senior business development officer for Southwest Bank (which we
refer to together as “Southwest Bank”), to call a special meeting of the unit holders of the Trust
(“Unit Holders”).
We urge you to sign, date and return this BLUE Revocation Card.
The undersigned Unit Holder, acting with regard to all the units of the Trust entitled to vote and
held by the undersigned, hereby REVOKES any previously executed white written consent
request card (a “White Request Card”) delivered to Southwest Bank, requesting the call of a
special meeting of Unit Holders described in Southwest Bank’s solicitation statement, and
hereby confirms that the undersigned has the power to deliver a revocation of any White Request
Card for the number of units represented hereby.
You may revoke any previously executed White Request Card regarding the Southwest
Bank solicitation for the call of a special meeting by signing, dating and returning this
BLUE Revocation Card to the Trust in the enclosed postage paid envelope or by mailing
to:
Compass Bank
Attention: San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
IN ORDER FOR YOUR REVOCATION CARD TO BE VALID, IT MUST BE SIGNED AND
DATED.
Dated
Signature
Signature (if held jointly)
Name and Title(s) (if
applicable)
Please sign this BLUE Revocation Card exactly as your name appears above. If signing as
an attorney, administrator, executor, guardian or trustee, please give your title as such. If
you are a corporation, this signature should be that of an authorized officer who should
state his or her title. If you are a partnership, sign in the partnership name by an authorized
person. Signed BLUE Revocation Cards will be deemed to revoke all previously given
White Request Cards for the number of units presented by the above signed.