
424B5 1 a2221524z424b5.htm 424B5
Use these links to rapidly review the document
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents
Filed Pursuant to rule 424(b)(5)
Registration No. 333-179021
The information in this preliminary prospectus supplement is not complete and may change. This preliminary
prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus are not an offer to sell these securities and they are not
soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED SEPTEMBER 24, 2014
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
(To Prospectus dated January 13, 2012)
$
Ensco plc
$        % Senior Notes due
$        % Senior Notes due
This is an offering of $        aggregate principal amount of our        % Senior Notes due        (the "     notes")
and $        aggregate principal amount of our        % Senior Notes due        (the "     notes"). The        notes and
the         notes are collectively referred to herein as the "notes." The        notes will mature on        ,         and
the        notes will mature on         ,        . We will pay interest on the notes on                  and                  of each
year, commencing        , 2015. We may redeem the notes of any series, in whole at any time or in part from time to
time prior to their maturity, as described under "Description of Notes—Optional Redemption."
The notes will be our senior unsecured obligations and will rank equally in right of payment with all of our
existing and future senior unsecured debt. The notes will be structurally subordinated to all debt and other liabilities of
our subsidiaries and effectively subordinated to our secured debt to the extent of the value of the assets securing
such debt.
We are applying for listing of the notes on the New York Stock Exchange ("NYSE"). We expect trading in the
notes on the NYSE to begin within 30 days after the original issue date. Currently, there is no public market for the
notes. If such listing is obtained, we have no obligation to maintain such listing, and we may delist the notes at any
time.
Investing in the notes involves risks. See "Risk Factors" beginning on page S-5.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus supplement or the accompanying prospectus is
truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Public Offering
Price(1)
%
%
$ 
 
$
Underwriting
Discounts
%
%
$ 
 
$
Proceeds to Us,
Before Expenses(1)
                        %
%
$
$
Per        Note
Total
Per        Note
Total
(1)
Plus accrued interest from                        , 2014, if settlement occurs after that date.
The underwriters expect to deliver the notes in book-entry form only through the facilities of The Depository
Trust Company for the accounts of its participants, including Clearstream Banking, société anonyme, and Euroclear
Bank S.A./N.V., as operator of the Euroclear System, against payment in New York, New York, on or
about                        , 2014.
Joint Book-Running Managers
Citigroup
Deutsche Bank Securities
The date of this prospectus supplement is                        , 2014.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Supplement
Enforceability of Civil Liabilities
About This Prospectus Supplement
Market and Industry Data
Where You Can Find More Information; Incorporation by Reference
Summary
Risk Factors
Use of Proceeds
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
Capitalization
Description of Notes
Certain U.S. Federal and U.K. Tax Consequences
Book-Entry, Delivery and Form
Underwriting
Legal Matters
Experts
About this Prospectus
Where You Can Find More Information
Prospectus
Page
S-i
 
 
S-i
  S-ii
  S-ii
  S-1
  S-5
  S-8
  S-9
  S-10
  S-11
  S-26
  S-34
  S-38
  S-43
  S-43
1
Where You Can Find More Information
Forward Looking Information
Risk Factors
The Company
Use of Proceeds
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
Description of Debt Securities
Description of Class A Ordinary Shares
Description of Preference Shares
Description of Ordinary Shares
Description of Depositary Shares
Description of Warrants
Description of Share Purchase Contracts
Description of Guarantees
Description of Units
Plan of Distribution
Legal Matters
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms
Table of Contents
1
  2
  3
  3
  3
  4
  4
  4
  5
  5
  6
  6
  7
  7
  8
  8
  8
  8
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES
We are a public limited company organized under the laws of England and Wales. As a result, it may be difficult
for you to effect service of process or enforce judgments obtained against us within the United States (the "U.S."),
predicated upon the civil liability provisions of the federal securities laws of the U.S. There is doubt as to the
enforceability of civil liabilities predicated on U.S. federal securities laws in England, either in original actions or in
actions for enforcement of judgments of U.S. courts.
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
This document consists of two parts. The first part is this prospectus supplement, which describes specific
terms of the notes, the specific terms of this offering and adds to and updates information contained in the
accompanying prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference into this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying prospectus. The second part, the accompanying prospectus, provides more general information about
the notes and other securities that may be offered from time to time using such prospectus, some of which general
information does not apply to this offering. Generally, when we refer to the prospectus, we are referring to both parts
of this document combined. You should read both this prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus,
together with additional information described under the heading "Where You Can Find More Information; Incorporation
by Reference."
If the information in this prospectus supplement differs from the information in the accompanying prospectus,
the information in this prospectus supplement supersedes the information in the accompanying prospectus.
Any statement made in this prospectus supplement or in a document incorporated by reference in this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus will be deemed to be modified or superseded for purposes
of this prospectus supplement to the extent that a statement contained in this prospectus supplement or in any other
subsequently filed document that is also incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying prospectus modifies or supersedes that statement. Any statement so modified or superseded will not
be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this prospectus supplement. See "Where
You Can Find More Information; Incorporation by Reference."
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference in this prospectus
supplement, the accompanying prospectus or any free writing prospectus provided in connection with this
offering. Neither we nor the underwriters have authorized anyone else to provide you with different
information. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it.
Neither we nor the underwriters are making any offer or sale of these securities in any jurisdiction where the
offer is not permitted. You should assume that the information contained or incorporated by reference in this
prospectus supplement, the accompanying prospectus and any free writing prospectus provided in
connection with this offering is accurate only as of the respective dates thereof or, in the case of information
incorporated by reference, only as of the date of such information, regardless of the time of delivery of this
prospectus supplement, the accompanying prospectus or any free writing prospectus. Our business, financial
condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since such dates. It is important for you to
read and consider all the information contained in this prospectus supplement and the accompanying
prospectus, including the documents incorporated by reference therein, in making your investment decision.
Table of Contents
S-i
MARKET AND INDUSTRY DATA
Certain market and industry data included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and in the
accompanying prospectus have been obtained from third party sources that we believe to be reliable. We have not
independently verified such third party information and cannot assure you of its accuracy or completeness. Such data
involve risks and uncertainties and are subject to change based on various factors, including those discussed under
the heading "Risk Factors" in this prospectus supplement and the documents incorporated by reference herein.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. You may
read and copy any reports, statements or other information on file at the SEC's public reference room at 100 F Street,
N.E., Washington, D.C., 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information on the public reference
room. Our SEC filings are also available to the public from commercial document retrieval services and are available
at the Internet website maintained by the SEC at http://www.sec.gov. These reports and other information filed by us
with the SEC are also available free of charge at our website at www.enscoplc.com.
We incorporate information into the prospectus by reference, which means that we disclose important
information to you by referring you to another document filed separately with the SEC. The information incorporated by
reference is deemed to be part of the prospectus, except to the extent superseded by information contained herein or
by information contained in documents subsequently filed with the SEC. The prospectus incorporates by reference the
documents set forth below that have been previously filed with the SEC. These documents contain important
information about us and our financial condition.
Ensco's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 (the "Form 10-K") (as
updated by the Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 22, 2014);
Ensco's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (as updated by the
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 22, 2014);
Ensco's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2014;
the information included in Ensco's Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed on April 7, 2014 to
the extent incorporated by reference in Part III of the Form 10-K; and
•
•
•
•
•
Ensco's Current Reports on Form 8-K filed January 10, 2014, May 15, 2014, May 23, 2014, June 5,
2014, June 13, 2014 and September 22, 2014.
We also incorporate by reference into the prospectus additional documents that Ensco may file with the SEC
under Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act") from the date of
this prospectus supplement to the completion of the offering of the notes. We are not incorporating by reference any
information furnished under items 2.02 or 7.01 (or corresponding information furnished under item 9.01 or included as
an exhibit) in any past or future Current Report on Form 8-K that we may file with the SEC, unless otherwise specified
in such Current Report.
You may obtain copies of any of these filings as described below, through the SEC or through the SEC's
Internet website as described above or through our website as described above. Documents incorporated by reference
are available without charge, excluding all exhibits unless an exhibit has been
S-ii
Table of Contents
specifically incorporated by reference into the prospectus, by requesting them in writing or by telephone at:
Investor Relations
Ensco plc
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3300
Houston, Texas 77057
+1 (713) 789-1400
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN OUR WEBSITE IS NOT INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE AND DOES
NOT CONSTITUTE A PART OF THE PROSPECTUS.
Table of Contents
S-iii
SUMMARY
The following is a summary of selected information appearing elsewhere in this prospectus supplement, the
accompanying prospectus and the documents incorporated herein by reference. This summary is not complete and
does not contain all the information that may be important to you. You should carefully read this entire prospectus
supplement, the accompanying prospectus and the documents incorporated herein by reference to understand fully
the terms of the notes, as well as the tax and other considerations that are important in making your investment
decision. Unless the context requires otherwise or we specifically indicate otherwise, the terms "Ensco," "Company,"
"we," "us" and "our" refer to Ensco plc together with all subsidiaries and predecessors.
Ensco plc
Ensco is a global offshore contract drilling company. We own the world's second largest offshore drilling rig fleet
amongst competitive rigs. We operate one of the newest ultra-deepwater fleets in the industry, and our premium
jackup fleet is the largest of any offshore drilling company. We currently own and operate an offshore drilling rig fleet
of 75 rigs, including seven rigs under construction, spanning most of the strategic markets around the globe. Our fleet
includes ten drillships, 13 dynamically positioned semisubmersible rigs, six moored semisubmersible rigs and 46
jackup rigs.
We remain focused on our long-established strategy of high-grading and expanding the size of our fleet where we
identify long-term growth opportunities. In response to customer demand for our differentiated rig technology and
contract drilling services in the Middle East, we entered into an agreement with Lamprell to construct two premium
jackup rigs (ENSCO 140 and ENSCO 141) during the second quarter of 2014. These rigs are scheduled for delivery
during the second quarter and third quarter of 2016, respectively. In July 2014, we accepted delivery of ENSCO 122,
an ultra-premium harsh environment rig that is expected to be placed into service later this year. Currently, we have
seven rigs under construction, including three ultra-deepwater drillships, three premium jackup rigs and one ultra-
premium harsh environment jackup rig. In addition to ENSCO 122, our next two deliveries, ENSCO DS-8 and ENSCO
DS-9, are contracted. Five of our older, less capable floater rigs are currently being marketed for sale as part of our
fleet high-grading strategy.
Our customers include most of the leading national and international oil companies, in addition to many
independent operators. We are among the most geographically diverse offshore drilling companies, with current
operations and drilling contracts spanning approximately 20 countries on six continents in nearly every major
deepwater and shallow-water basin around the world. The markets in which we operate include the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico, Mexico, Brazil, the Mediterranean, the North Sea, the Middle East, West Africa, Australia and Southeast
Asia.
Our principal executive office is located at 6 Chesterfield Gardens, London W1J5BQ, England, United Kingdom,
and our telephone number is +44 (0) 20 7659 4660. Our website is located at www.enscoplc.com. The information on
or linked to/from our website is not part of, and is not incorporated by reference into, this prospectus supplement or
the accompanying prospectus.
Proposed Credit Facility Amendment
We have received commitments, subject to final documentation, from our existing syndicate of lenders and new
lenders to amend our five-year revolving credit facility. The proposed amendment would, among other things, increase
the commitments thereunder from $2.0 billion to up to $2.3 billion and extend the maturity date from May 2018 to five
years from the effective date of the amendment. The proposed amendment is expected to be entered into in late
September 2014.
Table of Contents
S-1
The Offering
The summary below describes the principal terms of the notes. Certain of the terms and conditions described
below are subject to important limitations and exceptions. The "Description of Notes" section of this prospectus
supplement contains a more detailed description of the terms and conditions of the notes. In this section, "Ensco,"
"we" or "our" refers to Ensco plc and not any of its subsidiaries.
Issuer
Notes Offered
Maturity Dates
Interest Rates
Interest Payment Dates
Ensco plc
$        principal amount of        % Senior Notes due
$        principal amount of        % Senior Notes due
The        notes will mature on                ,         .
The        notes will mature on                ,         .
Interest on the        notes will accrue at a rate of        % per annum.
Interest on the        notes will accrue at a rate of        % per annum.
Interest on the notes will be payable on        and        of each year,
commencing                    , 2015, and will accrue from the issue date of the
Ranking
notes.
The notes are unsecured and will rank equally in right of payment with all of
our other existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness. As of June 30,
2014, after giving effect to this offering, Ensco would have had outstanding
$         million of indebtedness, which includes $2,188.1 million of
indebtedness of our subsidiaries that is guaranteed by Ensco.
We are a holding company whose assets consist of direct and indirect
ownership interests in, and whose business is conducted through,
subsidiaries. The notes will be structurally subordinated to all indebtedness
and other liabilities of our subsidiaries. As of June 30, 2014, our subsidiaries
had approximately $2,250.7 million of indebtedness (including indebtedness
guaranteed by us). In addition, the notes will be effectively subordinated to all
of the secured indebtedness of Ensco plc to the extent of the value of the
assets securing such debt. As of June 30, 2014, Ensco plc had no secured
indebtedness.
Table of Contents
Optional Redemption
We may redeem any or all of the notes of a series, in whole at any time or in
S-2
Tax Redemption
Additional Amounts
part from time to time prior to their maturity. If we elect to redeem
the        notes before the date that is        months prior to the maturity date or
the        notes before the date that is        months prior to the maturity date,
we will pay an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes
redeemed plus a "make-whole" premium. If we elect to redeem a series of
notes on or after the applicable date described in the preceding sentence, we
will pay an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes
redeemed. In each case, we also will pay accrued interest on the notes
redeemed to the redemption date. See "Description of Notes—Optional
Redemption."
If certain changes in the law of any relevant Tax Jurisdiction (as defined in
"Description of Notes—Additional Amounts") become effective that would
impose withholding taxes on payments on the notes, we may redeem the
notes in whole, but not in part, at a redemption price of 100% of the aggregate
principal amount thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to
the redemption date and all Additional Amounts (as defined in "Description of
Notes"), if any, which otherwise would be payable to the date of redemption.
See "Description of Notes—Redemption for Changes in Taxes."
If any deduction or withholding for, or on account of, any Taxes imposed by
any Tax Jurisdiction will at any time be required to be made from any
payments made under or with respect to the notes, subject to certain
exceptions, we will pay such Additional Amounts as may be necessary in
order that the net amounts received in respect of such payments by each
holder after such withholding or deduction (including any such deduction or
withholding in respect of Additional Amounts) will equal the respective
amounts which would have been received in respect of such payments in the
absence of such withholding or deduction. See "Description of Notes—
Additional Amounts."
Certain Covenants
The indenture governing the notes will contain covenants limiting our ability
and the ability of certain subsidiaries to:
•
•
create liens on certain assets;
•
engage in certain sale/leaseback transactions; and
•
merge, consolidate or transfer all or substantially all of our assets.
These covenants are subject to a number of important limitations and
exceptions.
S-3
We intend to use the net proceeds from the notes offered hereby for general
corporate purposes, which may include payments with respect to our seven
rigs under construction and other capital expenditures. See "Use of
Proceeds."
The        notes will be limited initially to $         million in aggregate principal
amount and the        notes will be limited initially to $         million in aggregate
principal amount. We may, however, "reopen" each series of the notes and
issue an unlimited principal amount of additional notes of that series in the
future without the consent of the holders.
The notes are a new issue of securities with no established trading market.
Accordingly, we cannot provide assurance as to the development or liquidity
of any market for any series of the notes as described in this prospectus
supplement. See "Underwriting."
We are applying for listing of the notes on the NYSE.
State of New York
Investing in the notes involves substantial risks. See "Risk Factors" beginning
on page S-5 in this prospectus supplement for a description of certain of the
risks you should consider before investing in the notes.
S-4
RISK FACTORS
Table of Contents
Use of Proceeds
Further Issues
Absence of Market
Listing
Governing Law
Risk Factors
Table of Contents
Investing in the notes involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the following risk factors, in
addition to the other information contained in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying prospectus and the
information that we are incorporating by reference into the prospectus, before purchasing any notes offered hereby.
Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also affect our
business operations. If any of these risks actually occur, our business, financial position, operating results and/or
cash flows could suffer, the trading price and liquidity of the notes could decline and you may lose all or part of your
investment.
Risks Relating to the Notes
The notes will be structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities of our subsidiaries and
effectively subordinated to claims by secured creditors of Ensco.
We are a holding company whose assets consist of direct and indirect ownership interests in, and whose
business is conducted through, subsidiaries. Consequently, our ability to repay our debt, including the notes, depends
primarily upon our receipt of funds from our subsidiaries through dividends, repayment of intercompany notes or other
payments. The ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends, repay intercompany notes or make other advances to us is
subject to restrictions imposed by applicable laws, tax considerations and the terms of agreements governing our
subsidiaries. Our non-U.S. subsidiaries in particular may be subject to currency controls, repatriation restrictions,
withholding obligations on payments to us, and other limitations.
The notes will be obligations solely of Ensco and will not be guaranteed by any of our subsidiaries. The notes
will be structurally subordinated to any and all existing and future indebtedness, whether or not secured, and other
liabilities of our subsidiaries. Our subsidiaries have no obligation to pay any amounts due on our debt securities,
including the notes, or to provide us with funds for our payment obligations. The indenture will not limit the ability of
our subsidiaries to incur unsecured indebtedness. Any right that Ensco has to receive any assets of any of the
subsidiaries upon the liquidation or reorganization of those subsidiaries, and the consequent rights of holders of notes
to realize proceeds from the sale of any of those subsidiaries' assets, will be subordinated to the claims of those
subsidiaries' creditors, including trade creditors and holders of preferred equity interests of those subsidiaries. The
indenture will not restrict the ability of our subsidiaries to enter into agreements or other arrangements that have the
effect of prohibiting or restricting their ability to pay dividends or otherwise make distributions to Ensco plc. As of
June 30, 2014, our subsidiaries had approximately $2,250.7 million of indebtedness (including indebtedness
guaranteed by us).
In addition, the notes will be effectively subordinated to claims by any secured creditors Ensco plc may have to
the extent of the value of the assets securing such claims. As of June 30, 2014, Ensco plc had no secured
indebtedness. The indenture permits us to incur a substantial amount of secured indebtedness.
Our substantial indebtedness could adversely affect our financial health and prevent us from fulfilling our
obligations under the notes.
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness. As of June 30, 2014 (without giving effect to this offering), we
had total indebtedness of $4,726.6 million, and we had $2,000.0 million of total additional borrowing capacity under our
revolving credit facility and commercial paper program.
Our ability to make scheduled payments of principal of, or to pay the interest or premium, if any, on, or to
refinance our indebtedness (including the notes), or to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions and other strategic
initiatives will depend on our future performance, which, to a certain extent, is subject to general economic, financial,
competitive, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our
S-5
Table of Contents
control. We cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future
borrowings will be available under our revolving credit facility or commercial paper program or otherwise in an amount
sufficient to enable us to service our indebtedness, including the notes, or to fund our other liquidity needs.
Furthermore, our increased leverage resulting from this offering could adversely affect our business. In particular, it
could increase our vulnerability to sustained, adverse macroeconomic weakness, limit our ability to obtain further
financing, limit our ability to pursue certain operational and strategic opportunities, reduce our flexibility to respond to
changing business and economic conditions and increase borrowing costs.
Active trading markets may not develop for the notes.
Each series of notes is a new issue of securities. There are no active public trading markets for any series of
the notes. We are applying for listing of the notes on the NYSE; however, we can give no assurances that these
notes will be so listed. The underwriters of the notes have informed us that they intend to make a market in the notes.
However, the underwriters may cease their market-making at any time. The liquidity of the trading markets in the
notes and the market prices quoted for any series of the notes may be adversely affected by changes in the overall
market for debt securities and by changes in our financial performance or prospects or in the prospects for companies
in our industries generally. As a consequence, an active trading market may not develop for your notes, you may not
be able to sell your notes, or, even if you can sell your notes, you may not be able to sell them at an acceptable
price.
We could enter into various transactions that could increase the amount of our outstanding debt, adversely
affect our capital structure or credit ratings or otherwise adversely affect holders of the notes.
The terms of the notes do not prevent us from entering into a variety of acquisition, change-of-control,
refinancing, recapitalization or other highly leveraged transactions. As a result, we could enter into a variety of
transactions that could increase the total amount of our outstanding indebtedness, adversely affect our capital
structure or credit ratings or otherwise adversely affect the holders of the notes.
Investor enforcement of civil judgments against us may be more difficult.
Because we are a public limited company incorporated under English law, investors could experience more
difficulty enforcing judgments obtained against us in U.S. courts than would be obtained against a U.S. company. In
addition, it may be more difficult (or impossible) to bring some types of claims against us in courts in England than it
would be to bring similar claims against a U.S. company in a U.S. court.
Redemption may adversely affect your return on the notes.
The notes of each series are redeemable at any time at our option, and therefore we may choose to redeem
some or all of the notes of any series, including at times when prevailing interest rates are relatively low. As a result,
you may not be able to reinvest the proceeds you receive from the redemption in a comparable security at an
effective interest rate as high as the interest rate on your notes being redeemed. See "Description of Notes—Optional
Redemption" and "Description of Notes—Redemption for Changes in Taxes."
S-6
Table of Contents
If there is any withholding under the EU Savings Directive, the recent Amending Directive or any agreement
between the EU and any non-EU jurisdiction imposing equivalent measures, we are not obligated to pay any
Additional Amounts in respect of such withholding.
Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income (the "Savings Directive"), each
member state of the European Union (a "Member State") is required to provide to the tax authorities of another
Member State details of payments of interest (or similar income) paid by a person established within its jurisdiction to
(or for the benefit of) an individual resident in that other Member State or to certain limited types of entities
established in that other Member State.
On March 24, 2014, the Council of the European Union adopted a Council Directive (the "Amending Directive")
amending and broadening the scope of the requirements described above. Member States are required to apply these
new requirements from January 1, 2017. The changes will expand the range of payments covered by the Savings
Directive, in particular to include additional types of income payable on securities. The Amending Directive will also
expand the circumstances in which payments that indirectly benefit an individual resident in a Member State must be
reported. This approach will apply to payments made to, or secured for, persons, entities or legal arrangements
(including trusts) where certain conditions are satisfied, and may in some cases apply where the person, entity or
legal arrangement is established or effectively managed outside the European Union.
However, for a transitional period, the end of which is dependent upon the conclusion of certain other
agreements relating to information exchange with certain non-EU countries, Luxembourg and Austria are instead
required (unless during that period they elect otherwise) to operate a withholding system in relation to such payments.
The changes referred to above will broaden the types of payments subject to withholding in those Member States
which still operate a withholding system when they are implemented. In April 2013, the Luxembourg Government
announced its intention to abolish the withholding system with effect from January 1, 2015, in favor of automatic
information exchange under the Savings Directive.
A number of non-EU countries and territories have adopted similar measures.
If a payment were to be made or collected through a Member State which has opted for a withholding system
and an amount of, or in respect of, tax were to be withheld from that payment pursuant to the Savings Directive, the
Amending Directive or any agreement between the EU and any non-EU jurisdiction imposing equivalent measures,
neither we nor the paying agent nor any other person would be obliged to pay Additional Amounts with respect to such
payment as a result of the imposition of such withholding tax.
S-7
Table of Contents
USE OF PROCEEDS
We estimate that the net proceeds from the sale of the notes will be approximately $             million after
deducting the underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses payable by us. We expect to use the net
proceeds from this offering for general corporate purposes, which may include payments with respect to our seven
rigs under construction and other capital expenditures. With respect to our seven rigs under construction, we made
payments of $174.0 million during the six-month period ended June 30, 2014 and anticipate making additional
payments of approximately $241 million and $1,600 million during the six-month period ended December 31, 2014 and
the year ended December 31, 2015, respectively.
For information about the remaining contractual payments on our construction projects and our capital
expenditures, please read "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Cash Flow and Capital Expenditures" in our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2014.
Table of Contents
S-8
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
The following table sets forth our ratio of earnings to fixed charges for the periods indicated on a consolidated
historical basis.
Six
Months
Ended
June 30,
Year Ended December 31,
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
2014
2013   2012   2011  
  4.5x
6.2x
(1)   7.5x
2010
2009
19.2x
32.7x
(1)
For the six months ended June 30, 2014, our earnings were inadequate to cover our fixed charges by
$240.6 million. Net loss on continuing operations before income taxes of $200.0 million for the six-month period
ended June 30, 2014 included a non-cash loss on impairment of $991.5 million recorded during such period.
These ratios were computed by dividing earnings by fixed charges. For this purpose, earnings consist of income
from continuing operations before income taxes, fixed charges and amortization of capitalized interest, less income
from continuing operations before income taxes attributable to noncontrolling interests and interest capitalized. Fixed
charges consist of interest expensed and capitalized and estimates of interest within rental expense.
Table of Contents
S-9
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our consolidated cash and cash equivalents and our capitalization as of June 30,
2014:
on an actual basis; and
•
•
on an as adjusted basis to give effect to the offering of the notes.
You should read this table in conjunction with "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations" and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those financial
statements appearing in our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2014, which is incorporated
by reference into this prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus. The capitalization table below is not
necessarily indicative of our future capitalization or financial condition.
Cash and cash equivalents
Debt included in current maturities(1)
Revolving credit agreement
Commercial paper program
Current maturities of long-term debt
Total debt included in current maturities
Debt included in long-term liabilities
6.36% MARAD bonds due 2015(2)
4.33% MARAD bonds due 2016(3)
4.65% MARAD bonds due 2020(2)
8.50% Senior Notes due 2019(2)
6.875% Senior Notes due 2020(2)
7.20% Debentures due 2027(2)
7.875% Senior Notes due 2040(2)
3.25% Senior Notes due 2016
4.70% Senior Notes due 2021
       % Senior Notes due        offered hereby
       % Senior Notes due        offered hereby
Total long-term debt
Total shareholders' equity
Noncontrolling interests
Total capitalization
$
$
$
$
June 30, 2014
Actual
As Adjusted
(In millions)
145.0  $
—  $
 
— 
47.5
47.5  $
— 
— 
47.5
47.5
6.3  $
 
32.3 
 
24.8 
592.2 
 
 
1,016.6 
 
149.1 
 
381.9 
997.3 
 
 
1,478.6 
 
— 
—
6.3 
32.3 
24.8 
592.2 
1,016.6 
149.1 
381.9 
997.3 
1,478.6
4,679.1 
  11,582.6 
10.2
11,582.6 
10.2
$ 16,271.9  $
(1)
(2)
(3)
On September 22, 2014, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2.0 billion revolving credit facility and
$280.0 million was outstanding under our commercial paper program.
Issued by a subsidiary and guaranteed by Ensco plc.
Issued by a subsidiary.
S-10
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES
We have summarized selected provisions of each series of the notes below. We will issue the notes under the
indenture, dated as of March 17, 2011, between us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee, as
supplemented by a supplemental indenture establishing the terms of each series of notes. Each series of the notes
will be a separate series of senior debt securities under the indenture. The terms of the notes include those stated in
the indenture and those made part of the indenture by reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (the
"Trust Indenture Act"). We urge you to read the indenture and related supplemental indenture because they, and not
this description, define your rights as holders of the notes. Copies of the indenture and related supplemental indenture
are available as set forth under the caption "Where You Can Find More Information; Incorporation by Reference." Our
3.250% Senior Notes due 2016 and 4.700% Senior Notes due 2021 are currently outstanding under the indenture.
As used in this "Description of Notes" section, references to "Ensco," "we," "our" or "us" refer solely to
Ensco plc and not to any of its Subsidiaries. In addition, we have used in this description capitalized and other terms
that we have defined below under "—Definitions" and in other parts of this description.
General
The            notes will mature on                ,            and will bear interest at        % per year. The             notes
will mature on                ,             and will bear interest at        % per year. Interest on the notes of each series will
accrue from                    , 2014. We:
will pay interest semiannually on                and                of each year, commencing                    ,
2015;
will pay interest to the person in whose name a note is registered at the close of business on
the            or             preceding the interest payment date;
will compute interest on the basis of a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months;
will make payments on the notes at the offices of the trustee and any paying agent; and
•
•
•
•
•
may make payments by wire transfer for notes held in book-entry form or by check mailed to the
address of the person entitled to the payment as it appears in the note register.
We will issue the notes only in fully registered form, without coupons, in minimum denominations of $2,000 and
any integral multiples of $1,000 above that amount.
The            notes will be limited initially to $            in aggregate principal amount and the            notes will be
limited initially to $            in aggregate principal amount. We may, however, "reopen" each series of the notes and
issue an unlimited principal amount of additional notes of that series in the future without the consent of the holders.
Optional Redemption
We may redeem the notes of a series, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, prior to their maturity. If
we elect to redeem the            notes before the date that is            months prior to the maturity date or
the            notes before the date that is            months prior to the maturity date, we will pay a redemption price equal
to the greater of:
(1)
(2)
100% of the principal amount of the notes of such series to be redeemed; and
the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest thereon
that would be due if the notes of such series matured on the applicable Par Call Date
S-11
Table of Contents
(not including any portion of such payments of interest accrued as of the date of redemption),
discounted to the date of redemption on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of
twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate (as defined below), plus            basis points in the case of
the            notes and            basis points in the case of the             notes, plus, in each case, accrued
interest thereon to the date of redemption.
If we elect to redeem a series of notes on or after the applicable date described in the immediately preceding
sentence, we will pay an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes redeemed plus accrued interest
thereon to the date of redemption.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, installments of interest on a series of notes being redeemed that are due and
payable on interest payment dates falling on or prior to a redemption date will be payable on the interest payment date
to the registered holders as of the close of business on the relevant record date according to such series of notes and
the indenture.
"Comparable Treasury Issue" means the United States Treasury security selected by the Quotation Agent as
having a maturity comparable to the remaining term of the series of notes (assuming, for this purpose, that such
series of notes matured on the applicable Par Call Date) to be redeemed that would be utilized, at the time of
selection and in accordance with customary financial practice, in pricing new issues of corporate debt securities of
comparable maturity to the remaining term of such notes.
"Comparable Treasury Price" means, with respect to any redemption date, (i) the average of two Reference
Treasury Dealer Quotations for such redemption date, after excluding the highest and lowest such Reference Treasury
Dealer Quotations, or (ii) if we are given fewer than four such Reference Treasury Dealer Quotations, the average of
all such quotations, or (iii) if only one Reference Treasury Dealer Quotation is received, such quotation.
"Par Call Date" means (i) with respect to the            notes, the date that is            months prior to the maturity
date of such notes and (ii) with respect to the            notes, the date that is            months prior to the maturity date
of such notes.
"Quotation Agent" means the Reference Treasury Dealer appointed by us.
"Reference Treasury Dealer" means each of Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. (or
their respective affiliates that are Primary Treasury Dealers (as defined below)) and their respective successors and
two other nationally recognized investment banking firms that are primary U.S. Government securities dealers
specified from time to time by us; provided, however, that if any of the foregoing shall cease to be a primary U.S.
Government securities dealer in New York City (a "Primary Treasury Dealer"), we will substitute therefor another
Primary Treasury Dealer.
"Reference Treasury Dealer Quotations" means, with respect to each Reference Treasury Dealer and any
redemption date, the average, as determined by us, of the bid and asked prices for the Comparable Treasury Issue
(expressed in each case as a percentage of its principal amount) quoted in writing to us by such Reference Treasury
Dealer at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the third business day preceding such redemption date.
"Treasury Rate" means, with respect to any redemption date, the rate per annum equal to the semi-annual
equivalent yield to maturity of the Comparable Treasury Issue, assuming a price for the Comparable Treasury Issue
(expressed as a percentage of its principal amount) equal to the Comparable Treasury Price for such redemption date.
Notice of any redemption described under "—Optional Redemption" will be mailed at least 30 days but not more
than 60 days before the redemption date to each holder (with a copy to the trustee) of the series of notes to be
redeemed. Unless we default in payment of the redemption price, on and after the redemption date, interest will cease
to accrue on the series of notes or portions thereof called for redemption. If less than all of a series of the notes are to
be redeemed, the notes to
S-12
Table of Contents
be redeemed shall be selected by lot by The Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), in the case of notes represented by
a global security, or by the trustee by a method the trustee deems to be fair and appropriate and in accordance with
any applicable procedures of DTC, in the case of notes that are not represented by a global security.
We may at any time purchase notes on the open market or otherwise at any price. We will surrender all notes
that we redeem or purchase to the trustee for cancellation. We may not reissue or resell any of these notes.
Ranking
The notes of each series will constitute our senior unsecured debt and will rank equally in right of payment with
the other series of notes and with our senior unsecured debt from time to time outstanding and senior in right of
payment to any future subordinated debt from time to time outstanding. The notes will be effectively junior to our
secured debt from time to time outstanding to the extent of the value of the assets securing that debt.
We are a holding company and do not conduct any business operations or have any significant assets other
than interests in our Subsidiaries. We currently conduct our operations through both U.S. and non-U.S. Subsidiaries,
and our operating income and cash flow are generated by our Subsidiaries. As a result, cash we obtain from our
Subsidiaries is the principal source of funds necessary to meet our debt service obligations. Contractual provisions or
laws, as well as our Subsidiaries' financial condition and operating requirements, may limit our ability to obtain cash
from our Subsidiaries that we require to pay our debt service obligations, including payments on the notes. The notes
will be obligations solely of us and will not be guaranteed by any of our Subsidiaries. Therefore, holders of the notes
will have a junior position to the claims of creditors, including trade creditors and tort claimants, of our Subsidiaries
with respect to their assets and earnings.
As of June 30, 2014 (without giving effect to this offering), we had outstanding $4,726.6 million of indebtedness,
which includes $2,188.1 million of indebtedness of our Subsidiaries that is guaranteed by Ensco. In addition, as of
June 30, 2014, Ensco's Subsidiaries had approximately $2,250.7 million of indebtedness (including indebtedness
guaranteed by Ensco), and Ensco had no secured indebtedness.
Additional Amounts
All payments made under or with respect to the notes will be made free and clear of and without withholding or
deduction for, or on account of, any present or future tax, duty, levy, impost, assessment or other governmental
charge (including penalties, interest, additions to tax and other liabilities related thereto) (collectively, "Taxes") unless
the withholding or deduction of such Taxes is then required by law. If any deduction or withholding for, or on account
of, any Taxes imposed or levied by or on behalf of (1) any jurisdiction in which we are organized, resident or doing
business for Tax purposes or any department or political subdivision thereof or therein or (2) any jurisdiction from or
through which payment is made by us or the paying agent or any department or political subdivision thereof or therein
(each, a "Tax Jurisdiction") will at any time be required to be made from any payments made under or with respect to
the notes, including payments of principal, redemption price, interest or premium, we will pay such additional amounts
(the "Additional Amounts") as may be necessary in order that the net amounts received in respect of such payments
by each holder after such withholding or deduction (including any such deduction or withholding in respect of
Additional Amounts) will equal the respective amounts which would have been received in respect of such payments
in the absence of such withholding or deduction; provided, however, that no Additional Amounts will be payable with
respect to:
(1)
any Taxes, to the extent such Taxes would not have been imposed but for the existence of any present
or former connection between the holder or the beneficial owner of the notes and the
Table of Contents
S-13
relevant Tax Jurisdiction (other than any connection arising solely from the acquisition, ownership,
holding or disposition of the notes, the enforcement of rights under the notes and/or the receipt of any
payments in respect of the notes);
(2)
any Taxes, to the extent such Taxes would not have been imposed but for the failure of the holder or
the beneficial owner of the notes to comply with any certification, identification, information,
documentation, or other reporting requirements, including an application for relief under an applicable
double Tax treaty, whether required by statute, treaty, regulation or administrative practice of a Tax
Jurisdiction, as a precondition to exemption from, or reduction in the rate of deduction or withholding of,
Taxes imposed by the Tax Jurisdiction (including, without limitation, a certification that the holder or
beneficial owner is not resident in the Tax Jurisdiction or is a resident of an applicable Tax treaty
jurisdiction), but in each case, only to the extent the holder or the beneficial owner is legally eligible to
provide such certification or documentation; provided, however, that in the event that any such
requirements are imposed as a result of an amendment to, or change in, any laws, Tax treaties,
regulations or rulings (or any official administrative or judicial interpretation thereof) after the Issue Date,
this paragraph (2) will apply only if we notify the trustee, at least 30 days before any such withholding or
deduction would be payable, that holders or beneficial owners must comply with such certification,
identification, information, documentation or other reporting requirements;
any Taxes, to the extent such Taxes were imposed as a result of the presentation of a note for payment
(where presentation is required) more than 30 days after the relevant payment is first made available for
payment to the holder (except to the extent that the holder would have been entitled to Additional
Amounts had the note been presented on the last day of such 30 day period);
any estate, inheritance, gift, transfer, personal property or similar Tax;
any Taxes payable otherwise than by deduction or withholding from payments made under or with
respect to the notes;
any Taxes required to be withheld pursuant to the EC Council Directive on the Taxation of Savings
Income in the Form of Interest Payments (Directive 2003/48/EC) (as amended by EC Counsel Directive
2014/48/EU on March 24, 2014) or any law implementing or complying with, or introduced in order to
conform to, such Directive or any agreement between the European Union and any non-EU jurisdiction
providing for equivalent measures;
any Taxes required to be withheld in respect of a payment of interest in respect of notes presented for
payment by or on behalf of a holder who would be able to avoid such withholding or deduction by
presenting the relevant note to another paying agent in a member state of the European Union; or
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
any combination of the above items.
We also will not pay any Additional Amounts to any holder who is a fiduciary or partnership or other than the sole
beneficial owner of the note to the extent that the obligation to pay Additional Amounts would be reduced or eliminated
by transferring the notes in question to the sole beneficial owner, but only if there is no material commercial or legal
impediment to, or material cost associated with, transferring the notes to the sole beneficial owner.
In addition to the foregoing, we will also pay and indemnify the holder for any present or future stamp, issue,
registration, transfer, court or documentary taxes, or any other excise or property taxes, charges or similar levies
(including penalties, interest, additions to Tax and other liabilities related thereto) which are levied by any Tax
Jurisdiction on the execution, delivery, issuance, or registration of
S-14
Table of Contents
any of the notes, the indenture or any other document or instrument referred to therein, or the receipt of any payments
with respect to, or enforcement of, the notes.
If we become aware that we will be obligated to pay Additional Amounts with respect to any payment under or
with respect to the notes, we will deliver to the trustee on a date which is at least 30 days prior to the date of that
payment (unless the obligation to pay Additional Amounts arises after the 30th day prior to that payment date, in
which case we shall notify the trustee promptly thereafter) notice stating the fact that Additional Amounts will be
payable and the amount estimated to be so payable. The notice must also set forth any other information reasonably
necessary to enable the paying agent to pay Additional Amounts to holders on the relevant payment date. We will
provide the trustee with documentation reasonably satisfactory to the trustee evidencing the payment of Additional
Amounts.
We will timely make all withholdings and deductions required by law and will remit the full amount deducted or
withheld to the relevant Tax authority in accordance with applicable law. We will furnish to the trustee (or to a holder
upon request), within a reasonable time after the date the payment of any Taxes so deducted or withheld is made,
certified copies of Tax receipts evidencing payment by us, or if receipts are not reasonably available, other evidence
of payment reasonably satisfactory to the trustee.
Whenever in the indenture or in this "Description of Notes" there is mentioned, in any context, the payment of
amounts based upon the principal amount of the notes or of principal, interest or of any other amount payable under,
or with respect to, any of the notes such mention shall be deemed to include the payment to the paying agent of
Additional Amounts, if applicable.
The obligations under this section will survive any termination, defeasance or discharge of the indenture and will
apply, mutatis mutandis, to any jurisdiction in which any successor Person to us is organized, resident or doing
business for Tax purposes or any jurisdiction from or through which such Person or its paying agent makes any
payment on the notes and, in each case, any department or political subdivision thereof or therein.
Redemption for Changes in Taxes
We may redeem the notes, in whole but not in part, at our option upon giving not less than 30 nor more than
60 days' prior written notice to the holders, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount
thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date and all Additional Amounts, if any,
which otherwise would be payable, if on the next date on which any amount would be payable in respect of the notes,
we would be required to pay Additional Amounts, and we cannot avoid any such payment obligation by taking
reasonable measures available to us, as a result of:
any amendment to, or change in, the laws, Tax treaties or any regulations or rulings promulgated
thereunder of a relevant Tax Jurisdiction which is announced and becomes effective after the date of
this prospectus supplement (or, if the applicable Tax Jurisdiction became a Tax Jurisdiction on a date
after the date of this prospectus supplement, such later date); or
(1)
(2)
any amendment to, or change in, an official interpretation or application regarding such laws, Tax
treaties, regulations or rulings, including by virtue of a holding, judgment or order by a court of
competent jurisdiction which is announced and becomes effective after the date of this prospectus
supplement (or, if the applicable Tax Jurisdiction became a Tax Jurisdiction on a date after the date of
this prospectus supplement, such later date).
We will not give any such notice of redemption earlier than 90 days prior to the earliest date on which we would
be obligated to pay Additional Amounts or more than 365 days after the applicable
S-15
Table of Contents
law change takes effect, and, at the time such notice is given, the obligation to pay Additional Amounts must remain
in effect.
Restrictive Covenants
Limitation on Liens
We will not, and will not permit any of our Subsidiaries to, incur, issue or assume any Indebtedness for borrowed
money secured by any Lien upon any Principal Property or any shares of stock or Indebtedness of any Subsidiary
that owns or leases a Principal Property (whether such Principal Property, shares of stock or Indebtedness are now
owned or hereafter acquired) without making effective provision whereby the notes (together with, if we so determine,
any other Indebtedness or other obligation of us or any Subsidiary) shall be secured equally and ratably with (or, at our
option, prior to) the Indebtedness so secured by a Lien on the same assets of us or such Subsidiary, as the case
may be, for so long as such Indebtedness is so secured. The foregoing restrictions will not, however, apply to
Indebtedness secured by Permitted Liens.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we and our Subsidiaries may, without securing the notes, incur, issue or assume
Indebtedness that would otherwise be subject to the foregoing restrictions in an aggregate principal amount that,
together with all other such Indebtedness of us and our Subsidiaries that would otherwise be subject to the foregoing
restrictions (not including Indebtedness permitted to be secured under the definition of Permitted Liens) and the
aggregate amount of Attributable Indebtedness deemed outstanding with respect to Sale/Leaseback Transactions
(other than Sale/Leaseback Transactions in connection with which we have voluntarily retired any of the notes, any
Pari Passu Indebtedness or any Funded Indebtedness pursuant to clause (i) of the third bullet below under "Limitation
on Sale Leaseback Transactions") does not at any one time exceed 15% of Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
For purposes of this covenant, if at the time any Indebtedness is incurred, issued or assumed, such
Indebtedness is unsecured but is later secured by a Lien, such Indebtedness shall be deemed to be incurred at the
time that such Indebtedness is so secured by a Lien.
Limitation on Sale/Leaseback Transactions
So long as notes of any series are outstanding, we will not, and we will not permit any Subsidiary to, sell or
transfer (other than to us or a Wholly Owned Subsidiary) any Principal Property, whether owned at the date of the
indenture or thereafter acquired, which has been in full operation for more than 120 days prior to such sale or transfer,
with the intention of entering into a lease of such Principal Property (except for a lease for a term, including any
renewal thereof, of not more than three years), if after giving effect thereto the Attributable Indebtedness in respect of
all such sale and leaseback transactions involving Principal Properties shall be in excess of 15% of Consolidated Net
Tangible Assets.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we or any Subsidiary may sell any Principal Property and lease it back if the net
proceeds of such sale are at least equal to the fair value of such property as determined by our Board of Directors
and:
•
•
we or such Subsidiary would be entitled to incur Indebtedness in a principal amount equal to the
Attributable Indebtedness with respect to such Sale/Leaseback Transaction secured by a Lien on the
property subject to such Sale/Leaseback Transaction pursuant to the covenant described under
"Limitation on Liens" above without equally and ratably securing the notes pursuant to such covenant;
after the Issue Date and within a period commencing nine months prior to the consummation of such
Sale/Leaseback Transaction and ending nine months after the consummation thereof, we or
S-16
Table of Contents
•
such Subsidiary shall have expended for property used or to be used in the ordinary course of our
business and that of our Subsidiaries an amount equal to all or a portion of the net proceeds of such
Sale/Leaseback Transaction and we shall have elected to designate such amount as a credit against
such Sale/Leaseback Transaction (with any such amount not being so designated to be applied as set
forth in the following bullet or as otherwise permitted); or
we, during the nine-month period after the effective date of such Sale/Leaseback Transaction, shall
have applied to either (i) the voluntary defeasance or retirement of any notes, any Pari Passu
Indebtedness or any Funded Indebtedness or (ii) the acquisition of one or more Principal Properties at
fair value, an amount equal to the greater of the net proceeds of the sale or transfer of the property
leased in such Sale/Leaseback Transaction and the fair value, as determined by our Board of Directors,
of such property as of the time of entering into such Sale/Leaseback Transaction (in either case
adjusted to reflect the remaining term of the lease and any amount expended by us as set forth in the
preceding bullet), less an amount equal to the sum of the principal amount of notes, Pari Passu
Indebtedness and Funded Indebtedness voluntarily defeased or retired by us plus any amount expended
to acquire any Principal Properties at fair value, within such nine month period and not designated as a
credit against any other Sale/Leaseback Transaction entered into by us or any of our Subsidiaries during
such period.
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets
We will not, directly or indirectly, in any transaction or series of related transactions: (1) consolidate or merge
with or into another Person (whether or not we are the surviving Person); (2) sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise
dispose of all or substantially all of our and our Subsidiaries' properties or assets taken as a whole, or (3) assign any
of our obligations under the notes and the indenture, in one or more related transactions, to another Person; unless:
either: (A) we are the surviving or continuing Person; or (B) the Person formed by, surviving or continued
by any such consolidation, amalgamation or merger (if other than us) or the Person to which such sale,
assignment, transfer, conveyance or other disposition shall have been made is an Entity, validly
organized and existing in good standing (to the extent the concept of good standing is applicable) under
the laws of any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Cayman Islands, Bermuda,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,
Ireland, or any other member country of the European Union;
the Person formed by, surviving or continued by any such consolidation, amalgamation or merger (if
other than us) or the Person to which such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or other disposition
shall have been made assumes all our obligations under the notes and the indenture;
immediately after such transaction no Default or Event of Default exists; and
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
we shall have delivered to the trustee an Officers' Certificate and an opinion of counsel, each stating
that such merger, consolidation, amalgamation or sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or other
disposition of such properties or assets or assignment of our obligations under the notes and the
indenture and such supplemental indenture, if any, comply with the indenture.
We will not, directly or indirectly, lease all or substantially all of our properties or assets, in one or more related
transactions, to any other Person.
S-17
Table of Contents
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the limitations described above shall not apply to a sale, assignment, transfer,
conveyance or other disposition of assets between or among us and any of our Wholly Owned Subsidiaries.
Events of Default
An "Event of Default" on a series of notes occurs if:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
we default in the payment of interest on any note of such series when the same becomes due and
payable and the Default continues for a period of 30 days;
we default in the payment of the principal of any note of such series when the same becomes due and
payable at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise;
we fail to comply with any of our other agreements in the notes of such series or the indenture (as they
relate thereto), which shall not have been remedied within the specified period after written notice, as
specified below;
we pursuant to or within the meaning of any Bankruptcy Law shall:
commence a voluntary case,
consent to the entry of an order for relief against us in an involuntary case,
(a)
(b)
(c)
consent to the appointment of a Custodian of us for all or substantially all of the property of us, or
make a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; or
(d)
(5)
a court of competent jurisdiction enters into an order or decree under any Bankruptcy Law that:
is for relief against us in an involuntary case, or
appoints a Custodian of us or substantially all of the property of us, or
(a)
(b)
(c)
orders the liquidation of us,
and the order or decree remains unstayed and in effect for 60 days.
The term "Bankruptcy Law" means the Bankruptcy Act or any similar Federal or State law for the relief of
debtors. The term "Custodian" means any receiver, trustee, assignee, liquidator or similar official under any
Bankruptcy Law.
S-18
Table of Contents
If any Event of Default (other than an Event of Default specified in clause (4) or (5) above) with respect to notes
of any series occurs and is continuing, either the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the then
outstanding notes of that series may declare all the notes of that series to be due and payable immediately. Upon any
such declaration, the notes of that series shall become due and payable immediately, by a notice in writing to us (and
to the trustee if given by holders). Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an Event of Default specified in clause (4) or
(5) above hereof occurs with respect to us, all outstanding notes shall become due and payable without further action
or notice.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Default under clause (3) above is not an Event of Default until the trustee
notifies us, or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the then outstanding notes of the series affected by
such Default notify us and the trustee, of the Default, and we fail to cure the Default within 90 days after receipt of the
notice. The notice must specify the Default, demand that it be remedied and state that the notice is a "Notice of
Default."
Holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes in any series by
notice to the trustee may on behalf of the holders of all of the notes of that series waive any existing Default or Event
of Default and its consequences under the indenture, except a continuing Default or Event of Default in the payment
of the principal of, premium, if any, or interest on, the notes of that series (including in connection with an offer to
purchase) (provided, however, that the holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding
notes of any series may rescind an acceleration and its consequences, including any related payment Default that
resulted from such acceleration, with respect to that series). Upon any such waiver, such Default shall cease to exist,
and any Event of Default arising therefrom shall be deemed to have been cured for every purpose of the indenture; but
no such waiver shall extend to any subsequent or other Default or impair any right consequent thereon.
Modification and Waiver
We and the trustee may supplement or amend the indenture with respect to any series of notes with the consent
of the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the outstanding notes of such series. Without the consent of
the holder of each note affected, however, no modification may:
reduce the principal amount of the outstanding notes whose holders must consent to an amendment,
supplement or waiver;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
reduce the principal of or change the fixed maturity of any notes or alter any of the provisions with
respect to the redemption of the notes;
reduce the rate of or change the time for payment of interest on any note;
waive a Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on the
notes (except a rescission of acceleration of the notes by the holders of any series of notes of at least a
majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes of that series and a waiver of the
payment Default that resulted from such acceleration);
make any note payable in money other than that stated in the note;
make any change in the provisions of the indenture relating to waivers of past Defaults or the rights of
holders of notes to receive payments of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on the notes;
waive a redemption payment with respect to any note;
cause the notes to become subordinated in right of payment to any other Indebtedness; or
make any change in the foregoing amendment and waiver provisions.
S-19
Table of Contents
We and the trustee may supplement or amend the indenture or waive any provision of that indenture without the
consent of any holders of the notes in certain circumstances, including:
•
•
•
•
•
•
to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
to provide for uncertificated notes in addition to or in place of certificated notes or to alter the provisions
of the indenture related to the forms of notes (including the related definitions) in a manner that does not
adversely affect any holder in any material respect;
to provide for the assumption of our obligations to the holders of the notes by a successor to us
pursuant to provisions of the indenture described under "Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets";
to make any change that would provide any additional rights or benefits to the holders of the notes or
that does not adversely affect the legal rights hereunder of any such holder in any material respect or to
surrender any right or power conferred upon us;
to comply with requirements of the SEC in order to effect or maintain the qualification of the indenture
under the Trust Indenture Act;
to change or eliminate any of the provisions of the indenture; provided that any such change or
elimination becomes effective only when there are no outstanding notes of any series created prior to
the execution of such amendment or supplemental indenture that is adversely affected in any material
respect by the change in or elimination of the provision;
to supplement any of the provisions of the indenture to such extent necessary to permit or facilitate the
defeasance and discharge of any series of notes pursuant to the indenture; provided, that any such
action does not adversely affect the interest of the holders of the notes in any material respect;
to evidence and provide the acceptance of the appointment of a successor trustee pursuant to the
terms thereof; and
•
•
•
to add a guarantor of the notes.
The holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding notes of any series may waive any existing or
past Default or Event of Default with respect to those notes of such series. Those holders may not, however, waive
any Default or Event of Default in any payment on any note or compliance with a provision that cannot be amended or
supplemented without the consent of each holder affected.
Defeasance and Discharge
Defeasance.    When we use the term "defeasance," we mean discharge from some or all of our obligations
under the indenture. If we deposit with the trustee under the indenture any combination of money or government
securities sufficient to make payments on the notes of a series issued under the indenture on the dates those
payments are due, then, at our option, either of the following will occur:
we will be discharged from our obligations with respect to notes of that series ("legal defeasance"); or
•
•
we will no longer have any obligation to comply with specified restrictive covenants with respect to the
notes of that series, the covenant described under "—Consolidation, Merger and Sales of Assets" and
other specified covenants under the applicable indenture, and the related Events of Default will no longer
apply ("covenant defeasance").
If a series of notes is defeased, the holders of the notes of that series will not be entitled to the benefits of the
indenture, except for obligations to authenticate and deliver temporary securities, register the transfer or exchange of
notes, replace mutilated, destroyed, lost and stolen notes and
S-20
Table of Contents
maintain paying agencies. In the case of covenant defeasance, our obligation to pay principal, premium and interest
on the notes will also survive.
We will be required to deliver to the trustee an opinion of counsel that the deposit and related defeasance would
not cause the holders of the notes to recognize income, gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes and that the
holders would be subject to U.S. federal income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at the same
times as would have been the case if the deposit and related defeasance had not occurred. If we elect legal
defeasance, that opinion of counsel must be based upon a ruling from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or a change
in law to that effect.
Under current U.S. federal income tax law, legal defeasance would likely be treated as a taxable exchange of
notes to be defeased for interests in the defeasance trust. As a consequence, a U.S. holder would recognize gain or
loss equal to the difference between the holder's cost or other tax basis for the notes and the value of the holder's
interest in the defeasance trust, and thereafter would be required to include in income a share of the income, gain or
loss of the defeasance trust. Under current U.S. federal income tax law, covenant defeasance would not be treated as
a taxable exchange of such notes.
Satisfaction and Discharge.    In addition, the indenture will cease to be of further effect with respect to the
notes of a series, subject to exceptions relating to compensation and indemnity of the trustee under the indenture and
repayment to us of excess money or government securities, when:
•
either
•
•
all such notes of such series theretofore authenticated and delivered (other than (i) such notes
which have been destroyed, lost or stolen and which have been replaced or paid as provided in
the indenture and (ii) such notes of such series for whose payment money has theretofore been
deposited in trust or segregated and held in trust by us and thereafter repaid to us or discharged
from such trust, as provided in the indenture) have been delivered to the trustee for cancellation;
or
all such notes of such series not theretofore delivered to the trustee for cancellation:
have become due and payable,
will become due and payable at their Stated Maturity within one year, or
•
•
•
are to be called for redemption within one year under arrangements satisfactory to the
trustee for the giving of notice of redemption by the trustee in our name and at our
expense;
and we, in the case of the three preceding bullets, have deposited or caused to be deposited with the
trustee, as funds in trust for such purpose, an amount in U.S. dollars or U.S. government obligations
maturing as to principal and interest in such amounts and at such times as will, together with any
interest thereon (but without consideration of the reinvestment of such interest), be sufficient to pay and
discharge the entire Indebtedness on such notes of such series not theretofore delivered to the trustee
for cancellation, for principal and any premium and interest to the date of such deposit (in the case of
notes which have become due and payable) or to the Stated Maturity or redemption date, as the case
may be;
we have paid or caused to be paid all other sums payable by us with respect to the notes of such series
by us; and
we have delivered to the trustee an Officers' Certificate and an opinion of counsel, each stating that all
conditions precedent provided in the indenture or relating to the satisfaction and discharge of the
indenture with respect to such series of notes have been complied with.
S-21
•
•
Table of Contents
The Trustee
Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas is the trustee under the indenture. Deutsche Bank Trust Company
Americas and its affiliates may perform certain commercial banking services for us from time to time for which they
receive customary fees.
The Trust Indenture Act contains limitations on the rights of the trustee, if it or any of its affiliates is then our
creditor, to obtain payments of claims or to realize on certain property received for any such claim, as security or
otherwise. The trustee and its affiliates are permitted to engage in other transactions with us. If, however, the trustee
acquires any conflicting interest, it must eliminate that conflict or resign within 90 days after ascertaining that it has a
conflicting interest and after the occurrence of a Default under the indenture, unless the Default has been cured,
waived or otherwise eliminated within the 90-day period.
Payment; Paying Agents and Transfer Agents
The trustee will be appointed as paying agent and transfer agent for the notes. Payments on the notes will be
made in U.S. dollars at the office of the trustee and any paying agent. At our option, however, payments may be
made by wire transfer for notes held in book-entry form or by check mailed to the address of the Person entitled to the
payment as it appears in the security register.
If the principal of or any premium or interest on notes of a series is payable on a day that is not a business day,
the payment will be made on the following business day. Subject to the requirements of any applicable abandoned
property laws, the trustee and paying agent will pay to us upon written request any money held by them for payments
on the notes that remains unclaimed for three years after the date upon which that payment has become due. After
payment to us, holders entitled to the money must look to us for payment. In that case, all liability of the trustee or
paying agent with respect to that money will cease.
Definitions
"Attributable Indebtedness," when used with respect to any Sale/Leaseback Transaction, means, as at the time
of determination, the present value (discounted at the rate set forth or implicit in the terms of the lease included in
such transaction) of the total obligations of the lessee for rental payments (other than amounts required to be paid on
account of taxes, maintenance, repairs, insurance, assessments, utilities, operating and labor costs and other items
which do not constitute payments for property rights) during the remaining term of the lease included in such
Sale/Leaseback Transaction (including any period for which such lease has been extended). In the case of any lease
which is terminable by the lessee upon the payment of a penalty, such net amount shall be the lesser of the net
amount determined assuming termination upon the first date such lease may be terminated (in which case the net
amount shall also include the amount of the penalty, but no rent shall be considered as required to be paid under such
lease subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated) or the net amount determined assuming no
such termination.
"Bankruptcy Act" means the Bankruptcy Act or Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.
"Board of Directors" means our Board of Directors or comparable governing body or any committee thereof duly
authorized, with respect to any particular matter, to act by or on behalf of our Board of Directors or comparable
governing body.
"Capitalized Lease Obligation" of any Person means any obligation of such Person to pay rent or other amounts
under a lease of property, real or personal, that is required to be accounted for as a capital lease for financial reporting
purposes in accordance with GAAP; and the amount of such obligation shall be the capitalized amount thereof
determined in accordance with GAAP.
S-22
Table of Contents
"Consolidated Net Tangible Assets" means the total amount of assets (after deducting applicable reserves and
other properly deductible items) less:
all current liabilities (excluding liabilities that are extendible or renewable at our option to a date more
than 12 months after the date of calculation and excluding current maturities of long-term Indebtedness);
and
•
•
all goodwill, trade names, trademarks, patents, unamortized debt discount and expense and other like
intangible assets.
We will calculate our Consolidated Net Tangible Assets based on our most recent quarterly balance sheet and in
accordance with GAAP.
"Default" means any event, act or condition that is, or after notice or the passage of time or both would be, an
Event of Default.
"Entity" means a corporation, limited liability company or business trust (or functional equivalent of the foregoing
under applicable foreign law).
"Funded Indebtedness" means all Indebtedness that matures on or is renewable to a date more than one year
after the date the Indebtedness is incurred.
"GAAP" means United States generally accepted accounting principles and policies consistent with those
applied in the preparation of our financial statements.
"Indebtedness" means:
all indebtedness for borrowed money (whether full or limited recourse);
all obligations evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or other similar instruments;
all obligations under letters of credit or other similar instruments, other than standby letters of credit,
performance bonds and other obligations issued in the ordinary course of business, to the extent not
drawn or, to the extent drawn, if such drawing is reimbursed not later than the third business day
following demand for reimbursement;
all obligations to pay the deferred and unpaid purchase price of property or services, except trade
payables and accrued expenses incurred in the ordinary course of business;
all Capitalized Lease Obligations;
all Indebtedness of others secured by a Lien on any asset of the Person in question (provided that if the
obligations so secured have not been assumed in full or are not otherwise fully the Person's legal
liability, then such obligations may be reduced to the value of the asset or the liability of the Person); or
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
all Indebtedness of others (other than endorsements in the ordinary course of business) guaranteed by
the Person in question to the extent of such guarantee.
"Issue Date" means the date on which the notes are first authenticated and delivered under the indenture.
"Joint Venture" means any partnership, corporation or other entity in which up to and including 50% of the
partnership interests, outstanding voting stock or other equity interests is owned, directly or indirectly, by us and/or
one or more Subsidiaries. A Joint Venture is not treated as a Subsidiary.
"Lien" means any mortgage, pledge, lien, charge, security interest or similar encumbrance. For purposes of the
indenture, we or any of our Subsidiaries shall be deemed to own subject to a Lien any asset which it has acquired or
holds subject to the interest of a vendor or lessor under any conditional sale agreement, Capitalized Lease Obligation
or other title retention agreement relating to such asset.
S-23
Table of Contents
"Maturity" when used with respect to any notes, means the date on which the principal of such note or an
installment of principal becomes due and payable as therein or herein provided, whether at the Stated Maturity or by
declaration of acceleration, call for redemption or otherwise.
"Officers" means our Chairman of the Board, President, Vice President, Treasurer, Controller, Secretary,
Assistant Treasurer, Assistant Controller or Assistant Secretary.
"Officers' Certificate" means a certificate signed by two Officers and delivered to the trustee, which certificate
shall be in compliance with the indenture.
"Pari Passu Indebtedness" means any of our Indebtedness, whether outstanding on the Issue Date or thereafter
created, incurred or assumed, unless, in the case of any particular Indebtedness, the instrument creating or
evidencing the same or pursuant to which the same is outstanding expressly provides that such Indebtedness shall
be subordinated in right of payment to the notes.
"Permitted Liens" shall mean (i) Liens existing on the Issue Date; (ii) Liens on property or assets of, or any
shares of stock of, or other equity interests in, or Indebtedness of, any Person existing at the time such Person
becomes a Subsidiary of us or at the time such Person is merged into or consolidated with us or any of our
Subsidiaries or at the time of a sale, lease or other disposition of the properties of a Person (or a division thereof) as
an entirety or substantially as an entirety to us or a Subsidiary, and not incurred in contemplation of such merger,
consolidation, sale, lease or other disposition; (iii) Liens in favor of us or any of our Subsidiaries or Liens securing
debt of a Subsidiary owing to us or to another Subsidiary; (iv) Liens in favor of governmental bodies to secure partial,
progress, advance or other payments or performance pursuant to the provisions of any contract or statute; (v) Liens
securing industrial revenue, pollution control or similar revenue bonds; (vi) Liens on assets existing at the time of
acquisition thereof, securing all or any portion of the cost of acquiring, constructing, improving, developing, expanding
or repairing such assets or securing Indebtedness incurred prior to, at the time of, or within 24 months after, the later
of the acquisition, the completion of construction, improvement, development, expansion or repair or the
commencement of commercial operation of such assets, for the purpose of (a) financing all or any part of the
purchase price of such assets or (b) financing all or any part of the cost of construction, improvement, development,
expansion or repair of any such assets; (vii) statutory liens or landlords', carriers', warehouseman's, mechanics',
suppliers', materialmen's, repairmen's, maritime or other like Liens arising in the ordinary course of business and with
respect to amounts not yet delinquent or being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings; (viii) Liens in
connection with in rem and other legal proceedings, which are being contested in good faith; (ix) Liens securing taxes,
assessments, government charges or levies not yet due or delinquent, or which can thereafter be paid without
penalty, or which are being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings; (x) Liens on the stock, partnership or
other equity interest of us or any Subsidiary in any Joint Venture or any Subsidiary that owns an equity interest in
such Joint Venture to secure Indebtedness, provided the amount of such Indebtedness is contributed and/or
advanced solely to such Joint Venture; (xi) Liens incurred in the ordinary course of business to secure performance of
tenders, bids or contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business, including without limitation any rights of
offset or liquidated damages, penalties, or other fees that may be contractually agreed to in conjunction with any
tender, bid, or contract entered into by us or any of our Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business; (xii) Liens on
current assets of us or any of our Subsidiaries securing our Indebtedness or Indebtedness of any such Subsidiary,
respectively; (xiii) deposits made in connection with maintaining self-insurance, to obtain the benefits of laws,
regulations or arrangements relating to unemployment insurance, old age pensions, social security or similar matters
or to secure surety, appeal or customs bonds; and (xiv) any extensions, substitutions, replacements or renewals in
whole or in part of a Lien enumerated in clauses (i) through (xiii) above, provided that the amount of Indebtedness
secured by such extension, substitution, replacement or renewal shall not exceed the principal amount of
Indebtedness being substituted, extended, replaced or renewed, together with the amount of any premiums, fees,
costs and expenses associated with such
S-24
Table of Contents
substitution, extension, replacement or renewal, nor shall the pledge, mortgage or lien be extended to any additional
Principal Property unless otherwise permitted under this covenant.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, incorporated or
unincorporated association, joint stock company, trust, unincorporated organization or government or other agency or
political subdivision thereof or other entity of any kind.
"Principal Property" means any drilling rig or drillship, or integral portion thereof, owned or leased by us or any
Subsidiary and used for drilling offshore oil and gas wells, which, in the opinion of the Board of Directors, is of material
importance to the business of us and our Subsidiaries taken as a whole, but no such drilling rig or drillship, or portion
thereof, shall be deemed of material importance if its net book value (after deducting accumulated depreciation) is
less than 2% of Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
"Sale/Leaseback Transaction" means any arrangement with any Person pursuant to which we or any Subsidiary
leases any Principal Property that has been or is to be sold or transferred by us or the Subsidiary to such Person,
other than (1) temporary leases for a term, including renewals at the option of the lessee, of not more than five years;
(2) leases between us and a Subsidiary or between Subsidiaries; and (3) leases of Principal Property executed by the
time of, or within 12 months after the latest of, the acquisition, the completion of construction, alteration, improvement
or repair, or the commencement of commercial operation of the Principal Property.
"Stated Maturity" when used with respect to any note or any installment of principal thereof or interest thereon,
means the date specified in such note as the fixed date on which the principal of such note or such installment of
principal or interest is due and payable.
"Subsidiary" means a Person at least a majority of the outstanding Voting Stock of which is owned, directly or
indirectly, by us or by one or more other Subsidiaries, or by us and one or more other Subsidiaries. A Joint Venture is
not treated as a Subsidiary.
"Voting Stock" means, with respect to any Person, securities of any class or classes of capital stock of such
Person entitling the holders thereof (whether at all times or at the times that such class of capital stock has voting
power by reason of the happening of any contingency) to vote in the election of members of the board of directors or
comparable body of such Person.
"Wholly Owned Subsidiary" means, with respect to a Person, any Subsidiary of that Person to the extent
(1)   all of the Voting Stock of such Subsidiary, other than any director's qualifying shares mandated by
applicable law, is owned directly or indirectly by such Person or
(2)   such Subsidiary is organized in a foreign jurisdiction and is required by the applicable laws and
regulations of such foreign jurisdiction to be partially owned by another Person, if such Person:
•
•
Table of Contents
directly or indirectly owns the remaining capital stock of such Subsidiary and
by contract or otherwise, controls the management and business of such Subsidiary and derives
the economic benefits of ownership of such Subsidiary to substantially the same extent as if
such Subsidiary were a Wholly Owned Subsidiary.
S-25
CERTAIN U.S. FEDERAL AND U.K. TAX CONSEQUENCES
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences
The following discussion summarizes certain U.S. federal income tax consequences of the ownership and
disposition of the notes by holders who purchase notes for cash at their original issuance at their "issue price" (i.e.,
the first price at which a substantial amount of the notes is sold to the public, excluding sales to bond houses,
brokers, or similar persons or organizations acting in the capacity of underwriters, placement agents or wholesalers)
and who hold the notes as "capital assets" (within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended (the "Code")). This discussion is not a complete discussion of all the potential tax consequences of the
ownership and disposition of notes that may be relevant to you. This discussion is based upon the Code, regulations
issued under the Code, administrative rulings and court decisions, all as in effect on the date of this prospectus
supplement, and all of which are subject to change, possibly on a retroactive basis that could adversely affect a
holder of the notes, or to different interpretations. We cannot assure you that the Internal Revenue Service (the "IRS")
will not challenge one or more of the tax consequences described in this prospectus supplement. We have not
obtained, nor do we intend to obtain, a ruling from the IRS with respect to the U.S. federal tax consequences of
owning or disposing of the notes.
This discussion does not address all U.S. federal income tax considerations that may be relevant to a particular
holder in light of the holder's circumstances or to certain categories of investors that may be subject to special rules,
such as financial institutions, regulated investment companies, insurance companies, real estate investment trusts,
controlled foreign corporations or their shareholders, passive foreign investment companies or their shareholders, tax-
exempt entities, retirement plans, non-U.S. trusts or estates with U.S. beneficiaries, individual retirement accounts,
tax-deferred accounts, holders subject to alternative minimum tax, dealers or traders in securities, partnerships or
other pass-through entities (or investors in such entities), U.S. expatriates, holders of notes whose functional currency
is not the U.S. dollar or persons who hold the notes as part of a hedge, conversion transaction, straddle or other
integrated transaction. This discussion also does not address U.S. federal tax consequences other than U.S. federal
income tax consequences (such as estate or gift tax consequences), or the tax considerations arising under the laws
of any state, local or non-U.S. jurisdiction or under any applicable tax treaties.
For purposes of this discussion, you are a "U.S. holder" if you are a beneficial owner of notes and you are a
"U.S. person" for U.S. federal income tax purposes. You are a "non-U.S. holder" if you are a beneficial owner of notes
that is neither a U.S. holder nor an entity treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. A "U.S.
person" is:
an individual who is a citizen of the U.S. or a resident alien of the U.S. for U.S. federal income tax
purposes;
an entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, created or organized in or under
the laws of the U.S. or of any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
•
•
•
•
a trust if a U.S. court is able to exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one
or more U.S. persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust, or a trust that
has a valid election in effect under applicable regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
If an entity treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes holds the notes, the tax treatment of a
partner will generally depend on the status of the partner and on the activities of the partnership. Partners of
partnerships considering an investment in the notes should consult their tax advisors.
S-26
Table of Contents
This discussion is intended for general information purposes only. We urge you to consult your own tax
advisors regarding the particular U.S. federal income, estate and gift tax consequences to you of owning and
disposing of notes, any tax consequences that may arise under the laws of any relevant non-U.S., state, local
or other taxing jurisdiction or under any applicable tax treaty, as well as possible effects of changes in federal
or other tax laws. Holders who purchase notes subsequent to their original issuance should consult their own
tax advisors with respect to the tax treatment of any market discount or bond premium associated with the
purchase of such notes.
Effect of Certain Contingencies
In certain circumstances (see, e.g., "Description of Notes—Optional Redemption"), we may be obligated to pay
amounts on the notes that are in excess of stated interest and principal. The possibility of such payments may
implicate special rules under U.S. Treasury Regulations governing "contingent payment debt instruments." According
to those regulations, the possibility that additional payments will be made will not cause the notes to be contingent
payment debt instruments if, as of the date the notes are issued, there is only a remote chance that any such
payments will be made, each such payment is considered incidental or, in certain circumstances, if it is significantly
more likely than not that no such payments will be made. We have determined, and intend to take the position, that
the likelihood that we will redeem the notes at our option is remote under the applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations.
Therefore, we do not intend to treat the possibility of such events occurring as subjecting the notes to the contingent
payment debt rules. If any additional payments are in fact made, holders generally will be required to recognize such
amounts as income.
Our determination that the notes are not contingent payment debt instruments is binding on holders unless they
disclose their contrary positions to the IRS in the manner required by applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations. Our
determination that the notes are not contingent payment debt instruments is not, however, binding on the IRS. If the
IRS were to successfully challenge our determination and the notes were treated as contingent payment debt
instruments, holders subject to U.S. federal income taxation would be required, among other things, to (i) accrue
interest income based on a projected payment schedule and a comparable yield (which would be a higher rate than
the stated interest rate on the notes) regardless of their method of tax accounting and (ii) treat as ordinary income,
rather than capital gain, any gain recognized on a sale, exchange or redemption of a note. In the event that any of the
above contingencies were to occur, it would affect the amount and timing of the income recognized by a holder.
The remainder of this discussion assumes that the notes will not be treated as contingent payment debt
instruments. Holders of the notes are urged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential application to the
notes of the contingent payment debt instrument rules and the consequences thereof.
U.S. Holders
Payments of Interest
Interest on a note (without reduction for any tax withheld and including any Additional Amounts paid in respect of
such taxes) generally will be includable in gross income by a U.S. holder as ordinary income at the time the interest is
either received or accrued in accordance with your regular method of accounting for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
All such amounts of interest (including any Additional Amounts) should generally constitute foreign source
interest income for U.S. federal income tax purposes. If any non-U.S. taxes were to be paid or withheld in respect of
payments on the notes (including any Additional Amounts), a U.S. holder may be eligible, subject to a number of
complex limitations (including that the election to deduct or credit non-U.S. taxes applies to all of your non-U.S. taxes
for a particular tax year), for a
S-27
Table of Contents
deduction or a foreign tax credit. With certain exceptions, interest on the notes (including any Additional Amounts) will
be treated as "passive category income," or in the case of certain U.S. holders, "general category income," for
purposes of computing the foreign tax credit allowable under the Code. The rules governing foreign tax credits are
complex and a U.S. holder of notes should consult its tax advisor regarding the availability of the foreign tax credit in
its situation.
Sale, Exchange, or Other Taxable Disposition of the Notes
Upon a sale, taxable exchange, retirement, redemption or other taxable disposition of a note, a U.S. holder
generally will recognize gain or loss equal to the difference, if any, between the amount received upon such taxable
disposition (less any amount attributable to accrued but unpaid interest, which will be taxable as ordinary income if not
previously included in gross income) and the U.S. holder's adjusted tax basis in the note at that time. A U.S. holder's
adjusted tax basis in a note will generally equal such holder's original purchase price for the note.
Any gain or loss realized by a U.S. holder on the sale, taxable exchange, retirement, redemption or other taxable
disposition of a note generally will be treated as U.S. source capital gain or loss, and will be long-term capital gain or
loss if, at the time of sale, exchange, retirement or other taxable disposition, the note has been held for more than one
year; otherwise, the capital gain or loss will be short-term. Under current law, net long-term capital gain recognized by
certain non-corporate U.S. holders is generally taxed at lower rates than items of ordinary income. The deductibility of
capital losses is subject to limitations. You should consult your tax advisor regarding the treatment of capital gains
and losses.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
In general, information reporting will apply to payments of interest on the notes and to the proceeds from the
sale, taxable exchange, retirement, redemption or other taxable disposition of a note paid to U.S. holders that are not
exempt recipients. Additionally, backup withholding (currently at a rate of 28%) will apply to such payments if a U.S.
holder fails to provide a correct taxpayer identification number or certification of exempt status or becomes subject to
backup withholding due to a prior failure to report full dividend and interest income or otherwise fails to comply with
applicable requirements of the backup withholding rules. In addition to being subject to backup withholding, a U.S.
holder may in certain circumstances be subject to penalties imposed by the IRS if the U.S. holder does not provide a
correct taxpayer identification number or an adequate basis for an exemption from backup withholding.
Certain persons are exempt from backup withholding, including corporations. Other U.S. holders generally will be
eligible for an exemption from backup withholding upon providing a properly completed IRS Form W-9 (or substitute
form) to us, our paying agent or the person who would otherwise be required to withhold U.S. federal income tax, as
applicable. Backup withholding is not an additional tax. If backup withholding applies to you, you may use the
amounts withheld as a refund or credit against your U.S. federal income tax liability, as long as you timely provide
specific information to the IRS.
Foreign financial asset reporting
Certain individual U.S. holders who hold interests in "specified foreign financial assets," such as the notes, may
be required to disclose certain information relating to each "specified foreign financial asset" by attaching a complete
IRS Form 8938, Statement of Specified Foreign Assets, to their U.S. federal income tax return for the relevant taxable
year if the aggregate value of such assets exceeds a certain threshold, subject to certain exceptions (including an
exception for shares held in accounts
S-28
Table of Contents
maintained by U.S. financial institutions). You should consult your tax advisor regarding your information reporting
requirements, including the significant penalties for non-compliance.
Medicare Tax
Certain U.S. holders that are individuals, estates or trusts will be subject to a 3.8% tax (the "Medicare Tax") on
the lesser of (a) the U.S. holder's "net investment income" for the relevant taxable year and (b) the excess of the U.S.
holder's modified adjusted gross income for the taxable year over a certain threshold (which in the case of individuals
will be between $125,000 and $250,000 depending on the individual's circumstances). A U.S. holder's net investment
income will generally include its interest income and its net gains from the disposition of notes, unless such interest
income or net gains are derived in the ordinary course of the conduct of a trade or business (other than a trade or
business that consists of certain passive or trading activities). A U.S. holder that is an individual, estate or trust
should consult its tax advisor regarding the applicability of the Medicare Tax to its income and gains in respect of its
investment in the notes.
Non-U.S. Holders
Taxation of Interest and Disposition
In general and subject to the discussion below under "Information Reporting and Backup Withholding," a non-
U.S. holder generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income or withholding tax on payments of interest on notes or
gain upon the taxable exchange, retirement, redemption or other taxable disposition of notes, unless:
with respect to both interest on notes or gain upon such disposition of notes, the interest or gain is "U.S.
trade or business income," which means income or gain that is effectively connected with the conduct
by the non-U.S. holder of a trade or business in the U.S.; or
•
•
with respect to gain upon the disposition of notes, such non-U.S. holder is an individual who is present
in the U.S. for 183 days or more in the taxable year of disposition and certain other conditions are met
(in which case, unless an applicable treaty provides otherwise, such non-U.S. holder will be subject to a
flat 30% U.S. federal income tax on the gain derived from the sale, which may be offset by certain U.S.-
source capital losses).
U.S. trade or business income of a non-U.S. holder generally will be subject to regular U.S. federal income tax in
the same manner as if it were realized by a U.S. holder, unless an applicable treaty provides otherwise. In addition, a
non-U.S. holder that is a foreign corporation may be subject to a branch profits tax at a rate of 30%, or such lower rate
as provided by an applicable income tax treaty, on its effectively connected earnings and profits (subject to certain
adjustments).
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Payments to a non-U.S. holder of interest on a note, and amounts withheld from such payments, if any, may be
required to be reported to the IRS and to such non-U.S. holder. U.S. backup withholding tax generally will not apply to
payments of interest on a note to a non-U.S. holder if the non-U.S. holder certifies to us, our paying agent or the
person who would otherwise be required to withhold U.S. federal income tax, on a properly completed and executed
IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E or an applicable substitute form, under penalties of perjury, that such non-U.S.
holder is not a U.S. person and provides his or her name and address or the non-U.S. holder otherwise establishes an
exemption, provided that we, our paying agent, or the person who would otherwise be required to withhold U.S. federal
income tax, as applicable, does not have actual knowledge or reason to know that the non-U.S. holder is a U.S.
person.
S-29
Table of Contents
The payments of the proceeds of the disposition of notes to or through the U.S. office of a broker will be subject
to information reporting and backup withholding unless a non-U.S. holder properly certifies under penalties of perjury
as to his or her non-U.S. status and specific other conditions are met or the non-U.S. holder otherwise establishes an
exemption. The proceeds of a disposition effected outside the U.S. by a non-U.S. holder of notes to or through a non-
U.S. office of a broker generally will not be subject to backup withholding or information reporting. However, if that
broker is a U.S. person (including a non-U.S. branch or office of such person), a controlled foreign corporation within
the meaning of the Code, a foreign person 50% or more of whose gross income from all sources for certain periods is
effectively connected with a trade or business in the U.S., or a foreign partnership that is engaged in the conduct of a
trade or business in the U.S. or that has one or more partners that are U.S. persons who in the aggregate hold more
than 50% of the income or capital interests in the partnership, information reporting requirements will apply unless that
broker has documentary evidence in its files of the non-U.S. holder's non-U.S. status and has no actual knowledge to
the contrary or unless the non-U.S. holder otherwise establishes an exemption.
Non-U.S. holders are urged to consult their tax advisors regarding the application of information reporting and
backup withholding to their particular situation, the availability of an exemption therefrom, and the procedure for
obtaining such an exemption, if available. Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Any amounts withheld from a
payment to a non-U.S. holder under the backup withholding rules may be allowed as a credit against his or her U.S.
federal income tax liability and may entitle the non-U.S. holder to a refund, provided such non-U.S. holder timely
furnishes the required information to the IRS.
U.K. Tax Consequences
The following discussion summarizes the material U.K. withholding tax consequences in relation to the payment
of principal, interest, discount and premium in respect of the notes and the material U.K. tax consequences of the
ownership and disposition of the notes. Except where the context otherwise requires, the following discussion relates
only to the position of persons who are absolute beneficial owners of the notes and does not deal with the position of
certain classes of holders such as dealers.
The following discussion is not a complete discussion of all the potential tax consequences of the ownership
and disposition of notes that may be relevant to you. This discussion is based upon the U.K. tax laws as in effect on
the date of this prospectus supplement, which are subject to change, possibly on a retroactive basis in a way which
could adversely affect a holder of the notes, or to different interpretations. We cannot assure you that HM Revenue &
Customs will not challenge one or more of the tax consequences described in this prospectus supplement. We have
not obtained, nor do we intend to obtain, a ruling from HM Revenue & Customs with respect to the U.K. tax
consequences of purchasing, owning, exchanging or disposing of the notes.
This discussion does not address all U.K. tax considerations that may be relevant to a particular holder in light
of the holder's circumstances or to certain categories of investors that may be subject to special rules. Except as
discussed below, this discussion also does not address U.K. inheritance tax consequences or the tax considerations
arising under the laws of any local or non-U.K. jurisdiction or under any applicable tax treaties.
This discussion is for general purposes only. You should consult your own tax advisor as to the
particular U.K. tax consequences to you of the purchase, ownership, exchange, disposition and defeasance of
the notes, including the effect and applicability of local or non-U.K. tax laws or tax treaties and the possible
effects of changes in the tax law.
S-30
Table of Contents
Interest Payments
While the notes continue to be listed on a recognized stock exchange as defined in Section 1005 of the Income
Tax Act 2007 (which includes the NYSE), payments of interest may be made without withholding or deduction for or
on account of U.K. income tax.
Interest on the notes may also be paid without withholding or deduction on account of U.K. tax where interest on
the notes is paid to a person we reasonably believe (and any person by or through whom interest on the notes is paid
reasonably believes) is the beneficial owner of, and is within the charge to U.K. corporation tax as regards, the
payment of interest at the time the payment is made, provided that HM Revenue & Customs has not given a direction
that it has reasonable grounds to believe that it is likely that the beneficial owner is not within the charge to U.K.
corporation tax in respect of such payment of interest at the time the payment is made.
In all cases not described in the two preceding paragraphs, subject to relief under an applicable double taxation
treaty, interest on the notes will be paid under deduction of U.K. income tax at the basic rate (currently 20%).
Payments on the notes that, although not expressed to be interest, are treated as interest for U.K. tax purposes,
and are not "short interest," will also be subject to the withholding tax rules described above. Short interest is interest
on indebtedness which is not capable of or intended to subsist for a period of one year or more. A premium payable
on a redemption of a note may fall to be treated as interest other than short interest for U.K. tax purposes. When the
notes are issued at a discount or redeemable at a premium, U.K. withholding tax will not apply to the payment of such
discount or premium so long as it does not constitute interest other than short interest for U.K. tax purposes (other
than discount treated as interest solely by virtue of Section 381 of the Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act
2005).
Payments, or parts thereof, constituting income in respect of the notes have a U.K. source and accordingly may
be chargeable to U.K. tax by direct assessment even if paid without withholding or deduction. However, income in
respect of the notes with a U.K. source received by a holder of the notes without deduction or withholding on account
of U.K. tax will not be liable to U.K. tax by direct assessment unless that note holder (i) is resident in the United
Kingdom for U.K. tax purposes, or (ii) carries on a trade, profession or vocation in the United Kingdom through a U.K.
branch, agency or permanent establishment in connection with which the income is received or to which the notes are
attributable. There are certain exemptions for income received by certain categories of agent (such as some brokers
and investment managers).
Tax on Ownership and Disposition
Holders of the notes which are companies within the charge to U.K. corporation tax may be subject to U.K.
corporation tax on their holding, disposal and redemption (including a part redemption of the notes that are redeemable
in two or more installments) of the notes. In general, all returns on and fluctuations in the value of the notes will be
brought into account in computing taxable income broadly in accordance with note holders' statutory accounting
treatment. Fluctuations in value relating to foreign exchange gains and losses in respect of the notes will also be
brought into account in computing income. This discussion does not address the U.K. tax consequences of any
defeasance of the notes or any obligations thereunder.
Holders of the notes who are individuals and who are resident in the United Kingdom or carry on a trade in the
United Kingdom through a branch or agency to which the notes are attributable may be subject to U.K. income or
capital gains tax on the disposal or redemption (including a part redemption of the notes that are redeemable in two or
more installments) of the notes. The nature of the tax charge will depend on the terms of the notes in question and the
particular circumstances of the
S-31
Table of Contents
relevant note holder. In particular, we urge individual note holders to have regard, where appropriate, to the capital
gains tax legislation, the "accrued income scheme" and the "deeply discounted securities legislation" which may, in
certain circumstances, alter the tax treatment of the notes discussed above.
Provision of Information by and/or to HM Revenue & Customs
HM Revenue & Customs has the power to obtain information (including the name and address of the beneficial
owner of the interest) from any person in the United Kingdom:
who either pays interest to or receives interest for the benefit of an individual; or
•
•
who either pays amounts payable on the redemption of the notes which are deeply discounted securities
(for the purposes of the Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005) to, or receives such amounts
for the benefit of, an individual. Such information may, in certain circumstances, be exchanged by
HMRC with the tax authorities of other jurisdictions.
Inheritance Tax
A holder of the notes who is an individual domiciled outside the United Kingdom will generally not be liable to
U.K. inheritance tax in respect of his holding of the notes if a register of the notes is maintained outside the United
Kingdom. If a register of the notes is maintained within the United Kingdom, then an individual domiciled outside the
United Kingdom may be liable to U.K. inheritance tax. If so, exemption from or reduction in any U.K. inheritance tax
liability may be available for holders of the notes who are resident in the U.S. under the Estate and Gift Tax
Convention made between the United Kingdom and the U.S.
Holders of the notes who are domiciled or treated as domiciled in the United Kingdom may be liable to
inheritance tax in respect of their holdings of such notes.
Stamp Duty and Stamp Duty Reserve Tax
No U.K. stamp duty or stamp duty reserve tax will generally be payable by a holder of the notes on the
redemption of the notes by us.
No liability for U.K. stamp duty or stamp duty reserve tax should arise on a transfer of, or an agreement to
transfer, the notes.
European Union Directive on the Taxation of Savings Income
EU Savings Directive
Under the Savings Directive, each Member State is required to provide to the tax authorities of another Member
State details of payments of interest (or similar income) paid by a person established within its jurisdiction to (or for
the benefit of) an individual resident in that other Member State or to certain limited types of entities established in
that other Member State.
On March 24, 2014, the Council of the European Union adopted the Amending Directive amending and
broadening the scope of the requirements described above. Member States are required to apply these new
requirements from January 1, 2017. The changes will expand the range of payments covered by the Savings
Directive, in particular to include additional types of income payable on securities. The Amending Directive will also
expand the circumstances in which payments that indirectly benefit an individual resident in a Member State must be
reported. This approach will apply to payments made to, or secured for, persons, entities or legal arrangements
(including trusts) where certain conditions are satisfied, and may in some cases apply where the person, entity or
legal arrangement is established or effectively managed outside the European Union.
S-32
Table of Contents
However, for a transitional period, the end of which is dependent upon the conclusion of certain other
agreements relating to information exchange with certain non-EU countries, Luxembourg and Austria are instead
required (unless during that period they elect otherwise) to operate a withholding system in relation to such payments.
The changes referred to above will broaden the types of payments subject to withholding in those Member States
which still operate a withholding system when they are implemented. In April 2013, the Luxembourg Government
announced its intention to abolish the withholding system with effect from January 1, 2015, in favor of automatic
information exchange under the Savings Directive.
A number of non-EU countries and territories have adopted similar measures.
Table of Contents
S-33
BOOK-ENTRY, DELIVERY AND FORM
We have obtained the information in this section concerning The Depository Trust Company ("DTC"),
Clearstream Banking, S.A., Luxembourg ("Clearstream") and Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V., as operator of the Euroclear
System ("Euroclear") and their book-entry systems and procedures from sources that we believe to be reliable. We
take no responsibility for an accurate portrayal of this information. In addition, the description of the clearing systems
in this section reflects our understanding of the rules and procedures of DTC, Clearstream and Euroclear as they are
currently in effect. Those systems could change their rules and procedures at any time.
Each series of notes will initially be represented by one or more fully registered global notes. Each such global
note will be deposited with, or on behalf of, DTC or any successor thereto and registered in the name of Cede & Co.
(DTC's nominee). You may hold your interests in the global notes in the U.S. through DTC, or in Europe through
Clearstream or Euroclear, either as a participant in such systems or indirectly through organizations which are
participants in such systems. Clearstream and Euroclear will hold interests in the global notes on behalf of their
respective participating organizations or customers through customers' securities accounts in Clearstream's,
Luxembourg's or Euroclear's names on the books of their respective depositaries, which in turn will hold those
positions in customers' securities accounts in the depositaries' names on the books of DTC.
So long as DTC or its nominee is the registered owner of the global securities representing the notes, DTC or
such nominee will be considered the sole owner and holder of the notes for all purposes of the notes and the
indenture. Except as provided below, owners of beneficial interests in the notes will not be entitled to have the notes
registered in their names, will not receive or be entitled to receive physical delivery of the notes in definitive form and
will not be considered the owners or holders of the notes under the indenture, including for purposes of receiving any
reports delivered by us or the trustee pursuant to the indenture. Accordingly, each person owning a beneficial interest
in a note must rely on the procedures of DTC or its nominee and, if such person is not a participant, on the
procedures of the participant through which such person owns its interest, in order to exercise any rights of a holder of
notes.
Unless and until we issue the notes in fully certificated, registered form under the limited circumstances
described below under the heading "—Certificated Notes":
you will not be entitled to receive a certificate representing your interest in the notes;
all references in this prospectus supplement or the accompanying prospectus to actions by holders will
refer to actions taken by DTC upon instructions from its direct participants; and
•
•
•
all references in this prospectus supplement or the accompanying prospectus to payments and notices
to holders will refer to payments and notices to DTC or Cede & Co., as the registered holder of the
notes, for distribution to you in accordance with DTC procedures.
We have provided the descriptions of the operations and procedures of DTC, Clearstream and Euroclear in this
prospectus supplement solely as a matter of convenience. These operations and procedures are solely within the
control of those organizations and are subject to change by them from time to time. None of us, the underwriters or
the trustee takes any responsibility for these operations or procedures, and you are urged to contact DTC,
Clearstream and Euroclear or their participants directly to discuss these matters.
The Depository Trust Company
DTC will act as securities depositary for the notes. DTC is:
•
a limited-purpose trust company organized under the New York Banking Law;
S-34
Table of Contents
a "banking organization" under the New York Banking Law;
a member of the Federal Reserve System;
a "clearing corporation" under the New York Uniform Commercial Code; and
•
•
•
•
a "clearing agency" registered under the provisions of Section 17A of the Exchange Act.
DTC holds securities that its direct participants deposit with DTC. DTC facilitates the settlement among direct
participants of securities transactions, such as transfers and pledges, in deposited securities through electronic
computerized book-entry changes in direct participants' accounts, thereby eliminating the need for physical movement
of securities certificates.
Direct participants of DTC include securities brokers and dealers (including the underwriters), banks, trust
companies, clearing corporations and certain other organizations. DTC is owned by a number of its direct participants.
Indirect participants of DTC, such as securities brokers and dealers, banks and trust companies, can also access the
DTC system if they maintain a custodial relationship with a direct participant.
Purchases of notes under DTC's system must be made by or through direct participants, which will receive a
credit for the notes on DTC's records. The ownership interest of each beneficial owner is in turn to be recorded on the
records of direct participants and indirect participants. Beneficial owners will not receive written confirmation from DTC
of their purchase, but beneficial owners are expected to receive written confirmations providing details of the
transaction, as well as periodic statements of their holdings, from the direct participants or indirect participants
through which such beneficial owners entered into the transaction. Transfers of ownership interests in the notes are to
be accomplished by entries made on the books of participants acting on behalf of beneficial owners. Beneficial
owners will not receive certificates representing their ownership interests in notes, except as provided below in "—
Certificated Notes."
To facilitate subsequent transfers, all notes deposited with DTC are registered in the name of DTC's nominee,
Cede & Co. The deposit of notes with DTC and their registration in the name of Cede & Co. effect no change in
beneficial ownership. DTC has no knowledge of the actual beneficial owners of the notes. DTC's records reflect only
the identity of the direct participants to whose accounts such notes are credited, which may or may not be the
beneficial owners. The participants will remain responsible for keeping account of their holdings on behalf of their
customers.
Conveyance of notices and other communications by DTC to direct participants, by direct participants to indirect
participants and by direct participants and indirect participants to beneficial owners will be governed by arrangements
among them, subject to any statutory or regulatory requirements as may be in effect from time to time.
The laws of some jurisdictions may require that purchasers of securities take physical delivery of those
securities in definitive form. Accordingly, the ability to transfer interests in the notes represented by a global note to
those persons may be limited. In addition, because DTC can act only on behalf of its participants, who in turn act on
behalf of persons who hold interests through participants, the ability of a person having an interest in notes
represented by a global note to pledge or transfer those interests to persons or entities that do not participate in DTC's
system, or otherwise to take actions in respect of such interest, may be affected by the lack of a physical definitive
security in respect of such interest.
Book-Entry Format; Clearance and Settlement Procedures
Under the book-entry format, the paying agent will pay interest or principal payments to Cede & Co., as nominee
of DTC. DTC will forward the payment to the direct participants, who will then forward the payment to the indirect
participants (including Clearstream or Euroclear) or to you as
S-35
Table of Contents
the beneficial owner. You may experience some delay in receiving your payments under this system. Neither we, the
trustee nor any paying agent has any direct responsibility or liability for the payment of principal or interest on the
notes to owners of beneficial interests in the notes.
DTC is required to make book-entry transfers on behalf of its direct participants and is required to receive and
transmit payments of principal, premium, if any, and interest on the notes. Any direct participant or indirect participant
with which you have an account is similarly required to make book-entry transfers and to receive and transmit
payments with respect to the notes on your behalf. We and the trustee have no responsibility for any aspect of the
actions of DTC, Clearstream or Euroclear or any of their direct or indirect participants. In addition, we and the trustee
have no responsibility or liability for any aspect of the records kept by DTC, Clearstream, Euroclear or any of their
direct or indirect participants relating to or payments made on account of beneficial ownership interests in the notes or
for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any records relating to such beneficial ownership interests. We also do not
supervise these systems in any way.
The trustee will not recognize you as a holder under the indenture, and you can only exercise the rights of a
holder indirectly through DTC and its direct participants. DTC has advised us that it will only take action regarding a
note if one or more of the direct participants to whom the note is credited directs DTC to take such action and only in
respect of the portion of the aggregate principal amount of the notes as to which that participant or participants has or
have given that direction. DTC can only act on behalf of its direct participants.
Neither DTC nor Cede & Co. (nor such other DTC nominee) will consent or vote with respect to the notes unless
authorized by a direct participant in accordance with DTC's procedures. Under its usual procedures, DTC will mail an
omnibus proxy to us as soon as possible after the record date. The omnibus proxy assigns Cede & Co.'s consenting
or voting rights to those direct participants to whose accounts the notes are credited on the record date (identified in a
listing attached to the omnibus proxy).
Clearstream or Euroclear will credit payments to the cash accounts of Clearstream customers or Euroclear
participants in accordance with the relevant system's rules and procedures, to the extent received by its depositary.
These payments will be subject to tax reporting in accordance with relevant U.S. tax laws and regulations.
Clearstream or the Euroclear Operator, as the case may be, will take any other action permitted to be taken by a
holder under the indenture on behalf of a Clearstream customer or Euroclear participant only in accordance with its
relevant rules and procedures and subject to its depositary's ability to effect those actions on its behalf through DTC.
Transfers Within and Among Book-Entry Systems
Initial settlement for the notes will be made in immediately available funds. Secondary market trading between
DTC participants will occur in the ordinary way in accordance with DTC rules and will be settled in immediately
available funds. Secondary market trading between Clearstream customers and/or Euroclear participants will occur in
the ordinary way in accordance with the applicable rules and operating procedures of Clearstream and Euroclear and
will be settled using the procedures applicable to conventional eurobonds in immediately available funds.
DTC will effect cross-market transfers between persons holding directly or indirectly through DTC, on the one
hand, and directly or indirectly through Clearstream customers or Euroclear participants, on the other hand, in
accordance with DTC rules on behalf of the relevant European international clearing system by its depositary.
However, cross-market transactions will require delivery of instructions to the relevant European international clearing
system by the counterparty in that system in accordance with its rules and procedures and within its established
deadlines (European time). The relevant European international clearing system will, if the transaction meets its
settlement requirements, instruct its depositary to effect final settlement on its behalf by delivering or receiving
S-36
Table of Contents
securities in DTC, and making or receiving payment in accordance with normal procedures for same-day funds
settlement applicable to DTC. Clearstream customers and Euroclear participants may not deliver instructions directly
to the depositaries.
Because of time-zone differences, credits of securities received in Clearstream or Euroclear resulting from a
transaction with a DTC direct participant will be made during the subsequent securities settlement processing, dated
the business day following the DTC settlement date. Those credits or any transactions in those securities settled
during that processing will be reported to the relevant Clearstream customer or Euroclear participant on that business
day. Cash received in Clearstream or Euroclear as a result of sales of securities by or through a Clearstream
customer or a Euroclear participant to a DTC direct participant will be received with value on the DTC settlement date
but will be available in the relevant Clearstream or Euroclear cash amount only as of the business day following
settlement in DTC.
Although DTC, Clearstream and Euroclear has agreed to the foregoing procedures in order to facilitate transfers
of debt securities among their respective participants, they are under no obligation to perform or continue to perform
such procedures and such procedures may be discontinued at any time.
Certificated Notes
Unless and until they are exchanged, in whole or in part, for notes in definitive form in accordance with the terms
of the notes, the notes may not be transferred except (1) as a whole by DTC to a nominee of DTC or (2) by a nominee
of DTC to DTC or another nominee of DTC or (3) by DTC or any such nominee to a successor of DTC or a nominee of
such successor.
We will issue certificated notes to each person that DTC identifies as the beneficial owner of the notes
represented by the global notes upon surrender by DTC of the global notes if:
•
•
•
DTC notifies us that it is no longer willing or able to act as a depositary for the global notes, and we
have not appointed a successor depositary within 90 days of that notice;
an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, and DTC requests the issuance of certificated
notes; or
we determine not to have the notes represented by a global note.
Neither we nor the trustee will be liable for any delay by DTC, its nominee or any direct or indirect participant in
identifying the beneficial owners of the related notes. We and the trustee may conclusively rely on, and will be
protected in relying on, instructions from DTC or its nominee for all purposes, including with respect to the registration
and delivery, and the respective principal amounts, of the notes to be issued.
Table of Contents
S-37
UNDERWRITING
Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. are acting as joint book-running managers of
the offering and as representatives of the underwriters named below. Subject to the terms and conditions stated in the
underwriting agreement dated the date of this prospectus supplement, each underwriter named below has severally
agreed to purchase, and we have agreed to sell to that underwriter, the principal amount of notes set forth opposite
the underwriter's name.
Principal
Amount
Principal
Amount
Underwriter
Citigroup Global Markets Inc. 
Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.
Total
of        Notes
$
of        Notes
$
$
$
The underwriting agreement provides that the obligations of the underwriters to purchase the notes included in
this offering are subject to approval of legal matters by counsel and to other conditions. The underwriters are obligated
to purchase all the notes if they purchase any of the notes.
Notes sold by the underwriters to the public will initially be offered at the initial public offering prices set forth on
the cover of this prospectus supplement. Any notes sold by the underwriters to securities dealers may be sold at a
discount from the initial public offering price not to exceed        % per            note and        % per            note. Any
such securities dealers may resell any notes purchased from the underwriters to certain other brokers or dealers at a
discount from the initial public offering price not to exceed        % per            note and        % per            note. If all
the notes are not sold at the initial offering price, the underwriters may change the offering prices and the other selling
terms.
We have agreed that, during the period commencing on the date of this prospectus supplement and ending on
the business day after the notes are issued, we will not, without the prior written consent of Citigroup Global
Markets Inc. and Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., offer, sell, contract to sell, pledge, or otherwise dispose of (or enter
into any transaction which is designed to, or might reasonably be expected to, result in the disposition (whether by
actual disposition or effective economic disposition due to cash settlement or otherwise) by us or any of our affiliates
or any person in privity with us or any of our affiliates), directly or indirectly, including the filing (or participation in the
filing) of a registration statement with the SEC in respect of, or establish or increase a put equivalent position or
liquidate or decrease a call equivalent position within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act, any debt
securities issued or guaranteed by us (other than the notes) or publicly announce an intention to effect any such
transaction.
The following table shows the underwriting discounts that we are to pay to the underwriters in connection with
this offering (expressed as a percentage of the principal amount of the notes).
Per        note
Per        note
Paid by Ensco plc  
        %
 
 
        %
We estimate that our total expenses for this offering will be approximately $2.3 million.
Each series of notes is a new issue of securities. There are no active public trading markets for any series of
the notes. We are applying for listing of the notes on the NYSE; however, we can give no assurances that the notes
will be so listed. The underwriters have informed us that they intend to make a market in the notes. However, the
underwriters may cease their market-making at any time. The liquidity of the trading markets in the notes and the
market prices quoted for any series of the notes
S-38
Table of Contents
may be adversely affected by changes in the overall market for debt securities and by changes in our financial
performance or prospects or in the prospects for companies in our industries generally. As a consequence, an active
trading market may not develop for your notes, you may not be able to sell your notes, or, even if you can sell your
notes, you may not be able to sell them at an acceptable price.
In connection with the offering, the underwriters may purchase and sell notes in the open market. Purchases and
sales in the open market may include short sales, purchases to cover short positions and stabilizing purchases.
Short sales involve secondary market sales by the underwriters of a greater number of notes than they
are required to purchase in the offering.
Covering transactions involve purchases of notes in the open market after the distribution has been
completed in order to cover short positions.
•
•
•
Stabilizing transactions involve bids to purchase notes so long as the stabilizing bids do not exceed a
specified maximum.
Purchases to cover short positions and stabilizing purchases, as well as other purchases by the underwriters for
their own accounts, may have the effect of preventing or retarding a decline in the market price of the notes. They
may also cause the price of the notes to be higher than the price that would otherwise exist in the open market in the
absence of these transactions. The underwriters may conduct these transactions in the over-the-counter market or
otherwise. If the underwriters commence any of these transactions, they may discontinue them at any time.
The underwriters are full service financial institutions engaged in various activities, which may include securities
trading, commercial and investment banking, financial advisory, investment management, principal investment,
hedging, financing and brokerage activities. The underwriters and their respective affiliates have in the past performed
commercial banking, investment banking and advisory services for us from time to time for which they have received
customary fees and reimbursement of expenses and may, from time to time, engage in transactions with and perform
services for us in the ordinary course of their business for which they may receive customary fees and reimbursement
of expenses. In the ordinary course of their various business activities, the underwriters and their respective affiliates
may make or hold a broad array of investments and actively trade debt and equity securities (or related derivative
securities) and financial instruments (which may include bank loans and/or credit default swaps) for their own account
and for the accounts of their customers and may at any time hold long and short positions in such securities and
instruments. Such investment and securities activities may involve our securities and instruments. In addition,
affiliates of some of the underwriters are lenders, and in some cases agents or managers for the lenders, under our
revolving credit facility. Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, the trustee for the notes, is an affiliate of Deutsche
Bank Securities Inc.
We have agreed to indemnify the underwriters against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities
Act of 1933, or to contribute to payments the underwriters may be required to make because of any of those liabilities.
Notice to Prospective Investors in the European Economic Area
In relation to each member state of the European Economic Area that has implemented the Prospectus
Directive (each, a relevant member state), with effect from and including the date on which the Prospectus Directive
is implemented in that relevant member state (the relevant implementation date), an offer of notes described in this
prospectus supplement may not be made to the public in that relevant member state other than:
•
to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Directive;
Table of Contents
S-39
to fewer than 100 or, if the relevant member state has implemented the relevant provision of the 2010
PD Amending Directive, 150 natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the
Prospectus Directive), as permitted under the Prospectus Directive, subject to obtaining the prior
consent of the relevant Dealer or Dealers nominated by us for any such offer; or
•
•
in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,
provided that no such offer of securities shall require us or any underwriter to publish a prospectus pursuant to
Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive.
For purposes of this provision, the expression an "offer of securities to the public" in any relevant member state
means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the terms of the offer and the
securities to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase or subscribe for the securities, as the
expression may be varied in that member state by any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in that
member state, and the expression "Prospectus Directive" means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto,
including the 2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented in the relevant member state) and includes any
relevant implementing measure in each relevant member state. The expression 2010 PD Amending Directive means
Directive 2010/73/EU.
The sellers of the notes have not authorized and do not authorize the making of any offer of notes through any
financial intermediary on their behalf, other than offers made by the underwriters with a view to the final placement of
the notes as contemplated in this prospectus supplement. Accordingly, no purchaser of the notes, other than the
underwriters, is authorized to make any further offer of the notes on behalf of the sellers or the underwriters.
Notice to Prospective Investors in the United Kingdom
This prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus are only being distributed to, and are only
directed at, persons in the United Kingdom that are qualified investors within the meaning of Article 2(1)(e) of the
Prospectus Directive that are also (i) investment professionals falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and
Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (the "Order") or (ii) high net worth entities, and other persons to
whom it may lawfully be communicated, falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Order (each such person being
referred to as a "relevant person"). This prospectus supplement and its contents are confidential and should not be
distributed, published or reproduced (in whole or in part) or disclosed by recipients to any other persons in the United
Kingdom. Any person in the United Kingdom that is not a relevant person should not act or rely on this document or
any of its contents.
Each underwriter has represented and agreed that:
(a)   it has communicated or caused to be communicated and will communicate or cause to be
communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning of Section 21
of the Finance Service and Market Act 2000 ("FSMA")) received by it in connection with the issue or sale of
the notes only in circumstances in which Section 21(1) of the FSMA does not apply to us; and
(b)   it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to anything
done by it in relation to the notes in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.
Notice to Prospective Investors in France
Neither this prospectus supplement nor any other offering material relating to the notes described in this
prospectus supplement has been submitted to the clearance procedures of the Autorité des
S-40
Table of Contents
Marchés Financiers or of the competent authority of another member state of the European Economic Area and
notified to the Autorité des Marchés Financiers. The notes have not been offered or sold and will not be offered or
sold, directly or indirectly, to the public in France. Neither this prospectus supplement nor any other offering material
relating to the notes has been or will be:
released, issued, distributed or caused to be released, issued or distributed to the public in France; or
•
•
used in connection with any offer for subscription or sale of the notes to the public in France.
Such offers, sales and distributions will be made in France only:
to qualified investors (investisseurs qualifiés) and/or to a restricted circle of investors (cercle restreint
d'investisseurs), in each case investing for their own account, all as defined in, and in accordance with,
articles L.411-2, D.411-1, D.411-2, D.734-1, D.744-1, D.754-1 and D.764-1 of the French Code monétaire
et financier;
to investment services providers authorized to engage in portfolio management on behalf of third
parties; or
•
•
•
in a transaction that, in accordance with article L.411-2-II-1°-or-2°-or 3° of the French Code monétaire
et financier and article 211-2 of the General Regulations (Règlement Général) of the Autorité des
Marchés Financiers, does not constitute a public offer (appel public à l'épargne).
The notes may be resold, directly or indirectly, only in compliance with articles L.411-1, L.411-2, L.412-1 and
L.621-8 through L.621-8-3 of the French Code monétaire et financier.
Notice to Prospective Investors in Hong Kong
The notes may not be offered or sold in Hong Kong by means of any document other than (i) in circumstances
which do not constitute an offer to the public within the meaning of the Companies Ordinance (Cap. 32, Laws of Hong
Kong), or (ii) to "professional investors" within the meaning of the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571, Laws
of Hong Kong) and any rules made thereunder, or (iii) in other circumstances which do not result in the document
being a "prospectus" within the meaning of the Companies Ordinance (Cap. 32, Laws of Hong Kong) and no
advertisement, invitation or document relating to the notes may be issued or may be in the possession of any person
for the purpose of issue (in each case whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere), which is directed at, or the contents of
which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public in Hong Kong (except if permitted to do so under the laws of
Hong Kong) other than with respect to notes which are or are intended to be disposed of only to persons outside Hong
Kong or only to "professional investors" within the meaning of the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571, Laws
of Hong Kong) and any rules made thereunder.
Notice to Prospective Investors in Japan
The notes offered in this prospectus supplement have not been registered under the Securities and Exchange
Law of Japan. The notes have not been offered or sold and will not be offered or sold, directly or indirectly, in Japan or
to or for the account of any resident of Japan, except (i) pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements
of the Securities and Exchange Law and (ii) in compliance with any other applicable requirements of Japanese law.
Notice to Prospective Investors in Singapore
This prospectus supplement has not been registered as a prospectus with the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
Accordingly, this prospectus supplement and any other document or material in connection with the offer or sale, or
invitation for subscription or purchase, of the notes may not be
S-41
Table of Contents
circulated or distributed, nor may the notes be offered or sold, or be made the subject of an invitation for subscription
or purchase, whether directly or indirectly, to persons in Singapore other than (i) to an institutional investor under
Section 274 of the Securities and Futures Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore (the "SFA"), (ii) to a relevant person
pursuant to Section 275(1), or any person pursuant to Section 275(1A), and in accordance with the conditions
specified in Section 275 of the SFA or (iii) otherwise pursuant to, and in accordance with the conditions of, any other
applicable provision of the SFA, in each case subject to compliance with conditions set forth in the SFA.
Where the notes are subscribed or purchased under Section 275 of the SFA by a relevant person which is:
a corporation (which is not an accredited investor (as defined in Section 4A of the SFA)) the sole
business of which is to hold investments and the entire share capital of which is owned by one or more
individuals, each of whom is an accredited investor; or
•
•
a trust (where the trustee is not an accredited investor) whose sole purpose is to hold investments and
each beneficiary of the trust is an individual who is an accredited investor,
shares, debentures and units of shares and debentures of that corporation or the beneficiaries' rights and interest
(howsoever described) in that trust shall not be transferred within six months after that corporation or that trust has
acquired the notes pursuant to an offer made under Section 275 of the SFA except:
•
•
•
to an institutional investor (for corporations, under Section 274 of the SFA) or to a relevant person
defined in Section 275(2) of the SFA, or to any person pursuant to an offer that is made on terms that
such shares, debentures and units of shares and debentures of that corporation or such rights and
interest in that trust are acquired at a consideration of not less than S$200,000 (or its equivalent in a
foreign currency) for each transaction, whether such amount is to be paid for in cash or by exchange of
securities or other assets, and further for corporations, in accordance with the conditions specified in
Section 275 of the SFA;
where no consideration is or will be given for the transfer; or
where the transfer is by operation of law.
Table of Contents
S-42
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the notes is being passed upon for us by Baker Botts L.L.P., Houston, Texas. Certain legal
matters with respect to this offering will be passed upon for the underwriters by Cahill Gordon & Reindel LLP, New
York, New York.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Ensco plc and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and for
each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2013, and management's assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2013 have been incorporated by reference
in this prospectus supplement in reliance upon the reports of KPMG LLP, independent registered public accounting
firm, incorporated by reference herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
S-43
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS
Ensco plc
Debt Securities
Class A Ordinary Shares
Preference Shares
Ordinary Shares
Depositary Shares
Warrants
Share Purchase Contracts
Guarantees and
Units
From time to time we, Ensco plc, may offer to sell debt securities, Class A Ordinary Shares, preference shares,
ordinary shares, warrants, share purchase contracts and guarantees, as well as units that include any of these
securities or securities of other entities. The debt securities, preference shares, warrants and share purchase
contracts may be convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for Class A Ordinary Shares, ordinary shares or
preference shares or other securities of our company or debt or equity securities of one or more other entities.
Class A Ordinary Shares, preference shares and ordinary shares may be offered either separately or represented by
depositary shares.
We may offer and sell these securities to or through one or more underwriters, dealers and agents, or directly to
purchasers, on a continuous or delayed basis.
This prospectus describes some of the general terms that may apply to these securities. The specific terms of
any securities to be offered will be described in a supplement to this prospectus.
American depositary shares representing our Class A Ordinary Shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange
under the symbol "ESV".
Investing in our securities involves risk. You should carefully review the risks and
uncertainties described under the heading "Risk Factors" contained herein and in the
applicable prospectus supplement and any related free writing prospectus and under
similar headings in the other documents incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or complete. Any representation to
the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is January 13, 2012.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
RISK FACTORS
THE COMPANY
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS A ORDINARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF PREFERENCE SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF ORDINARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE PURCHASE CONTRACTS
DESCRIPTION OF GUARANTEES
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
LEGAL MATTERS
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRMS
Page  
1 
 
 
1 
2 
 
3 
 
3 
 
 
3 
4 
 
4 
 
 
4 
5 
 
5 
 
6 
 
 
6 
7 
 
7 
 
8 
 
 
8 
8
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRMS
i
Table of Contents
8
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(the "SEC") using a "shelf" registration process. Under this shelf process, we may sell any combination of the
securities described in this prospectus in one or more offerings.
As used in this prospectus, unless we state otherwise or the context indicates otherwise, references to "Ensco,"
the "Company," "we," "us" or "our" refer to Ensco plc and its subsidiaries.
This prospectus provides a general description of the securities offered by us. Each time we sell securities, we
will provide a prospectus supplement that will contain specific information about the terms of that offering. The
prospectus supplement may also add to, update or change information contained in this prospectus and, accordingly,
to the extent inconsistent, information in this prospectus shall be superseded by the information in the prospectus
supplement.
The prospectus supplement to be attached to the front of this prospectus may describe, as applicable: the terms
of the securities offered, the initial public offering price, the price paid for the securities, net proceeds and the other
specific terms related to the offering of these securities.
You should only rely on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus and any
prospectus supplement. We have not authorized any other person to provide different information. If anyone provides
you different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it. We are not making offers to sell these securities in
any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. For the avoidance of doubt, this prospectus is not intended to
be and is not a prospectus for purposes of the E.U. Prospectus Directive and/or the U.K. Financial Services
Authority's Prospectus Rules. You should not assume that the information in this prospectus or any prospectus
supplement is accurate as of any date other than the date on the cover of the applicable document. Our business,
financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since that date.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
We file annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. You may
read and copy any reports, statements or other information on file at the SEC's public reference room at 100 F Street,
N.E., Washington, D.C., 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information on the public reference
room. The SEC filings are also available to the public from commercial document retrieval services and are available
at the Internet website maintained by the SEC at http://www.sec.gov. These reports and other information filed by us
with the SEC are also available free of charge at our website at www.enscoplc.com.
We incorporate information into this prospectus by reference, which means that we disclose important
information to you by referring you to another document filed separately with the SEC. The information incorporated by
reference is deemed to be part of this prospectus, except to the extent superseded by information contained herein or
by information contained in documents filed with the SEC after the date of this prospectus. This prospectus
incorporates by reference the documents set forth below that have been previously filed with the SEC. These
documents contain important information about us and our financial condition.
Ensco SEC Filings (SEC File No. 001-08097)
•
•
•
•
Ensco's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2010;
Ensco's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2011;
Ensco's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2011;
Ensco's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2011;
Table of Contents
1
Ensco's Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed on April 5, 2011; and
•
•
Ensco's Current Reports on Form 8-K filed December 23, 2009, February 7, 2011, March 4, 2011,
March 8, 2011, March 16, 2011, March 23, 2011, March 24, 2011, May 2, 2011, May 6, 2011, May 16,
2011, May 18, 2011, May 24, 2011, May 25, 2011, May 31, 2011, June 2, 2011, June 7, 2011,
January 13, 2012 and January 13, 2012.
We also incorporate by reference into this prospectus additional documents that Ensco may file with the SEC
under Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 from the date of this prospectus to the
end of the offering of the securities. These documents may include Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports
on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, as well as proxy statements. We are not incorporating by reference
any information furnished under items 2.02 or 7.01 (or corresponding information furnished under item 9.01 or included
as an exhibit) in any past or future Current Report on Form 8-K that we may file with the SEC, unless otherwise
specified in such Current Report.
You may obtain copies of any of these filings as described below, through the SEC or through the SEC's
Internet website as described above or through our website as described above. Documents incorporated by reference
are available without charge, excluding all exhibits unless an exhibit has been specifically incorporated by reference
into this prospectus, by requesting them in writing or by telephone at:
Investor Relations
Ensco plc
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3300
Houston, Texas 77057
+1 (713) 789-1400
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN OUR WEBSITE IS NOT INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE AND DOES NOT
CONSTITUTE A PART OF THIS PROSPECTUS.
FORWARD LOOKING INFORMATION
The information contained in this Prospectus is accurate only as of the date hereof.
This Prospectus and documents incorporated herein by reference contain some forward looking statements that
set forth anticipated results based on management's plans and assumptions. From time to time, we also provide
forward looking statements in other materials we release to the public, as well as oral forward looking statements.
Such statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events; they do not relate strictly to historical or
current facts. We have tried, wherever possible, to identify such statements by using words such as "anticipate,"
"estimate," "expect," "project," "intend," "plan," "believe," "will," "target," "forecast" and similar expressions in
connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance or business plans or prospects. In
particular, these include statements relating to future actions, business plans and prospects, future performance or
results of current and anticipated products, expenses, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, the outcome of
contingencies, such as legal proceedings, and financial results.
We cannot guarantee that any forward looking statement will be realized. Achievement of future results is
subject to risks, uncertainties and potentially inaccurate assumptions. Should known or unknown risks or
uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could differ materially
from past results and those anticipated, estimated or projected. You should bear this in mind as you consider forward
looking statements.
You should take care not to place undue reliance on forward looking statements, which represent our views only
as of the date they are made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward
Table of Contents
2
looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You are advised, however, to
consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current
Reports on Form 8-K filed with the SEC. Also note that we provide cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and
possibly inaccurate assumptions relevant to our businesses and our merger (the "Merger") with Pride
International, Inc. ("Pride"), which we completed on May 31, 2011, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2010, and our most recently filed Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, and any amendments
thereto, and our Registration Statement on Form S-4, which was declared effective by the SEC on April 25, 2011.
These are factors that, individually or in the aggregate, may cause our actual results to differ materially from expected
and historical results. We note these factors for investors as permitted by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should
not consider those factors to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties.
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our securities involves significant risks. Before making an investment decision, you should carefully
consider the risks and other information we include or incorporate by reference in this prospectus. In particular, you
should consider the risk factors set forth in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC, as those
risk factors are amended or supplemented by subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. The risks and
uncertainties we have described are not the only ones facing us. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently
known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also affect our business operations. Additional risk factors may
be included in a prospectus supplement relating to a particular series or offering of securities.
THE COMPANY
Ensco plc is an English public limited company formed in 2009 in connection with our redomestication from
Delaware to England. Our predecessor, ENSCO International Incorporated, was formed as a Texas corporation in
1975 and reincorporated in Delaware in 1987. In connection with our redomestication to England, each issued and
outstanding share of common stock of ENSCO International Incorporated was converted into the right to receive one
American depositary share ("ADS"), each representing one Class A ordinary share, nominal value $0.10 per share, of
Ensco plc.
Ensco is a global offshore contract drilling company. As of December 15, 2011, our offshore rig fleet included 46
jackup rigs, five drillships, twelve ultra-deepwater semisubmersible rigs, six midwater semisubmersible rigs, one barge
rig, and seven rigs under construction. We are one of the leading providers of offshore contract drilling services to the
international oil and gas industry. Our customers include major integrated oil and natural gas companies, state-owned
national oil companies and independent oil and natural gas companies. Our operations are diversified across the
geographic regions of Asia Pacific (which includes Asia, the Middle East and Australia), Europe and Africa, and North
and South America.
Our ADSs are listed on the NYSE and trade under the symbol "ESV."
Our registered office and principal executive offices are located at 6 Chesterfield Gardens, London, England
W1J 5BQ and its telephone number is +44 (0) 20 7659 4660.
We intend to use the net proceeds from the sales of the securities for general corporate purposes unless
otherwise set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement.
USE OF PROCEEDS
3
Table of Contents
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
For the purpose of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, "earnings" consist of income from
continuing operations before income taxes, fixed charges and amortization of capitalized interest, less income from
continuing operations before income taxes attributable to noncontrolling interests and interest capitalized. "Fixed
charges" consist of interest expensed and capitalized and estimates of interest within rental expense. The ratios were
calculated by dividing the sum of the fixed charges into the sum of the earnings. Our consolidated ratio of earnings to
fixed charges for each of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2006 through 2010 and the nine months ended
September 30, 2011 are set forth below:
Nine
Months
Ended
Year Ended December 31,
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
September 30,
2011
4.2
2010   2009   2008   2007   2006  
  23.6 
  24.4
36.7
48.8
30.3
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. The debt securities we may offer pursuant to this prospectus will be general unsecured
obligations of Ensco plc and will be senior, senior subordinated or subordinated debt. Our unsecured senior debt
securities will be issued under an indenture to be entered into by us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas or
another trustee to be named in a prospectus supplement. The unsecured senior subordinated debt securities will be
issued under a separate indenture to be entered into by us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas or another
trustee to be named in a prospectus supplement. The unsecured subordinated debt securities will be issued under a
separate indenture to be entered into by us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas or another trustee to be
named in a prospectus supplement.
A form of senior debt indenture is filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a
part and is incorporated by reference into this prospectus. Forms of the senior subordinated debt indenture and the
subordinated debt indenture are filed as exhibits to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part and
are incorporated by reference into this prospectus. You should refer to the applicable indenture for more specific
information.
The senior debt securities will rank equally with each other and with all of our other unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness. Our senior debt securities will effectively be subordinated to our secured indebtedness,
including amounts we have borrowed under any secured revolving or term credit facility and ship mortgages or bonds,
and the liabilities of our subsidiaries. The senior subordinated debt securities will be subordinate and junior in right of
payment, as more fully described in an indenture and in any applicable supplement to the indenture, to the senior
indebtedness designated in such indenture or supplemental indenture. The subordinated debt securities will be
subordinate and junior in right of payment, as more fully described in an indenture and in any applicable supplement to
the indenture, to all of our senior and senior subordinated indebtedness.
We will include the specific terms of each series of the debt securities being offered in a supplement to this
prospectus.
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS A ORDINARY SHARES
For a full description of our Class A Ordinary Shares, par value $0.10 per share (the "Class A Ordinary Shares")
and the American Depositary Shares (the "ADSs") representing the Class A Ordinary Shares, please see the
documents identified in the section "Where You Can Find More Information; Incorporation by Reference" in this
prospectus.
Table of Contents
4
DESCRIPTION OF PREFERENCE SHARES
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. Also, in this section, references to "holders" mean those who own preference shares
registered in their own names, on the books that the registrar or we maintain for this purpose, and not those who own
beneficial interests in preference shares registered in street name or in shares issued in book-entry form through one
or more depositaries.
The description set forth below is only a summary and is not complete. For more information regarding the
preference shares which may be offered by this prospectus, please refer to the applicable prospectus supplement, our
articles of association, which is incorporated by reference as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this
prospectus forms a part, and any certificate of designations establishing a series of preference shares, which will be
filed with the SEC as an exhibit to or incorporated by reference in the registration statement at or prior to the time of
the issuance of that series of preference shares.
Our articles of association authorize us to issue shares, including preference shares in one or more series, with
the number of shares of each series and the rights, preferences and limitations of each series to be determined by our
board of directors. Our board has been authorized to allot and issue up to a nominal amount of US$30,000,000 of
shares, of which US$21,415,005 of shares remain authorized for allotment and issuance, which may include
preference shares, which would generally be afforded preferences regarding dividends and liquidation rights over
Class A Ordinary Shares. Such authority to issue preference shares will continue until December 14, 2014 and
thereafter it must be renewed, but we may seek renewal more frequently for additional terms not to exceed five years
from the date of any such further authorization.
We will include the specific terms of each series of the preference shares being offered in a supplement to this
prospectus.
DESCRIPTION OF ORDINARY SHARES
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. Also, in this section, references to "holders" mean those who own ordinary shares of Ensco
registered in their own names, on the books that the registrar or we maintain for this purpose, and not those who own
beneficial interests in ordinary shares registered in street name or in shares issued in book-entry form through one or
more depositaries. Ordinary shares may be offered either separately or represented by depositary shares.
The description set forth below is only a summary and is not complete. For more information regarding the
ordinary shares which may be offered by this prospectus, please refer to the applicable prospectus supplement, our
articles of association, which is incorporated by reference as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this
prospectus forms a part, and any certificate of designations or other instrument establishing a series of ordinary
shares, which will be filed with the SEC as an exhibit to or incorporated by reference in the registration statement at or
prior to the time of the issuance of that series of ordinary shares.
Our articles of association authorize us to allot and issue shares in one or more series, and to grant rights to
subscribe for or to convert or exchange any security into or for shares of the company or its successors, in one or
more series, which we may determine to issue as or with the same rights, preferences and limitations as ordinary
shares or otherwise, as determined by our board of directors. Our board has been authorized to issue up to a nominal
amount of US$30,000,000 of shares, of which US$21,415,005 of shares remain authorized for allotment and issuance,
which may include ordinary or other shares which may rank pari passu or junior to Class A Ordinary Shares in terms
of dividends or
5
Table of Contents
liquidation rights. We will include the specific terms of each series of the ordinary shares being offered in a
supplement to this prospectus.
DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. Class A Ordinary Shares, preference shares and ordinary shares may be offered either
separately or represented by depositary shares. We may also, at our option, elect to offer fractional shares of
preference shares, rather than full preference. If we exercise this option, we will issue receipts for depositary shares,
each of which will represent a fraction of a share of a particular series of preference shares, to be described in an
applicable prospectus supplement.
The shares represented by depositary shares will be deposited under a deposit agreement between us and a
bank or trust company selected by us and having its principal office in the United States and having a combined
capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000. Subject to the terms of the deposit agreement, each owner of a depositary
share will be entitled, in proportion to the applicable share or fraction thereof represented by the depositary share, to
all of the rights and preferences, if any, of the share represented thereby, including any dividend, voting, redemption,
conversion and liquidation rights. The depositary shares will be evidenced by depositary receipts issued pursuant to
the deposit agreement.
The particular terms of the depositary shares offered by any prospectus supplement will be described in the
prospectus supplement, which will also include a discussion of certain United States federal income tax
consequences.
A copy of the form of deposit agreement, including the form of depositary receipt, will be included as an exhibit
to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part.
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. We may issue warrants to purchase Class A Ordinary Shares, preference shares and debt
securities. Each warrant will entitle the holder to purchase for cash a number of Class A Ordinary Shares or
preference shares or the principal amount of debt securities at the exercise price as will in each case be described in,
or can be determined from, the applicable prospectus supplement relating to the offered warrants.
Warrants may be issued independently or together with any securities and may be attached to or separate from
the securities. The warrants will be issued under warrant agreements to be entered into between us and a bank or
trust company, as warrant agent. You should read the particular terms of the warrants, which will be described in more
detail in the applicable prospectus supplement. The particular terms of any warrants offered by any prospectus
supplement, and the extent to which the general provisions summarized below may apply to the offered securities, will
be described in the prospectus supplement.
The applicable prospectus supplement will describe the terms of warrants we offer, the warrant agreement
relating to the warrants and the certificates representing the warrants, including, to the extent applicable:
the title of the warrants;
the aggregate number of warrants;
•
•
•
the price or prices at which the warrants will be issued;
6
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
•
the currency or currencies, including composite currencies or currency units, in which the price of the
warrants may be payable;
the designation, number or aggregate principal amount and terms of the securities purchasable upon
exercise of the warrants, and the procedures and conditions relating to the exercise of the warrants;
the date on which the right to exercise the warrants will commence, and the date on which the right will
expire;
the designation and terms of any related securities with which the warrants are issued, and the number
of the warrants issued with each security;
the currency or currencies, including composite currencies or currency units, in which any principal,
premium, if any, or interest on the securities purchasable upon exercise of the warrants will be payable;
the date, if any, on and after which the warrants and the related securities will be separately
transferable;
the maximum or minimum number of warrants which may be exercised at any time;
any other specific terms of the warrants; and
•
•
•
if appropriate, a discussion of material United States federal income or U.K. tax considerations.
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE PURCHASE CONTRACTS
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. We may issue share purchase contracts representing contracts obligating holders, subject to
the terms of such share purchase contracts, to purchase from us, and us to sell to the holders, a specified or varying
number of our Class A Ordinary Shares, preference shares, ordinary shares or depositary shares at a future date or
dates. Alternatively, the share purchase contracts may, subject to the terms of such share purchase contracts,
obligate us to purchase from holders, and obligate holders to sell to us, a specified or varying number of Class A
Ordinary Shares, preference shares, ordinary shares or depositary shares. The price per share of our Class A
Ordinary Shares, preference shares, ordinary shares or depositary shares and number of shares of our Class A
Ordinary Shares may be fixed at the time the share purchase contracts are entered into or may be determined by
reference to a specific formula set forth in the share purchase contracts.
The applicable prospectus supplement will describe the terms of any share purchase contract. The share
purchase contracts will be issued pursuant to documents to be issued by us. You should read the particular terms of
the documents, which will be described in more detail in the applicable prospectus supplement.
DESCRIPTION OF GUARANTEES
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. We may issue guarantees of debt securities and other securities. The applicable prospectus
supplement will describe the terms of any guarantees. The guarantees will be issued pursuant to documents to be
issued by us. You should read the particular terms of the documents, which will be described in more detail in the
applicable prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
7
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
In this description, references to "Ensco," the "company," "we," "us" or "our" refer only to Ensco plc and not to
any of our subsidiaries. We may issue units of securities consisting of one or more share purchase contracts,
warrants, debt securities, guarantees, Class A Ordinary Shares, preference shares, ordinary shares, depositary
shares or any combination thereof. The applicable prospectus supplement will describe the terms of any units and the
securities comprising the units, including whether and under what circumstances the securities comprising the units
may or may not be traded separately. The units will be issued pursuant to documents to be issued by us. You should
read the particular terms of the documents, which will be described in more detail in the applicable prospectus
supplement.
We will set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement a description of the plan of distribution of the securities
that may be offered pursuant to this prospectus.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Baker & McKenzie LLP, London (U.K.) will be requested to advise us with respect to the validity under English
law, if applicable, of any securities that may be offered pursuant to this prospectus. Baker & McKenzie LLP, Dallas,
Texas may also be requested to advise us with respect to the validity under New York law, if applicable, of any
LEGAL MATTERS
securities that may be offered pursuant to this prospectus.
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRMS
The consolidated financial statements of Ensco plc and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, and
for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2010, and management's assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2010 have been incorporated by reference
herein and in the registration statement in reliance upon the reports of KPMG LLP, independent registered public
accounting firm, incorporated by reference herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and
auditing.
With respect to the unaudited interim financial information of Ensco plc for the periods ended March 31, 2011,
June 30, 2011 and September 30, 2011, incorporated by reference herein, the independent registered public
accounting firm has reported that they applied limited procedures in accordance with professional standards for a
review of such information. However, their separate reports included in our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q for the
quarters ended March 31, 2011, June 30, 2011, and September 30, 2011, and incorporated by reference herein, state
that they did not audit and they do not express an opinion on that interim financial information. Accordingly, the
degree of reliance on their reports on such information should be restricted in light of the limited nature of the review
procedures applied. The independent registered public accounting firm is not subject to the liability provisions of
Section 11 of the Securities Act for their report on the unaudited interim financial information because that report is
not a "report" or a "part" of any registration statement prepared or certified by the independent registered public
accounting firm within the meaning of Sections 7 and 11 of the Securities Act.
The consolidated financial statements of Pride International, Inc. as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, and for
each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2010, and management's assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2010 have been incorporated by reference
herein and in the registration statement in reliance upon the reports of KPMG LLP, independent registered public
accounting firm, incorporated by reference herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and
auditing.
Table of Contents
8
$
Ensco plc
$            % Senior Notes due
$            % Senior Notes due
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
, 2014
Citigroup
Deutsche Bank Securities