
EX-99.1 2 a15-15564_8ex99d1.htm EX-99.1
Exhibit 99.1
MPLX LP and MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. Announce
Early Termination of HSR Act Waiting Period
FINDLAY, Ohio, and DENVER, Aug. 25, 2015 - MPLX LP (NYSE: MPLX) and MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. (NYSE:
MWE) today announced that they have received notification of early termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-
Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended, in connection with the proposed merger whereby MarkWest
would become a wholly-owned subsidiary of MPLX, thereby satisfying one of the conditions to closing of the transaction. 
The transaction remains subject to approval by MarkWest unitholders and to other customary closing conditions, and is
expected to close in the fourth quarter of 2015.
About MPLX LP
MPLX is a fee-based, growth-oriented master limited partnership formed in 2012 by Marathon Petroleum Corporation to
own, operate, develop and acquire pipelines and other midstream assets related to the transportation and storage of crude
oil, refined products and other hydrocarbon-based products. Headquartered in Findlay, Ohio, MPLX’s assets consist of a
99.5 percent equity interest in a network of common carrier crude oil and products pipeline assets located in the Midwest
and Gulf Coast regions of the United States and a 100 percent interest in a butane storage cavern located in West Virginia,
with approximately 1 million barrels of natural gas liquids storage capacity.
About MarkWest Energy Partners
MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. is a master limited partnership that owns and operates midstream service businesses.
MarkWest has a leading presence in many natural gas resource plays including the Marcellus Shale, Utica Shale,
Huron/Berea Shale, Haynesville Shale, Woodford Shale and Granite Wash formation.
MPLX Investor Relations Contacts:
Geri Ewing (419) 421-2071
Teresa Homan (419) 421-2965
MPLX Media Contacts:
Chuck Rice (419) 421-2521
Jamal Kheiry (419) 421-3312
MarkWest Investor Relations and Media Contact:
Joshua Hallenbeck (866) 858-0482
This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws regarding MPLX LP
(“MPLX”), Marathon Petroleum Corporation (“MPC”), and MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. (“MWE”). These forward-looking
statements relate to, among other things, expectations, estimates and projections concerning the business and operations
of MPC, MPLX and MWE. You can identify
forward-looking statements by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “imply,” “estimate,” “objective,” “expect,” “forecast,”
“plan,” “project,” “potential,” “could,” “may,” “should,” “would,” “will” or other similar expressions that convey the uncertainty
of future events or outcomes. Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject
to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond the companies’ control and are difficult to predict.
Factors that could cause MPLX’s or MWE’s actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements
include: their ability to complete the proposed merger of MPLX and MWE on anticipated terms and timetable; the ability to
obtain approval of the transaction by the unitholders of MWE and satisfy other conditions to the closing of the transaction
contemplated by the merger agreement; the risk that the costs savings and any other synergies from the MPLX/MWE
transaction may not be fully realized or may take longer to realize than expected; disruption from the MPLX/MWE
transaction making it more difficult to maintain relationships with customers, employees or suppliers; risks relating to any
unforeseen liabilities of MWE or MPLX, as applicable; the adequacy of their respective capital resources and liquidity,
including, but not limited to, availability of sufficient cash flow to pay distributions and execute their respective business
plans; the timing and extent of changes in commodity prices and demand for crude oil, refined products, feedstocks or
other hydrocarbon-based products; volatility in and/or degradation of market and industry conditions; completion of pipeline
capacity by competitors; disruptions due to equipment interruption or failure, including electrical shortages and power grid
failures; the suspension, reduction or termination of MPC’s obligations under MPLX’s commercial agreements; each
company’s ability to successfully implement its growth plan, whether through organic growth or acquisitions; modifications
to earnings and distribution growth objectives; federal and state environmental, economic, health and safety, energy and
other policies and regulations; changes to MPLX’s capital budget; other risk factors inherent to their industry; and the
factors set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” in MPLX’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended Dec. 31,
2014, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); and the factors set forth under the heading “Risk
Factors” in MWE’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended Dec. 31, 2014 and Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended June 30, 2015, filed with the SEC. These risks, as well as other risks associated with MPLX, MWE and
the proposed transaction are also more fully discussed in the preliminary joint proxy statement and prospectus included in
the registration statement on Form S-4 filed with the SEC by MPLX on August 18, 2015.  Factors that could cause MPC’s
actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include: risks described above relating to the
MPLX/MWE proposed merger; changes to the expected construction costs and timing of pipeline projects; volatility in
and/or degradation of market and industry conditions; the availability and pricing of crude oil and other feedstocks; slower
growth in domestic and Canadian crude supply; an easing or lifting of the U.S. crude oil export ban; completion of pipeline
capacity to areas outside the U.S. Midwest; consumer demand for refined products; transportation logistics; the reliability
of processing units and other equipment; MPC’s ability to successfully implement growth opportunities; modifications to
MPLX earnings and distribution growth objectives; federal and state environmental, economic, health and safety, energy
and other policies and regulations; MPC’s ability to successfully integrate the acquired Hess retail operations and achieve
the strategic and other expected objectives relating to the acquisition; changes to MPC’s capital budget; other risk factors
inherent to MPC’s industry; and the factors set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” in MPC’s Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the year ended Dec. 31, 2014, filed with SEC. In addition, the forward-looking statements included herein could be
affected by general domestic and international economic and political conditions. Unpredictable or unknown factors not
discussed here, in MPLX’s Form 10-K, in MPC’s Form 10-K, or in MWE’s Form 10-K could also have material adverse
effects on forward-looking statements. Copies of MPLX’s Form 10-K are available on the SEC website, MPLX’s website at
http://ir.mplx.com or by contacting MPLX’s Investor Relations office. Copies of MPC’s Form 10-K are available on the
SEC website, MPC’s website at http://ir.marathonpetroleum.com or by contacting MPC’s Investor Relations office. Copies
of MWE’s Form 10-K are available on the SEC website, MWE’s website at http://investor.markwest.com or by contacting
MWE’s Investor Relations office.
None of MPLX, MPC, or MWE undertake any duty to update any forward-looking statement except as required by law.
Additional Information
This communication may be deemed to be solicitation material in respect of the proposed transaction. In connection with
the proposed transaction, a registration statement on Form S-4 has been filed with the SEC and includes a preliminary
proxy statement of MWE.  MPLX and MWE expect to file amendments to these filings before they become effective. 
INVESTORS AND SECURITY HOLDERS ARE ENCOURAGED TO READ THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT AND ANY
OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE SEC, INCLUDING THE PRELIMINARY PROXY
STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS AND, WHEN AVAILABLE, THE DEFINITIVE PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS THAT
WILL BE PART OF THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT BECAUSE THEY WILL CONTAIN IMPORTANT INFORMATION
ABOUT THE PROPOSED MERGER. The final proxy statement/prospectus will be mailed to unitholders of MWE.
Investors and security holders will be able to obtain the documents free of charge at the SEC’s website, www.sec.gov,
from MPLX LP at its website, http://ir.mplx.com, or 200 E. Hardin Street, Findlay, Ohio 45840, Attention: Corporate
Secretary, or from MWE at its website, http://investor.markwest.com, or 1515 Arapahoe Street, Tower 1, Suite 1600,
Denver, CO 80202, Attention: Corporate Secretary.
Participants in Solicitation
MPLX and MWE and their respective directors and executive officers may be deemed to be participants in the solicitation
of proxies in respect of the proposed merger. Information concerning MPLX participants is set forth in MPLX’s Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2014, as filed with the SEC on February 27, 2015, and MPLX’s current report on Form 8-
K, as filed with the SEC on March 9, 2015. Information concerning MWE’s participants is set forth in the proxy statement,
dated April 23, 2015, for MWE’s 2015 Annual Meeting of Common Unitholders as filed with the SEC on Schedule 14A and
MWE’s current reports on Form 8-K, as filed with the SEC on May 5, 2015, May 19, 2015 and June 8, 2015. Additional
information regarding the interests of participants of MPLX and MWE in the solicitation of proxies in respect of the
proposed merger are included in the registration statement and proxy statement/prospectus and other relevant materials
filed with the SEC. These documents may be obtained free of charge from MPLX or MWE using the contact information
above.
Non-Solicitation
This communication shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to
buy any securities, nor shall there be any sale of securities in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would
be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such jurisdiction. No offer of securities shall
be made except by means of a prospectus meeting the requirements of Section 10 of the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended.
