
S-1/A 1 d246705ds1a.htm AMENDMENT NO. 4 TO FORM S-1 Amendment No. 4 to Form S-1
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 29, 2012
Registration No. 333-178457
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 4
TO
FORM S-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Northern Tier Energy LP
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
2911
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
80-0763623
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
38C Grove Street, Suite 100
Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877
(203) 244-6550
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Peter T. Gelfman
Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary
38C Grove Street, Suite 100
Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877
(203) 244-6550
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Douglas E. McWilliams
M. Breen Haire
Michael J. Volkovitsch
Brenda K. Lenahan
Baker Botts L.L.P.
Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP
Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.
910 Louisiana Street
One Liberty Plaza
1001 Fannin, Suite 2500
Houston, Texas 77002
New York, New York 10006
Houston, Texas 77002-6760
(713) 229-1234
(212) 225-2000
(713) 758-2222
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Registration
Statement.
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities
Act of 1933 check the following box: ¨
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check the following box
and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act
registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act
registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer  ¨
Accelerated filer  ¨
Non-accelerated filer þ
Smaller reporting company ¨
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
The registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay
its effective date until the registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this
Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act
of 1933 or until this Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the Securities and
Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell these securities until the
registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer
to sell these securities, and we are not soliciting offers to buy these securities in any state where the offer or sale is
not permitted.
Subject to Completion, Dated June 29, 2012
Common Units
Representing Limited Partner Interests
Northern Tier Energy LP
This is the initial public offering of our common units representing limited partner interests. Prior to this offering, there
has been no public market for our common units. We anticipate that the initial public offering price of our common
units will be between $         and $         per common unit.
Our common units have been approved for listing on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “NTI.”
See “Risk Factors” on page 26 to read about factors you should consider before buying our common units. These
risks include the following:
•   We may not have sufficient available cash to pay any quarterly distribution on our units.
•   The amount of our quarterly distributions, if any, will vary significantly both quarterly and annually and will be
directly dependent on the performance of our business. Unlike most publicly traded partnerships, we will not
have a minimum quarterly distribution or employ structures intended to consistently maintain or increase
distributions over time.
•   Restrictions in the agreements governing our indebtedness could limit our ability to make distributions to our
unitholders.
•   The price volatility of crude oil, other feedstocks, refined products and fuel and utility services may have a
material adverse effect on our earnings, profitability, cash flows and liquidity, and our ability to make
distributions to our unitholders.
•   Our results of operations are affected by crude oil differentials, which may fluctuate substantially.
•   Our general partner, the indirect owners of which include ACON Refining Partners, L.L.C., TPG Refining,
L.P., and certain members of our management team, has fiduciary duties to its owners, and the interests of
its owners may differ significantly from, or conflict with, the interests of our public common unitholders.
•   Our unitholders have limited voting rights and are not entitled to elect our general partner or our general
partner’s directors.
•   You will incur immediate and substantial dilution in the net tangible book value of your common units.
•   Our tax treatment depends on our status as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, as well as our not
being subject to a material amount of entity-level taxation by individual states. If the IRS were to treat us as
a corporation for federal income tax purposes or we were to become subject to material additional amounts
of entity-level taxation for state tax purposes, then our cash available for distribution to you could be
substantially reduced.
•   You will be required to pay taxes on your share of our income even if you do not receive any cash
distributions from us.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities regulators has approved or
disapproved of these securities or passed upon the accuracy or adequacy of this prospectus. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
PRICE $         PER COMMON UNIT
Per
Common
Initial public offering price
Underwriting discount
Proceeds, before expenses, to Northern Tier Energy LP
Unit
Total
$                 $              
   
   $
   $
$
      $
To the extent that the underwriters sell more than          common units, the underwriters have the option to purchase
up to an additional          common units at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discount.
The underwriters expect to deliver the common units against payment in New York, New York on or about
                    , 2012.
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Credit Suisse
Barclays
Deutsche Bank Securities
BofA Merrill Lynch
UBS Investment Bank
J.P. Morgan                                         Macquarie Capital
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Prospectus dated                     , 2012.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Summary
Risk Factors
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Use of Proceeds
Capitalization
Dilution
Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions
How We Make Distributions
Selected Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial Data
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business
Management
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
Conflicts of Interest and Fiduciary Duties
Description of Our Common Units
The Partnership Agreement
Common Units Eligible for Future Sale
Material Federal Income Tax Consequences
Investment in Northern Tier Energy LP by Employee Benefit Plans
Underwriting
Legal Matters
Experts
Where You Can Find More Information
Index to Financial Statements
Appendix A: Form of First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership
Appendix B: Glossary of Industry Terms Used in this Prospectus
1  
  27  
  66  
  69  
  70  
  71  
  72  
  90  
  92  
  94  
 141  
 170  
 176  
 196  
 201  
 203  
 210  
 212  
 226  
 228  
 243  
 244  
 250  
 250  
 250  
  F-1  
 A-1  
 B-1
Through and including                     , 2012 (the 25th day after the date of this prospectus), all dealers effecting
transactions in our common units, whether or not participating in this offering, may be required to deliver a prospectus.
This requirement is in addition to the dealers’ obligation to deliver a prospectus when acting as an underwriter and with
respect to an unsold allotment or subscription.
We have not authorized anyone to provide any information or to make any representations other than those contained
in this prospectus or in any free writing prospectuses we have prepared. We take no responsibility for, and can
provide no assurance as to the reliability of, any other information that others may give you. This prospectus is an
offer to sell only the common units offered hereby, but only under circumstances and in jurisdictions where it is lawful
to do so. The information contained in this prospectus is current only as of its date.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Industry and Market Data
i
This prospectus includes industry data and forecasts that we obtained from industry publications and surveys, public
filings and internal company sources. Industry publications and surveys and forecasts generally state that the
information contained therein has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable, but there can be no assurance
as to the accuracy or completeness of the included information. Statements as to our ranking, market position and
market estimates are based on independent industry publications, government publications, third-party forecasts and
management’s estimates and assumptions about our markets and our internal research. While we are not aware of
any misstatements regarding our market, industry or similar data presented herein, such data involve risks and
uncertainties and are subject to change based on various factors, including those discussed under the headings
“Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this prospectus.
This prospectus contains certain information regarding refinery complexity as measured by the Nelson Complexity
Index, which is calculated on an annual basis by the Oil and Gas Journal. Certain data presented in this prospectus is
from the Oil and Gas Journal Report dated January 1, 2010.
Trademarks and Trade Names
We own or have rights to various trademarks, service marks and trade names that we use in connection with the
operation of our business. This prospectus may also contain trademarks, service marks and trade names of third
parties, which are the property of their respective owners. Our use or display of third parties’ trademarks, service
marks, trade names or products in this prospectus is not intended to, and does not imply a relationship with, or
endorsement or sponsorship by us. Solely for convenience, the trademarks, service marks and trade names referred
to in this prospectus may appear without the ®, TM or SM symbols, but such references are not intended to indicate,
in any way, that we will not assert, to the fullest extent under applicable law, our rights or the right of the applicable
licensor to these trademarks, service marks and trade names.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ii
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights selected information contained elsewhere in this prospectus and is qualified in its entirety by
the more detailed information and financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Because it is abbreviated, this summary is not complete and does not contain all of the information that you should
consider before investing in our common units. You should read the entire prospectus carefully before making an
investment decision, including the information presented under the headings “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note
Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations” and the financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Unless otherwise indicated, the information presented in this prospectus assumes (i) an initial public offering price of
$             per common unit, which represents the midpoint of the price range set forth on the cover of this prospectus,
and (ii) that the underwriters’ option to purchase additional common units is not exercised. We have provided
definitions for certain terms used in this prospectus in the “Glossary of Industry Terms Used in this Prospectus”
beginning on page B-1 of this prospectus.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms “we,” “us,” “our,” “Successor” and “Company,” when used in the
context of the period (i) prior to the completion of the transactions described in “—IPO Transactions,” refer to Northern
Tier Energy LLC and its subsidiaries, which will be contributed to Northern Tier Energy LP in connection with the
closing of this offering, and (ii) after the completion of the transactions described in “—IPO Transactions,” refer to
Northern Tier Energy LP and its subsidiaries. References to our “general partner” refer to Northern Tier Energy GP
LLC. References to “Northern Tier Holdings” refers to Northern Tier Holdings LLC, the owner of our general partner.
References to “ACON Refining” refer to ACON Refining Partners, L.L.C. and certain of its affiliates and to “TPG
Refining” refer to TPG Refining, L.P. and certain of its affiliates. References to “Marathon Oil” refer to Marathon Oil
Corporation, references to “Marathon Petroleum” refer to Marathon Petroleum Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary
of Marathon Oil until June 30, 2011, and references to “Marathon” refer to Marathon Petroleum Company LP, an
indirect, wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon Petroleum, and certain affiliates of Marathon Petroleum Company LP.
References to the “Marathon Acquisition” refer to the acquisition by us of our St. Paul Park, Minnesota refinery, a
17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company, our convenience stores and related assets from Marathon,
completed in December 2010. We refer to the assets acquired in the Marathon Acquisition as the “Marathon Assets.”
The Marathon Acquisition is described in greater detail, including certain related transactions in “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Comparability of Historical Results—
Marathon Acquisition.”
Northern Tier Energy LP
We are an independent downstream energy limited partnership with refining, retail and pipeline operations that serves
the PADD II region of the United States. We operate our assets in two business segments: the refining business and
the retail business. For the three months ended March 31, 2012, we had total revenues of approximately $1.0 billion,
operating income of $2.7 million, a net loss of $193.6 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $81.5 million. For the year
ended December 31, 2011, we had total revenues of $4.3 billion, operating income of $422.6 million, net earnings of
$28.3 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $430.7 million. For a definition, and reconciliation, of Adjusted EBITDA to net
earnings, see “—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data.”
Refining Business
Our refining business primarily consists of a 74,000 barrels per calendar day (“bpd”) (84,500 barrels per stream day)
refinery located in St. Paul Park, Minnesota. Our refinery has a Nelson
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
1
complexity index of 11.5, which refers to the ability of a refinery to produce finished products based on its investment
intensity and cost relative to other refineries. Our refinery’s complexity allows us to process a variety of light, heavy,
sweet and sour crudes into higher value refined products.
We are one of only two refineries in Minnesota and one of four refineries in the Upper Great Plains area within the
Petroleum Administration for Defense District (“PADD”) II region. Our strategic location allows us direct access,
primarily via the Minnesota Pipeline, to what we believe are abundant supplies of advantageously priced crude oils. Of
the crude oil processed at our refinery in the year ended December 31, 2011 and in the three months ended March 31,
2012, approximately 51% and 39%, respectively, was Canadian crude oil and the remainder was comprised of mostly
light sweet crude oil from the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Many of these crude oils have historically priced at a
discount to the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude oil (“NYMEX WTI”). Further, over the past twelve
months, NYMEX WTI has traded at an additional discount relative to waterborne crude oils, such as Brent crude oil
(“Brent”).
We expect to continue to benefit from our access to these growing crude oil supplies. By 2030, according to the
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (“CAPP”), total Canadian crude oil production is expected to grow to
6.2 million bpd from 2011 production of 3.0 million bpd. Crude oil production from the Bakken Shale in North Dakota
has also increased significantly helping to grow crude oil production in North Dakota from approximately 98,000 bpd in
2005 to approximately 575,000 bpd as of March 2012, and is expected to continue to grow due to improvements in
unconventional resource production techniques.
Our location also allows us to distribute our refined products throughout the midwestern United States. Our refinery
produces a broad slate of refined products including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel and asphalt, which are then marketed to
resellers and consumers primarily in the PADD II region. Approximately 83% and 79% of our total refinery production
for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, respectively, was comprised of
higher value, light refined products, including gasoline and distillates.
We also own various storage and transportation assets, including a light products terminal, a heavy products terminal,
storage tanks, rail loading/unloading facilities and a Mississippi river dock. Approximately 70% and 83% of our
gasoline and diesel volumes for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011,
respectively, were sold via our light products terminal to our company-operated and franchised SuperAmerica branded
convenience stores, Marathon branded convenience stores and other resellers. We have a contract with Marathon to
supply substantially all of the gasoline and diesel requirements for 90 independently owned and operated Marathon
branded convenience stores.
Our refining business also includes our 17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company LLC (the “Minnesota Pipe
Line Company”), which owns and operates the Minnesota Pipeline, a 455,000 bpd crude oil pipeline system that
transports crude oil (primarily from Western Canada and North Dakota) for approximately 300 miles from the Enbridge
pipeline hub at Clearbrook, Minnesota to our refinery. The Minnesota Pipeline has historically transported the majority
of the crude oil used and processed in our refinery.
Retail Business
As of March 31, 2012, our retail business operated 166 convenience stores under the SuperAmerica brand and also
supported 67 franchised convenience stores, which are also operated under the SuperAmerica brand. These
convenience stores are located primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin and sell various grades of gasoline and diesel,
tobacco products and immediately
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
2
consumable items such as non-alcoholic beverages, beer, prepared food and a large variety of snacks and
prepackaged items. Our refinery supplied substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated and
franchised convenience stores for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011.
We also own and operate SuperMom’s Bakery, which prepares and distributes baked goods and other prepared food
items for sale in our company-operated and franchised convenience stores and other third party locations.
Refining Industry Overview
Crude oil refining is the process of separating the hydrocarbons present in crude oil for the purpose of converting them
into marketable finished, or refined, petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, asphalt and other products.
Refining is primarily a margin-based business where both the feedstock (primarily crude oil) and the refined products
are commodities with fluctuating prices. In order to increase profitability, it is important for a refinery to maximize the
yields of high value finished products and to minimize the costs of feedstock and operating expenses.
According to the Energy Information Administration (the “EIA”), as of January 1, 2011, there were 137 oil refineries
operating in the United States, with the 15 smallest each having a refining capacity of 14,000 bpd or less, and the 10
largest having capacities ranging from 330,000 bpd to 560,640 bpd.
High capital costs, historical excess capacity and environmental regulatory requirements have limited the construction
of new refineries in the United States over the past 30 years. According to the EIA, domestic operating refining
capacity has increased approximately 5% between January 1982 and January 2011 from 16.1 million bpd to
16.9 million bpd. Much of this increase in capacity is generally the result of efficiency measures and moderate
expansions at various refineries, known as “capacity creep,” but some significant expansions at existing refineries
have occurred as well. During this same time period, more than 110 generally smaller and less efficient refineries that
had limited access to a wide variety of crude oils or were unable to profitably process feedstock into a marketable
product mix were closed.
According to the EIA, total demand for refined products in PADD II, which is the region in which we operate, has
represented approximately 26% of total U.S. refined products demand from 2007 to 2011. Within PADD II, refined
product production capacity is currently insufficient to meet demand. For example, according to the EIA, due to
product supply shortfalls within PADD II, net receipts of gasoline, distillate and jet fuel/kerosene from domestic
sources outside of PADD II comprised approximately 17%, 14% and 14%, respectively, of demand for these
products. Refining capacity in the PADD II region has decreased approximately 3% between January 1982 and
January 2011 from approximately 3.8 million bpd to approximately 3.6 million bpd, while more than 25 refineries in the
PADD II region have ceased operations. The refined product volumes that are necessary to satisfy the demand in
excess of PADD II production are primarily sourced from domestic refineries located outside of PADD II, specifically
from the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Our Business Strategy
The primary components of our business strategy are:
Ÿ  Make Distributions Equal to the Available Cash We Generate Each Quarter.    The board of directors of our
general partner will adopt a policy under which distributions for each quarter will equal the amount of available
cash (as described in “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
3
Distributions”) we generate each quarter. We do not intend to maintain excess distribution coverage in order to
stablize our quarterly distributions or to otherwise reserve cash for future distributions. In addition, our general
partner has a non-economic interest and no incentive distribution rights, and, accordingly, our unitholders will
receive 100% of our cash distributions. See “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions.”
Ÿ  Focus on Growth Opportunities.    We intend to pursue opportunities to grow our business both organically
and through acquisitions within the refining, logistics and retail marketing industries.
•
•
Organic Growth Projects.    We plan to continue to make investments to enhance the operating
flexibility of our refinery, to improve our crude oil sourcing advantage and to grow our retail business.
We intend to pursue organic growth projects at the refinery to improve the yield of light products we
produce and the efficiency of our operations, which we believe should improve profitability. We also
plan to make investments in logistics operations, including trucking, terminal and pipeline facilities, to
enhance our crude oil sourcing flexibility and to reduce related crude oil purchasing and delivery costs.
We also intend to invest in the growth of our retail business with the ultimate objective of having a
dedicated outlet for all of our refinery’s gasoline production. We believe that this retail strategy should
allow our refinery to reduce its reliance on the wholesale market, improve the capacity utilization of our
refinery and increase our profitability.
Evaluate Accretive Acquisition Opportunities.    We will selectively pursue accretive acquisitions within
our refining and retail business segments, both in our existing areas of operations as well as in new
geographic regions that would diversify our operating footprint. In evaluating acquisitions within the
refining industry, we will consider, among other factors, sustainable performance of the targeted assets
through the refining cycle, access to advantageous sources of crude oil supplies, attractive demand
and supply market fundamentals, access to distribution and logistics infrastructure, and potential
operating synergies.
Ÿ  Focus on Optimizing Crude Oil Supply.    We are focused on optimizing our crude oil purchases for our
refining operations and minimizing our crude oil feedstock costs. Our strategic location and the refinery’s
complexity allow us to receive and process a variety of light, heavy, sweet and sour crude oils from Western
Canada and the United States, many of which have historically priced at a discount to the NYMEX WTI price
benchmark.
Ÿ  Maintain Significant Liquidity in Our Business.    We benefit from a number of sources of liquidity that provide
us with financial flexibility during periods of volatile commodity prices, including cash on hand, our $300
million revolving credit facility, trade credit from our crude oil supplies and other mechanisms. For example, in
December 2010, we entered into a crude oil supply and logistics agreement with J.P. Morgan Commodities
Canada Corporation (“JPM CCC”), which was later amended and restated in March 2012, to supply our
refinery’s crude oil feedstock requirements, which helps reduce the amount of working capital required in our
refinery operations. We manage our operations prudently with a focus on maintaining sufficient liquidity to
meet unforeseen capital needs. On a pro forma basis for this offering, as of March 31, 2012, we estimate that
we would have had approximately $         million of available liquidity comprised of cash on hand and
amounts available for borrowing under our $300 million revolving credit facility. Our actual available liquidity
may vary from our estimated amount depending on several factors, including fluctuations in inventory and
accounts receivable values as well as cash reserves.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
4
Ÿ  Selectively Engage in Hedging Activities to Ensure Sufficient Cash Flows to Service Our Fixed Obligations.
    We plan to systematically evaluate the merits of entering into commodity derivatives contracts to hedge
our refining margins with respect to a portion of our gasoline and diesel production. We may engage in these
activities with the purpose of ensuring that we have sufficient cash flows to meet our fixed cost obligations,
service our outstanding debt and other liabilities, and meet our capital expenditure requirements.
Commodity derivatives contracts that we may enter into include either exchange-traded contracts in the form of
futures contracts or over-the-counter contracts in the form of commodity price swaps that reference benchmark
indices.
As of March 31, 2012, approximately 15 million barrels of our future gasoline and diesel production remained hedged
under commodity derivatives contracts of which 10 million barrels related to 2012 production and the remainder to
2013 production. Our hedge positions for 2011 and 2012 production were established at the time of the Marathon
Acquisition and our plan is to hedge a lesser amount of production than we hedged at the time of the acquisition.
Consequently, we plan to increase our exposure to the gross refining margins that we would realize at our refinery on
an unhedged basis over time.
During the first quarter of 2012, we settled contracts covering approximately 3 million barrels of our remaining 2012
gasoline and diesel production and recognized a loss of approximately $45 million. Our required payment of the
majority of the loss from these settled contracts has been deferred until 2013.
In addition, during the second quarter of 2012, we reset the price of our contracts for the period of July 2012 through
December 2012 and recognized a loss of approximately $92 million. We plan to use a portion of the net proceeds of
this offering to settle this obligation. If we do not complete this offering, the loss from resetting the price of our
derivative contracts will be paid to the counterparty on the same monthly schedule as the original contracts were
scheduled to settle.
Our Competitive Strengths
We have a number of competitive strengths that we believe will help us to successfully execute our business
strategy:
Ÿ  Strategically Located Refinery with Advantageous Access to Crude Oil Supply.    Our refinery is located on
approximately 170 acres along the Mississippi River in a strategically advantageous area within the PADD II
region. The refinery has the ability to source a variety of crude oils, including heavy Canadian crude oils and
light North Dakota crude oils, primarily via the Minnesota Pipeline. Our refinery also has access to crude oils
from Cushing, Oklahoma, the U.S. Gulf Coast and other foreign markets. The ability to source and process
multiple types of crude oil enables us to capitalize on changing market conditions and, we believe, increase
our profitability. For the three months ended March 31, 2012, 39% of the crude oil processed at the refinery
was Canadian crude oil, with the remainder comprised of locally produced U.S. crude oils, mostly from the
Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Historically, we have purchased our crude oil at a discount to NYMEX WTI as
a result of our close proximity to plentiful sources of crude oil in Western Canada and North Dakota. Over the
five years ended March 31, 2012, we realized an average discount of $1.56 per barrel of crude oil purchased
for our refinery when compared to the average NYMEX WTI price per barrel over the same period. More
recently, the increase of the discount at which a barrel of NYMEX WTI traded relative to Brent has
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
5
allowed refineries, such as ours, that are capable of sourcing and utilizing crude oil that is priced more in line
with NYMEX WTI, to realize relatively lower feedstock costs and benefit from the higher refined product
prices resulting from higher Brent prices.
Ÿ  Attractive Regional Refined Products Supply/Demand Dynamics.    In recent years, demand for refined
products in the PADD II region has exceeded regional production, resulting in a need for imports from other
regions, specifically from the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Our inland location means that foreign and coastal
domestic refiners seeking to access our marketing area would incur additional transportation costs. Over the
five years ended March 31, 2012, our refinery has realized an average price premium of $3.45 per barrel for
its gasoline and distillates production relative to the prices used in calculating the U.S. Gulf Coast 3:2:1 crack
spread and an average price premium of $2.01 per barrel relative to the benchmark PADD II Group 3 3:2:1
crack spread (the “Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread”), in each case assuming a comparable rate of two barrels of
gasoline and one barrel of distillate (see footnote 4 in “—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated
Financial and Other Data”).
Ÿ  Substantial Refinery Operating Flexibility.    Since 2006, approximately $226 million (including $194 million
from January 2006 through November 2010 and $32 million from our inception date of June 23, 2010 through
March 2012) has been invested in upgrades and capital projects to modernize the St. Paul Park refinery,
improve its operating flexibility, increase its complexity and meet U.S. environmental, health and safety
requirements, including revamping the gas oil hydrotreater in 2006 to allow for the production of ultra low
sulfur diesel. As a result of these capital expenditures, we believe that we will be able to comply with known
prospective fuel quality requirements without incurring significant capital costs or substantially increased
operating costs. In addition, we have significant redundancies in our refining assets, which include two crude
oil distillation and vacuum towers, two reformers, two sulfur recovery units and five hydrotreating units. These
redundancies allow us to continue to receive and process crude oil and other feedstocks in the event a unit
goes out of service and allows for increased maintenance flexibility as a redundant unit may be used without
having to shut down the entire refinery in the case of a major unit turnaround.
Our refinery has a Nelson complexity index of 11.5. Our refinery’s complexity means we can process lower cost crude
oils into higher value light refined products, including transportation fuels, such as gasoline and distillates. Gasoline
and distillates comprised approximately 83% and 79% of our total refinery production for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, respectively.
Ÿ  Strong Refinery Operating and Safety Track Record.    Our refinery has a strong operating and safety track
record as evidenced by our high mechanical availability and low recordable incidents. This performance is
due to, among other things, the periodic upgrades and maintenance performed at our refinery. Our refinery
recorded mechanical availability of 96.9%, 95.8% and 96.6% for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010
and 2011, respectively, with an average annual mechanical availability of 96.9% from 2005 through 2011,
inclusive. We measure our safety track record primarily through the use of injury frequency rates as
determined by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”). Our refinery had OSHA
Recordable Rates of 0.75, 0.23 and 0.52 during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011,
respectively, with an average annual OSHA Recordable Rate of 0.97 during the period from 2005 through
2011, inclusive, and an OSHA Recordable Rate of 0.88 during the three months ended March 31, 2012.
Ÿ  Integrated Refining and Retail Distribution Operations.    Our business is an integrated refining operation with
significant storage assets and a retail distribution network comprising, as of
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
6
March 31, 2012, 166 company-operated and 67 franchised convenience stores, all of which are operated
under the SuperAmerica brand. For the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, we sold 70% and 83% of our gasoline and diesel volumes, respectively, via our eight-bay
bottom-loading light products terminal located at the refinery, primarily to our retail distribution network and, to
a lesser extent, other resellers. Our refinery supplied substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our
company-operated and franchised convenience stores during these periods. We also have a contract with
Marathon to supply substantially all of the gasoline and diesel requirements of 90 independently owned and
operated Marathon branded convenience stores. In addition, we also have (i) a seven-bay heavy products
terminal located on the refinery property, (ii) rail facilities for shipping liquefied petroleum gases and asphalt
and for receiving butane, isobutane, crude oil and ethanol and (iii) a barge dock on the Mississippi River used
primarily for shipping vacuum residuals and slurry.
Experienced, Proven and Incentivized Management Team.    Our management team is led by our Chief
Ÿ  Experienced, Proven and Incentivized Management Team.    Our management team is led by our Chief
Executive Officer, Mario E. Rodriguez, formerly a managing director in the global energy investment banking
division of Citigroup Global Markets, who has approximately 20 years of experience in the energy and finance
industries. Our President and Chief Operating Officer, Hank Kuchta, has over 30 years of industry experience
and was formerly President and Chief Operating Officer of Premcor Inc. Premcor operated four refineries in
the United States with approximately 750,000 bpd of refining capacity at the time of its sale to Valero Energy
Corporation in April 2005. Prior to Premcor, Mr. Kuchta served in various management positions at Phillips 66
Company, Tosco Corporation and Exxon Corporation. Our President of refinery operations, Greg Mullins,
previously worked at Marathon for over 30 years and has extensive experience in all aspects of refinery
operations and management as well as major project development and project management. Several
members of our management team, including our President and Chief Operating Officer; our Vice President,
Marketing; our Vice President, Supply; our Vice President, Human Resources; and our Vice President, Chief
Information Officer, have experience working together as a management team at Premcor.
Recent Developments
Preliminary Estimate of Selected Second Quarter 2012 Financial Results
While financial information and operating data as of and for the three months ending June 30, 2012 are not available,
based on the information and data currently available, management estimates, on a preliminary basis, that Adjusted
EBITDA for the three months ending June 30, 2012 is expected to be between $220 million and $240 million
compared to $103 million for the three months ended June 30, 2011 (see below for a reconciliation of estimated
Adjusted EBITDA to estimated net earnings, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with
GAAP). The estimated increase in our Adjusted EBITDA for the three months ending June 30, 2012 as compared to
the prior year period is based on an estimated increase in gross product margins per barrel projected to be realized by
our refining operations.
We have prepared these estimates on a materially consistent basis with Adjusted EBITDA as presented in “—
Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data” and in good faith based upon our internal
reporting as of and for the three months ending June 30, 2012. These estimated ranges are preliminary and unaudited
and are thus inherently uncertain and subject to change as we complete our financial results for the three months
ending June 30, 2012. Given the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
7
timing of these estimates, we have not completed our customary quarterly close and review procedures as of and for
the three months ending June 30, 2012, and there can be no assurance that our final results for this period will not
differ from these estimates. During the course of the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related
notes as of and for the three months ending June 30, 2012, we may identify items that could cause our final reports to
be materially different from the preliminary financial estimates presented herein. Important factors that could cause
actual results to differ materially from our preliminary estimates are set forth under the headings “Risk Factors” and
“Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
These estimates should not be viewed as a substitute for full interim financial statements prepared in accordance with
GAAP. In addition, these preliminary estimates for the three months ending June 30, 2012 are not necessarily
indicative of the results to be achieved for the remainder of 2012 or any future period. Our consolidated financial
statements and related notes as of and for the three months ending June 30, 2012 are not expected to be filed with
the SEC until after this offering is completed.
The following table shows the reconciliation of net earnings to Adjusted EBITDA for the three months ended June 30,
2011 along with the estimated range for the three months ending June 30, 2012. The line items in the table for the
three months ending June 30, 2012 are estimates and are subject to the qualifications set forth above:
Three Months
Three Months Ending June 30, 2012
ended
June 30,
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA
Minnesota Pipe Line Company proportionate
EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Formation costs
Unrealized losses (gains) on derivative
activities
  
Contingent consideration (income) expense   
Loss on early extinguishment of derivatives   
Realized losses on derivative activities
Adjusted EBITDA
2011
(42)  
 
10   
8   
   
(24)
1   
20   
2
31   
(9)  
—   
82   
   
103
$
$
Low Estimate
(In millions)
$
$
200    
 
11    
9    
   
220
1    
11    
—
(188)   
15    
92    
69    
   
220
$
$
High Estimate  
 
250
10  
9  
 
269
1  
11  
—
(200) 
—  
92  
67  
 
240
Proposed Pipeline Initiative
On June 22, 2012, consistent with our strategy to optimize our crude oil supply and sourcing advantage, we entered
into an exclusivity agreement with Saddle Butte Pipeline, LLC (“Saddle Butte”)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
8
and its wholly-owned subsidiary, High Prairie Pipeline, LLC (“High Prairie”). This agreement sets forth a proposed non-
binding shipping commitment and equity investment by us in a 150,000 bpd pipeline spanning from McKenzie County,
North Dakota to Clearbrook, Minnesota. The pipeline will be constructed and maintained by High Prairie. Our proposed
commitment contemplates a ten-year, 50,000 bpd shipping commitment on the High Prairie pipeline at a tariff of $2.49
per barrel (or as otherwise approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (“FERC”)) and an equity
investment in High Prairie proportional to our throughput commitment as a percentage of total commitments on the
High Prairie pipeline. Saddle Butte and High Prairie have granted certain exclusivity rights to us with respect to the
High Prairie Pipeline project. Upon satisfaction of certain conditions, we have agreed to grant exclusivity rights to
Saddle Butte and High Prairie during the negotiation of definitive agreements. There can be no assurance that
definitive agreements with Saddle Butte and High Prairie will be reached regarding the proposed shipping commitment
and equity investment.
Risk Factors
Investing in our common units involves risks that include the volatility of crude oil and other refinery feedstocks,
competition, our partnership structure, the tax characteristics of our common units and other material factors. For a
discussion of these risks and other considerations that could negatively affect us, see “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary
Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Our Relationship with ACON Refining and TPG Refining
Following this offering, ACON Refining and TPG Refining will indirectly control and own a substantial majority of the
economic interests in Northern Tier Holdings. Following this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own 100% of our
general partner and     % of our units (including 100% of our PIK units).
ACON Investments, L.L.C., an affiliate of ACON Refining, and certain other of its affiliates (“ACON Investments”)
manage private equity funds and special purpose investment partnerships. ACON Investments has executed
investments in upstream and midstream oil and gas companies as well as in energy infrastructure and energy
services. TPG Global LLC (together with its affiliates, “TPG”), an affiliate of TPG Refining, is a leading private
investment firm with approximately $51.5 billion of assets under management as of March 31, 2012. TPG has
extensive global experience with investments in the energy sector. We believe we will benefit from ACON
Investments’ and TPG’s collective experience in the energy industry.
At the closing of this offering, ACON Funds Management L.L.C. (“ACON Management”), an affiliate of ACON
Investment, and TPG VI Management, LLC, an affiliate of TPG (“TPG Management”), will receive a one time,
aggregate success fee of $7.5 million pursuant to the management services agreement that will terminate in
connection with the closing of this offering. The success fee will be divided equally between ACON Management and
TPG Management. In addition, ACON Refining and TPG Refining will receive a distribution of $         million from the
net proceeds of this offering.
Our Management
We are managed and operated by the board of directors and executive officers of our general partner, which is owned
by Northern Tier Holdings. Following this offering,     % of our units (including 100% of our PIK units) will be owned by
Northern Tier Holdings. Northern Tier Holdings, as the owner of our general partner, will have the right to appoint all
members of the board of directors of our general partner, including the independent directors. Our unitholders will not
be entitled to elect our general partner or its directors or otherwise directly participate in our management or operation.
For more information about the executive officers and directors of our general partner, please read “Management.”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
9
Following the consummation of this offering, neither our general partner nor its affiliates will receive any management
fee, but we will reimburse our general partner and its affiliates for all expenses they incur and payments they make on
our behalf. Our partnership agreement provides that our general partner will determine in good faith the expenses that
are allocable to us.
Our operations will be conducted through, and our operating assets will be owned by, our wholly owned subsidiary,
Northern Tier Energy LLC, and its subsidiaries. All of the employees who conduct our business will be employed by
Northern Tier Energy LLC and its subsidiaries. Northern Tier Energy LP does not have any employees.
Conflicts of Interest and Fiduciary Duties
Our general partner has a legal duty to manage us in good faith. However, the officers and directors of our general
partner also have fiduciary duties to manage our general partner in a manner beneficial to its indirect owners, which
include ACON Refining, TPG Refining and certain members of our management team. As a result, conflicts of interest
may arise in the future between us and our unitholders, on the one hand, and our general partner and its owners, on
the other hand. Our partnership agreement limits the liability and reduces the duties owed by our general partner to our
unitholders. Our partnership agreement also restricts the remedies available to our unitholders for actions that might
otherwise constitute a breach of our general partner’s duties. By purchasing a common unit, the purchaser agrees to
be bound by the terms of our partnership agreement, and each unitholder is treated as having consented to various
actions and potential conflicts of interest contemplated in the partnership agreement that might otherwise be
considered a breach of fiduciary or other duties under Delaware law.
For a more detailed description of the conflicts of interest and the fiduciary duties of our general partner, see
“Conflicts of Interest and Fiduciary Duties.” For a description of other relationships with our affiliates, see “Certain
Relationships and Related Person Transactions.”
The IPO Transactions
In connection with the closing of this offering, the following transactions will occur:
Ÿ  The settlement agreement with Marathon with respect to the contingent consideration arrangements that we
entered into in connection with the Marathon Acquisition will become effective. See “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Comparability of Historical
Results—Marathon Acquisition and Related Transactions;”
Ÿ  Our management services agreement with ACON Management and TPG Management will terminate. See
“Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions—Agreements with Affiliates of Our General Partner
—Management Services Agreement;”
Ÿ  Northern Tier Holdings LLC will contribute all of its membership interests in Northern Tier Energy LLC to
Northern Tier Energy LP in exchange for                 PIK units and                 common units and the right to
receive additional cash or common units as described below;
Ÿ  Northern Tier Energy LP will issue                 common units to the public, representing a     % limited partner
interest in us, and will use the net proceeds from this offering as described under “Use of Proceeds;”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
10
Ÿ  Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Northern Tier Energy LLC that holds all of the
ownership interests in Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Bakery LLC, through which we conduct our
retail business, will elect to be treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes, subjecting that
subsidiary to corporate-level tax; and
Ÿ  Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Northern Tier Energy LP, will elect to be
treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes, subjecting that subsidiary to corporate-level tax.
Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC will not have any independent operations.
We have granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an aggregate of          additional common units.
Any net proceeds received from the exercise of this option will be distributed to Northern Tier Holdings. If the
underwriters do not exercise this option in full or at all, the common units that would have been sold to the
underwriters had they exercised the option in full will be issued to Northern Tier Holdings at the expiration of the option
period. Accordingly, the exercise of the underwriters’ option will not affect the total number of common units
outstanding.
We refer to the above transactions as the “IPO Transactions.”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Organizational Structure
11
The following chart provides a simplified overview of our organizational structure after giving effect to the IPO
Transactions (assuming the underwriter’s option to purchase additional common units is not exercised):
All of the common interests in Northern Tier Holdings are owned by Northern Tier Investors, LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company, the sole member of which is Northern Tier Investors LP, a Delaware limited
partnership. All of the limited partnership interests in Northern Tier Investors LP are held by ACON Refining
(48.75%), TPG Refining (48.75%) and certain members of our management team (2.5%). All of the limited
liability company interests in the general partner of Northern Tier Investors LP, NTI GenPar LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company, are held equally by ACON Refining and TPG Refining. Marathon will hold a $45 million
preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings. All of our PIK units will initially be owned by Northern Tier Holdings.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Comparability
of Historical Results—Marathon Acquisition And Related Transactions.”
Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC, which will elect to be treated as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes in connection with the closing of this offering, will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of Northern Tier
Energy LP and will hold a 0.01% membership interest in Northern Tier Energy LLC.
(1)
(2)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
12
(3)
(4)
Includes 17% of the limited liability company interests of Minnesota Pipe Line Company, LLC and 17% of the
stock of MPL Investments, Inc.
Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Northern Tier Energy LLC that holds all of the
ownership interests in Northern Tier Bakery LLC and Northern Tier Retail LLC, will elect to be treated as a
corporation for federal income tax purposes in connection with the closing of this offering.
Principal Executive Offices and Internet Address
Our principal executive offices are located at 38C Grove Street, Suite 100, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877 and our
telephone number at that address is (203) 244-6550. Our website is located at www.ntenergy.com. We expect to
make our periodic reports and other information filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission
(“SEC”), available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after those reports and other
information are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. Information on our website or any other website is not
incorporated by reference herein and does not constitute a part of this prospectus.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Issuer
13
The Offering
Northern Tier Energy LP, a Delaware limited partnership.
Common units offered to the public
common units.
Option to purchase additional common units
We have granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up
to an aggregate of              additional common units.
Units outstanding after this offering
common units and              PIK units.
We have granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up
to an aggregate of              additional common units. If the
underwriters do not exercise this option in full or at all, the
common units that would have been sold to the underwriters had
they exercised the option in full will be issued to Northern Tier
Holdings at the expiration of the option period. Accordingly, the
exercise of the underwriters’ option will not affect the total number
of common units outstanding.
We expect to receive approximately $         million of net
proceeds from the sale of the common units offered by us, based
upon the assumed initial public offering price of $         per
common unit (the midpoint of the price range set forth on the
cover page of this prospectus), after deducting the underwriting
discount of $         million (or $         million if the underwriters
exercise in full their option to purchase additional common units)
and estimated offering expenses of $         million. Each $1.00
increase (decrease) in the public offering price would increase
(decrease) our net proceeds by approximately $         million
(assuming no exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase
additional common units).
We intend to use the net proceeds received from this offering to:
•   redeem $29 million of our senior secured notes at a redemption
price of 103% of the principal amount thereof, for an estimated
$30 million;
•   pay $40 million to Marathon, which represents the cash
component of a settlement agreement we entered into with
Marathon related to a contingent consideration agreement that
was entered into at the time of the Marathon Acquisition;
•   pay $92 million to J. Aron & Company, an affiliate of Goldman,
Sachs & Co., for losses incurred during the three months
ending June 30, 2012 as a result of resetting the price of
certain derivative contracts; and
14
•   distribute approximately $         million to Northern Tier
Holdings, of which $         million will be used to redeem
Marathon’s existing preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings
and $         million will be distributed to ACON Refining, TPG
Refining and certain members of our management team.
The remaining net proceeds of $             will be used to fund
capital expenditures and for general partnership purposes. See
“Use of Proceeds.”
Use of proceeds
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Distribution policy
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Any net proceeds received from the exercise of the underwriters’
option to purchase additional common units will be distributed to
Northern Tier Holdings.
We expect within 60 days after the end of each quarter, beginning
with the quarter ending September 30, 2012, to make distributions
to unitholders of record on the applicable record date. We expect
our first distribution will include available cash (as described
below) for the period from the closing of this offering through
September 30, 2012.
The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a policy
pursuant to which distributions for each quarter (including the
distributions of additional PIK units on outstanding PIK units) will
be in an amount equal to the available cash we generate in such
quarter. Distributions on our units will be in cash, but during the
PIK period described below, the board of directors of our general
partner will cause distributions on the PIK units to be payable by
Northern Tier Energy LP in the form of additional PIK units to PIK
unitholders of record on the applicable record date as described
below. Available cash for each quarter will be determined by the
board of directors of our general partner following the end of such
quarter. We expect that available cash for each quarter will
generally equal our cash flow from operations for the quarter, less
cash needed for maintenance capital expenditures, accrued but
unpaid expenses, reimbursement of expenses incurred by our
general partner and its affiliates, debt service and other
contractual obligations and reserves for future operating or capital
needs that the board of directors of our general partner deems
necessary or appropriate, including reserves for our turnaround
and related expenses.
We do not intend to maintain excess distribution coverage for the
purpose of maintaining stability or growth in our quarterly
distribution or to otherwise reserve cash for distributions, and we
do not intend to incur debt to pay quarterly distributions. We
expect to
15
finance substantially all of our growth externally, either by debt
issuances or additional issuances of equity.
Because our policy will be to distribute (through cash and in-kind
distributions) an amount equal to all available cash we generate
each quarter, our unitholders will have direct exposure to
fluctuations in the amount of cash generated by our business. We
expect that the amount of our quarterly distributions, if any, will
vary based on our operating cash flow during such quarter. As a
result, our quarterly distributions, if any, will not be stable and will
vary from quarter to quarter as a direct result of variations in,
among other factors, (i) our operating performance, (ii) cash flows
caused by, among other things, fluctuations in the prices of crude
oil and other feedstocks and the prices we receive for finished
products, working capital or capital expenditures and (iii) cash
reserves deemed necessary or appropriate by the board of
directors of our general partner. Such variations in the amount of
our quarterly distributions may be significant. Unlike most publicly
traded partnerships, we will not have a minimum quarterly
distribution or employ structures intended to consistently maintain
or increase distributions over time. The board of directors of our
general partner may change our distribution policy at any time.
Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay distributions
to our unitholders on a quarterly or other basis.
Certain provisions of the indenture governing our senior secured
notes and our revolving credit facility place restrictions on our
ability to make cash distributions. Subject to certain exceptions,
the restricted payment covenant under the indenture governing our
senior secured notes restricts us from making cash distributions
unless our fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the
indenture, is at least 2.0 to 1.0 after giving pro forma effect to
such distributions and such cash distributions do not exceed an
amount equal to the aggregate net proceeds received by us (either
as a result of capital contributions or from the sale of equity or
certain debt securities) plus 50% of our consolidated net income
(or less 100% of consolidated net loss) accrued on a cumulative
basis plus certain other items. As of December 31, 2011 and
March 31, 2012 (and thus, before giving effect to a $40.0 million
equity distribution to Northern Tier Holdings in May 2012),
our restricted payments basket under the indenture was equal to
approximately $58.3 million and $58.9 million, respectively. On a
pro forma basis for
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
16
this offering and the May 2012 equity distribution, as of
December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012, our restricted payments
basket under the indenture would have been equal to
approximately $         million and $         million, respectively. Our
revolving credit facility generally restricts our ability to make cash
distributions if (a) we fail to have excess availability under the
facility at least equal to the greater of (1) 25% of the lesser of (x)
the $300 million commitment amount and (y) the then applicable
borrowing base and (2) $37.5 million or (b) we fail to maintain a
fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined by the revolving credit
facility, after giving pro forma effect to such distributions of at
least 1.1 to 1.0.
Based upon our forecasted results, we expect that available cash
for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 will be approximately
$245.9 million. The following table sets forth our forecast of
available cash on a quarterly basis for the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013:
Three Months Ending
 
September 30, 2012
December 31, 2012
March 31, 2013
June 30, 2013
(in millions)
Available Cash 
 
92.7  
73.3  
57.1  
22.8
$
The forecasted available cash as of June 30, 2013 is projected to be unfavorably impacted by a planned turnaround
which we currently expect to occur during the second quarter of 2013. We expect that available cash for the three
months ending September 30, 2013 will be approximately $61.8 million.
Distribution of the full amount in cash for each period is projected to be permitted under the restricted payments
basket of the indenture. See “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions—Forecasted Available Cash.”
Unanticipated events may occur which could materially adversely affect the actual results we achieve during the
forecast periods.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
PIK units
Consequently, our actual results of operations, cash flows,
financial condition and our need for cash reserves during the
forecast periods may vary from the forecast, and such variations
may be material. Prospective investors are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on our forecast and should make their own
independent assessment of our future results of operations, cash
flows and financial condition. In addition, the board of directors of
our general partner may be required to, or elect to, reduce or
eliminate our distributions at any time during periods of high prices
for refinery feedstocks, such as
17
crude oil, and/or reduced prices or demand for our refined
products, among other reasons. See “Risk Factors.”
Northern Tier Holdings initially will own all of our PIK units. These
units are called “PIK units” because as described below
distributions on such units will be “payable in kind.” Distributions
on common units will be in cash, but during the PIK period
described below, our general partner will cause distributions to be
payable by Northern Tier Energy LP on the PIK units in additional
PIK units to PIK unitholders of record on the applicable record
date. The effect of paying distributions of additional PIK units on
PIK units, which we refer to as distributions in kind or distributions
of equity, is as if we had paid cash distributions on those PIK
units, and the holders of those PIK units had in turn recontributed
that cash to us in exchange for additional PIK units. In order to
make distributions in kind on these securities, we will have to
have sufficient available cash to have paid them in cash and must
pay a simultaneous cash distribution to the holders of our
common units.
The number of PIK units that will be distributed on a PIK unit in
lieu of a quarterly cash distribution will equal a fraction, the
numerator of which is the amount of the cash distribution paid on
a common unit and the denominator of which is the volume-
weighted average price of a common unit for the 10 trading days
immediately preceding the ex-dividend date for the associated
distribution in respect of the common unit.
This calculation is intended to provide the holders of PIK units
with a number of PIK units equal in value on a per unit basis to
the cash being distributed to common unitholders.
While the PIK units will not receive cash distributions during the
PIK period, the distribution of additional PIK units in lieu of cash
distributions may substantially increase the number of units
outstanding and the amount of cash required on a quarterly and
annual basis to pay distributions on all units.
The PIK period will commence on the date of the closing of the
offering and end on the date that is the earlier of (i) December 1,
2017 (the maturity date of our senior secured notes) and (ii) the
date by which we redeem, repurchase, defease or retire all of the
senior secured notes, or amend the indenture governing the senior
secured notes in a manner, as determined by our general partner,
that results in the indenture being unlikely to restrict our ability to
pay cash distributions on all units consistent with the cash
distribution policy described in this prospectus; provided, that a
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
18
restrictive covenant contained in such indenture that requires us
to meet a specified fixed charge coverage ratio (or similar ratio) in
order to make cash distributions shall not be deemed to restrict
our ability to pay cash distributions for purposes of our general
partner’s determination.
Immediately following the end of the PIK period, each outstanding
PIK unit will be automatically converted into a common unit and
entitled to receive any distributions in cash. The purpose of this
feature is to support the payment of cash distributions to our
common unitholders during periods in which we expect that
certain of the provisions of the existing notes indenture may
restrict the ability of Northern Tier Energy LLC, our operating
subsidiary, to distribute cash to us and thus our ability to
distribute all available cash in accordance with our distribution
policy.
Incentive distribution rights
None.
Incentive distribution rights
Subordination period
Issuance of additional units
Limited voting rights
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Call right
None.
Our partnership agreement authorizes us to issue an unlimited
number of additional units, including PIK units, units with rights to
distributions or in liquidation that are senior to our common units,
and rights to buy units for the consideration and on the terms and
conditions determined by the board of directors of our general
partner, without the approval of our unitholders. See “Common
Units Eligible for Future Sale” and “The Partnership Agreement—
Issuance of Additional Partnership Interests.”
Our general partner manages and operates us. Unlike the holders
of common stock in a corporation, our unitholders will have only
limited voting rights on matters affecting our business. Unitholders
will have no right to elect our general partner or our general
partner’s directors on an annual or other continuing basis. Our
general partner may be removed by a vote of the holders of at
least two-thirds of the outstanding units (with holders of the
common units and holders of the PIK units voting together as a
single class), including any units owned by our general partner
and its affiliates (including Northern Tier Holdings). Upon the
completion of this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own an
aggregate of approximately     % of our outstanding units
(approximately     % if the underwriters exercise their option to
purchase additional common units in full). This will give Northern
Tier Holdings the ability to prevent removal of our general partner.
See “The Partnership Agreement—Voting Rights.”
19
If at any time our general partner and its affiliates (including
Northern Tier Holdings) own more than 80% of the units, our
general partner will have the right, but not the obligation, to
purchase all, but not less than all, of the units held by unaffiliated
unitholders at a price not less than their then-current market price,
as calculated pursuant to the terms of our partnership agreement.
See “The Partnership Agreement—Call Right.”
Estimated ratio of taxable income to distributions We estimate that if you own the common units you purchase in
this offering through the record date for distributions for the period
ending December 31, 2015, you will be allocated, on a cumulative
basis, an amount of federal taxable income for that period that will
be approximately 30% of the cash distributed to you with respect
to that period. Because of the nature of our business and the
expected variability of our quarterly distributions, however, the
ratio of our taxable income to distributions may vary significantly
from one year to another. See “Material Federal Income Tax
Consequences—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Ratio of
Taxable Income to Distributions.”
Material federal income tax consequences
Exchange listing
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
For a discussion of the material federal income tax consequences
that may be relevant to prospective unitholders, see “Material
Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
Our common units have been approved for listing on the New
York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the symbol “NTI.”
20
Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data
The following tables present certain summary historical condensed consolidated financial and other data. The
combined financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009, and the eleven months ended November 30,
2010 represent a carve-out financial statement presentation of several operating units of Marathon, which we refer to
as “Predecessor.” For more information on the carve-out presentation, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Predecessor Carve-Out Financial Statements” and our financial
statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus. The historical combined financial data for
periods prior to December 1, 2010 presented below do not reflect the consummation of the Marathon Acquisition and
the transactions related thereto or our capital structure following the Marathon Acquisition and the transactions related
thereto. Northern Tier Energy LLC was formed on June 23, 2010 and entered into certain agreements with Marathon
on October 6, 2010 to acquire the Marathon Assets. At the closing of the Marathon Acquisition on December 1, 2010,
Northern Tier Energy LLC acquired the Marathon Assets. Northern Tier Energy LLC had no operating activities
between its inception date and the closing date of the Marathon Acquisition, although it incurred various transaction
and formation costs which have been included in the period June 23, 2010 (inception date) through December 31,
2010 (the “2010 Successor Period”).
The summary historical financial data as of March 31, 2012 and for the three months ended March 31, 2011 and 2012
are derived from unaudited financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus. The
summary historical financial data as of December 31, 2010 and 2011, for the year ended December 31, 2009, the
eleven months ended November 30, 2010, the 2010 Successor Period and the year ended December 31, 2011 are
derived from audited financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus. The summary
historical combined balance sheet data as of November 30, 2010 and December 31, 2009 were derived from audited
financial statements and the notes thereto and the summary historical balance sheet data as of March 31, 2011 was
derived from unaudited financial statements and the notes thereto that are not included in this prospectus.
On a pro forma basis, net earnings for the year ended December 31, 2011 would have been $24.2 million, adjusted for
certain items that will impact earnings following the consummation of the offering. These items include a reduction of
interest expense of $3.0 million related to the redemption of a portion of our senior secured notes (resulting in pro
forma interest expense of $39.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2011), increased selling, general and
administrative expenses of $3.5 million as a result of being a publicly traded partnership (resulting in pro forma selling,
general and administrative expense of $94.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2011), a $5.7 million tax
provision attributable to our retail business becoming a tax paying entity (resulting in a pro forma income tax provision
of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2011) and a reduction of $2.1 million in management fees paid to
ACON Management and TPG Management (resulting in pro forma other income of $6.6 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011).
As a result of the elections by Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Northern Tier Energy
LLC that holds all of the ownership interests in Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Bakery LLC, and Northern
Tier Energy Holdings LLC to be treated as corporations for federal income tax purposes, for periods following such
election, our financial statements will include a tax provision on income attributable to these subsidiaries. On a pro
forma basis after giving effect to such election, we would have recorded a tax benefit of approximately $0.2 million for
the three months ended March 31, 2012 (resulting in a pro forma income tax benefit of $0.2 million for the three
months ended March 31, 2012) and a tax provision of approximately $5.7 million for the year ended December 31,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
21
2011 (resulting in a pro forma income tax provision of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2011). In addition,
we will record a tax provision related to the recognition of deferred taxes equal to the tax effect of the difference
between the book and tax basis of the assets of these subsidiaries and liabilities as of the effective date of the
election. Assuming we had completed the conversion as of March 31, 2012, the amount of the deferred tax provision
would have been approximately $9.6 million.
You should read the tables along with “Risk Factors,” “Use of Proceeds,” “Capitalization,” “Selected Historical
Condensed Consolidated Financial Data,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations,” “Business” and our financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Predecessor
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
Successor
Year Ended 
December 31,
2010
 
(Dollars in millions, except per barrel/gallon data)
2011
2010
Three Months
Ended
March 31,
2011
2012
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
Consolidated and combined statements
of operations data:
Total revenue
Costs, expenses and other:
Cost of sales
Direct operating expenses
Turnaround and related expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Selling, general and administrative
expenses
Formation costs
Contingent consideration income
Other (income) expense, net
Operating income
$
Realized losses from derivative activities
 
Loss on early extinguishment of derivatives  
 
Unrealized losses from derivative activities
 
Bargain purchase gain
 
Interest expense
     
 
 
     
  $
Earnings (loss) before income taxes
Income tax provision
Net earnings (loss)
Consolidated and combined statements
of cash flow data:
Net cash provided by (used in):
Operating activities
Investing activities
Financing activities
Capital expenditures
Consolidated and combined balance
sheets data (at period end):
Cash and cash equivalents
Total assets
Total long-term debt
Total liabilities
$
$
2,940.5    $
2,507.9   
238.3   
0.6   
40.2
64.7   
–   
–   
(1.1)
3,195.2   
 
2,697.9   
227.0   
9.5   
37.3
59.6   
–   
–   
(5.4)
$
89.9
–   
–   
–   
–   
(0.4)
89.5   
(34.8)
54.7    $
129.4    $
 
(25.0)  
 
(103.9)  
(29.0)
169.3   
 
–   
–   
(40.9)  
–   
(0.3)
128.1   
(67.1)
61.0
$
$
145.4   
(29.3)  
(115.4)  
(29.8)
6.0    $
710.1
6.7   
717.8
$
–
–
344.9   
 
307.5   
21.4   
–   
2.2
6.4   
3.6   
–   
0.1   
  
3.7
–   
–   
(27.1)  
51.4   
(3.2)  
  
24.8   
–   
  
24.8
–   
(363.3)  
436.1   
(2.5)
72.8   
930.6
314.5
$
$
$
$
4,280.8   
 
3,508.0   
260.3   
22.6   
29.5
90.7   
7.4   
(55.8)  
(4.5)  
  
422.6
(310.3)  
–   
(41.9)  
–   
(42.1)  
  
28.3   
–   
  
28.3
209.3   
(156.3)  
(2.3)  
(45.9)
$ 940.2   
 
  779.0   
61.9   
 
 
3.3   
7.3
18.4   
 
2.5   
 
(31.8)  
 
(1.1)  
 
  
  
  100.7
(52.2)  
 
 
–   
  (262.9)  
 
–   
 
(10.0)  
  
  
  (224.4)  
 
(0.1)  
  
  
$(224.5)
$ 94.3   
  (117.8)  
 
–   
(6.0)
$ 999.1
839.8  
60.7  
 
 
3.5  
8.5
20.3  
–  
65.7  
(2.1) 
 
2.7
(52.9) 
 
(44.6) 
 
(88.4) 
 
–  
 
(10.4) 
 
  
  (193.6) 
 
–  
  
 
$(193.6)
$ (54.8) 
(4.6) 
 
 
–  
(5.4)
123.5   
998.8
$ 49.3   
  924.1
$ 64.1  
  962.7
301.9
314.5
301.9
343.9   
366.2
405.4   
312.4
645.6   
285.0
686.6   
312.2
859.5   
64.6
843.7  
  119.0
Total liabilities
Total equity (1)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Other data:
Adjusted EBITDA(2)
Refinery segment data:
Refinery feedstocks (bpd):
Light and intermediate crude
Heavy crude
Other feedstocks/ blendstocks
Total throughput
Refinery product yields (bpd):
Gasoline
Distillates
Asphalt
Other
Total production
Refinery gross product margin per
barrel of throughput(3)
SPP Refinery 3:2:1 crack spread
(per barrel)(4)
Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread (per
barrel)(4)
Retail segment data:
Gallons sold (in millions)
Retail fuel margin per gallon (for
company-operated stores)(5)
22
Predecessor
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
135.2
$
59,112   
15,427   
7,024   
  
81,563   
  
 
42,674   
22,876   
7,688   
8,888   
  
82,126
9.36
10.35
7.94
335.7
0.14
$
$
$
$
220.1   
 
 
 
55,402   
18,693   
5,971   
  
80,066   
  
 
41,080   
22,201   
9,532   
8,145   
  
80,958
12.86
15.12
9.34   
 
 
316.0
0.17
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
59,872   
14,777   
6,487   
  
81,136   
  
 
42,485   
26,258   
9,099   
4,011   
  
81,853
9.94
16.07
9.88
29.1
0.16
$
$
$
$
Successor
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
Year Ended 
December 31,
Three Months
Ended
March 31,
(Dollars in millions, except per barrel/gallon data)
2011
2010
2011
9.9
$
430.7
$
83.2
2012
$
81.5
58,368  
  14,877  
  2,759  
 
  
  76,004
38,902  
  24,160  
  8,323  
  5,052  
 
  
  76,437
56,722   
20,730   
3,698   
  
81,150   
  
 
40,240   
24,841   
9,888   
7,110   
  
82,079
56,453   
  21,888   
  6,433   
  
  
  84,774   
  
  
 
  41,489   
  23,795   
  9,615   
  9,805   
  
  
  84,704
20.26
$ 16.54
$ 17.71
27.92
$ 27.68
$ 24.28
25.37
$ 18.98
$ 22.29
324.0
0.21
78.1
0.15
$
$
74.1
0.18
(1) Total equity for the Predecessor represents a net balance reflecting Marathon’s investment and the effect of participation in Marathon’s
centralized cash management programs. All cash receipts were remitted to, and all cash disbursements were funded by, Marathon. Other
transactions affecting the net investment include general, administrative and overhead costs incurred by Marathon that were allocated to the
Predecessor. There are no terms of settlement or interest charges associated with the net investment balance.
(2) EBITDA is defined as net earnings before interest expense, income taxes and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as
EBITDA before turnaround and related expenses, stock-based compensation expense, gains (losses) from derivative activities, contingent
consideration, formation costs, bargain purchase gain and adjustments to reflect proportionate EBITDA from the Minnesota Pipeline operations.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is an important measure of operating performance and provides useful information to investors because it
highlights trends in our business that may not otherwise be apparent when relying solely on GAAP measures and because it eliminates items
that have less bearing on our operating performance. We also believe Adjusted EBITDA may be used by some investors to assess the ability of
our assets to generate sufficient cash flow to make distributions to our unitholders.
Adjusted EBITDA, as presented herein, is a supplemental measure of our performance that is not required by, or presented in accordance with,
GAAP. We use non-GAAP financial measures as supplements to our GAAP results in order to provide a more complete understanding of the
factors and trends affecting our business. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure of operating performance that is not defined by GAAP and should not
be considered a substitute for net (loss) earnings as determined in accordance with GAAP.
Set forth below is additional detail as to how we use Adjusted EBITDA as a measure of operating performance, as well as a discussion of the
limitations of Adjusted EBITDA as an analytical tool.
Operating Performance.    Management uses Adjusted EBITDA in a number of ways to assess our combined financial and operating
performance, and we believe this measure is helpful to management and investors in identifying trends in our performance. We use Adjusted
EBITDA as a measure of our combined operating performance exclusive of income and expenses that relate to the financing, derivative
activities, income taxes and capital investments of the business, adjusted to reflect EBITDA from the Minnesota Pipeline operations. In addition,
Adjusted EBITDA helps management identify
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
23
controllable expenses and make decisions designed to help us meet our current financial goals and optimize our financial performance.
Accordingly, we believe this metric measures our financial performance based on operational factors that management can impact in the short-
term, namely the cost structure and expenses of the organization.
Limitations.    Other companies, including other companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its
usefulness as a comparative measure. Adjusted EBITDA also has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or
as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include that Adjusted EBITDA:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
does not reflect our interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt;
does not reflect the equity income in our Minnesota Pipe Line Company investment, but includes 17% of the calculated EBITDA of
Minnesota Pipe Line Company;
does not reflect realized and unrealized gains and losses from hedging activities, which may have a substantial impact on our cash flow;
does not reflect certain other non-cash income and expenses; and
excludes income taxes that may represent a reduction in available cash.
The following table shows the reconciliation of net earnings, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for
the year ended December 31, 2009, the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, the 2010 Successor Period, the year ended December 31,
2011 and the three months ended March 31, 2011 and 2012:
Net earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
Predecessor
Successor
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
$
54.7    
  
0.4
$
61.0   
 
0.3
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
2010
(In millions)
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
$
24.8   
 
3.2
$
28.3   
 
42.1
Three Months
Ended
March 31,
2011
$(224.5)  
 
10.0
2012  
 
$(193.6)
10.4
Depreciation and amortization
Income tax provision
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipe Line Company
proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related
expenses
Stock-based compensation
expense
Unrealized losses on derivative
activities
Contingent consideration
income
Formation costs
Loss on early extinguishment of
derivatives
Bargain purchase gain
Realized losses on derivative
activities
Adjusted EBITDA
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
40.2    
34.8    
   
130.1
4.2
0.6
0.3
–
–    
–
–    
–
37.3   
67.1   
  
165.7
3.7
9.5
0.3
40.9
–   
–
–   
–
$
–    
   
135.2
$
–   
  
220.1
2.2   
–   
  
30.2
0.3
–
0.1
27.1
–   
3.6
–   
(51.4)
$
–   
  
9.9
$
24
7.3   
 
0.1   
 
  
  
  (207.1)
8.5  
 
–  
 
 
  
  (174.7)
29.5   
–   
  
99.9
2.8
22.6
1.6
0.9
3.3
0.3
41.9
262.9
(55.8)  
7.4
–   
–
310.3   
  
430.7
(31.8)  
2.5
–   
–
52.2   
  
  
$ 83.2
0.7
3.5
0.4
88.4
65.7  
–
44.6  
–
52.9  
 
  
$ 81.5
(3) Refinery gross product margin per barrel of throughput is a per barrel measurement calculated by subtracting refinery costs of sales from total
refinery revenues and dividing the difference by the total throughput for the respective periods presented. Refinery gross product margin per
barrel of throughput is a non-GAAP performance measure that we believe is important to investors in evaluating our refinery performance as a
general indication of the amount above our cost of products that we are able to sell refined products. Each of the components used in this
calculation (revenues and cost of sales) can be reconciled directly to our statements of operations. Our calculation of refinery gross product
margin per barrel of throughput may differ from similar calculations of other companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a
comparative measure.
The following table shows the reconciliation of refining gross product margin per barrel of throughput for the year ended December 31, 2009,
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, the 2010 Successor Period, the year ended December 31, 2011 and the three months ended
March 31, 2011 and 2012:
Refinery revenue
Refinery costs of sales
Refinery gross product margin
Throughput (barrels)
Refinery gross product margin per
barrel of throughput
Predecessor
Successor
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
Year Ended
December 31,
(In millions, except per barrel data)
2010
2011
$
 
   
$
$
2,530.7   
2,252.1   
  
278.6   
  
29.8
9.36
$
 
   
$
$
2,799.8   
2,455.9   
  
343.9   
  
26.8
12.86
$
 
   
$
$
312.2   
287.2   
  
25.0   
  
2.5
9.94
$
 
   
$
$
Three Months
Ended
March 31,
2011
$845.2   
  719.0   
  
  
$126.2   
  
  
7.6
2012  
 
$894.5  
  772.0  
  
 
$122.5  
 
  
6.9
3,804.1   
3,204.1   
  
600.0   
  
29.6
20.26
$16.54
$17.71
(4) We use the Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread as a benchmark for our refinery. The Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread is expressed in dollars per barrel and
is a proxy for the per barrel margin that a sweet crude oil refinery would earn assuming it produced and sold at PADD II Group 3 prices the
benchmark production of two barrels of gasoline and one barrel of ultra low sulfur diesel for every three barrels of light, sweet crude oil input. For
more information about the Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations—Major Influences on Results of Operations.”
Our SPP Refinery 3:2:1 crack spread is derived using a similar methodology as the Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread and is calculated by taking the
sum of (i) two times our weighted average per barrel price received for our gasoline products plus (ii) our average per barrel price received for
distillate, divided by three; then subtracting from that sum our weighted average cost of crude oil supply per barrel. The SPP Refinery 3:2:1
crack spread is not a full representation of our realized refinery gross product margin because the Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread is composed only
of gasoline and distillate, whereas our refinery gross product margin is calculated using all of our refined products including asphalt and other
lower margin products.
(5) Retail fuel margin per gallon is calculated by dividing retail fuel gross margin by the fuel gallons sold at company-operated stores. Retail fuel
gross margin is a non-GAAP performance measure that we believe is important to investors in evaluating our retail performance. Our calculation
of retail fuel gross margin may differ from similar calculations of other companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a comparative
measure.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
25
The following table shows the reconciliation of retail gross margin to retail segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2009, for
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, the 2010 Successor Period and the year ended December 31, 2011 and the three months
ended March 31, 2011 and 2012:
Retail gross margin:
Fuel margin
Merchandise margin
Other retail margin
Retail gross margin
Expenses:
Direct operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Selling, general and administrative
Retail segment operating income (loss)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Successor
Year Ended
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
Three
Months
Ended
December 31,
December 31,
March 31,
(In millions)
2010
2011
66.5   
86.3   
20.0   
  
172.8   
 
131.3   
7.2   
20.3   
  
14.0
2011    
 
   
 
$12.1   
  19.2   
  3.7   
  
  
  35.0   
 
  29.6   
  1.9   
  5.9   
  
  
$ (2.4)
2012
$13.3  
  20.3  
  3.2  
  
 
  36.8
29.4  
  1.8  
  6.0  
 
  
$ (0.4)
Predecessor
Year Ended
December 31,
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
2009
2010
$
$
47.1   
88.0   
18.9   
  
154.0   
 
100.0   
14.2   
20.5   
  
19.3
$
$
54.3   
81.4   
17.7   
  
153.4   
 
94.9   
12.4   
19.6   
  
26.5
$
$
4.7   
6.5   
1.3   
  
12.5   
 
10.2   
0.5   
1.3   
  
0.5
$
$
26
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our common units involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the risks described below
together with the other information set forth in this prospectus before making an investment decision. Any of the
following risks and uncertainties could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, cash flows
and results of operations could be materially adversely affected. If that occurs, we might not be able to pay
distributions on our common units, the trading price of our common units could decline materially, and you could lose
all or part of your investment. Although many of our business risks are comparable to those faced by a corporation
engaged in a similar business, limited partner interests are inherently different from the capital stock of a corporation
and involve additional risks described below. The risks discussed below are not the only risks we face. We may
experience additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us, or as a result of developments occurring in the
future. Conditions that we currently deem to be immaterial may also materially and adversely affect our business,
financial condition, cash flows and results of operations, and our ability to pay distributions to unitholders.
General Business and Industry Risks
Risks Related to Our Business and Industry
We may not have sufficient available cash to pay any quarterly distribution on our units.
We may not have sufficient available cash each quarter to enable us to pay any distributions to our unitholders. The
amount we will be able to distribute on our common units principally depends on the amount of cash we generate from
our operations, which is primarily dependent upon the operating margins we generate. Our operating margins, and
thus, the cash we generate from operations have been volatile, and we expect that they will fluctuate from quarter to
quarter based on, among other things:
Ÿ  the cost of refining feedstocks, such as crude oil, that are processed and blended into refined products;
Ÿ  the price at which we are able to sell refined products;
Ÿ  the level of our direct operating expenses, including expenses such as employee and contract labor,
maintenance and energy costs;
Ÿ  non-payment or other non-performance by our customers and suppliers; and
Ÿ  overall economic and local market conditions.
In addition, while the PIK units will not receive cash distributions during the PIK period, the distribution of additional
PIK units in lieu of cash distributions may substantially increase the number of units outstanding and the amount of
cash required on a quarterly and annual basis to pay distributions on all units. The actual amount of cash we will have
available for distribution will depend on other factors, some of which are beyond our control, including:
Ÿ  the level of capital expenditures we make;
Ÿ  our debt service requirements;
Ÿ  the amount of any accrued but unpaid expenses;
Ÿ  the amount of any reimbursement of expenses incurred by our general partner and its affiliates;
Ÿ  fluctuations in our working capital needs;
Ÿ  our ability to borrow funds and access capital markets;
27
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Ÿ  planned and unplanned maintenance at our facility, which, based on determinations by the board of directors
of our general partner to maintain reserves, may negatively impact our cash flows in the quarter in which such
maintenance occurs;
Ÿ  restrictions on distributions and on our ability to make working capital borrowings; and
Ÿ  the amount of cash reserves established by our general partner.
Our partnership agreement will not require us to pay a minimum quarterly distribution. The amount of distributions that
we pay, if any, and the decision to pay any distribution at all, will be determined by the board of directors of our
general partner. Our quarterly distributions, if any, will be subject to significant fluctuations based on the above
factors.
For a description of additional restrictions and factors that may affect our ability to pay distributions, see “Distribution
Policy and Restrictions on Distributions.”
Restrictions in the agreements governing our indebtedness could limit our ability to make distributions to our
unitholders.
Subject to certain exceptions, the indenture governing our senior secured notes and our revolving credit facility
prohibit us from making distributions to unitholders if certain defaults exist. In addition, both the indenture and our
revolving credit facility contain additional restrictions limiting our ability to pay distributions to unitholders. Subject to
certain exceptions, the restricted payments covenant under the indenture governing our senior secured notes restricts
us from making cash distributions unless our fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the indenture, is at least 2.0 to
1.0 after giving pro forma effect to such distributions and such cash distributions do not exceed an amount equal to
the aggregate net proceeds received by us (either as a result of capital contributions or from the sale of equity or
certain debt securities) plus 50% of our consolidated net income (or less 100% of consolidated net loss), which is
defined to exclude certain non-cash charges, such as net unrealized gains or losses from hedging obligations and
impairment charges, accrued on a cumulative basis, plus certain other items. Our revolving credit facility generally
restricts our ability to make cash distributions if (a) we fail to have excess availability under the facility at least equal
to the greater of (1) 25% of the lesser of (x) the $300 million commitment amount and (y) the then applicable
borrowing base and (2) $37.5 million or (b) we fail to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the revolving
credit facility, after giving pro forma effect to such distributions of at least 1.1 to 1.0. Accordingly, we may be
restricted by our debt agreements from distributing all of our available cash to our unitholders. See “Description of
Indebtedness.”
The amount of our quarterly distributions, if any, will vary significantly both quarterly and annually and will
be directly dependent on the performance of our business. Unlike most publicly traded partnerships, we will
not have a minimum quarterly distribution or employ structures intended to consistently maintain or increase
distributions over time.
Investors who are looking for an investment that will pay predictable quarterly distributions should not invest in our
common units. We expect our business performance will be more cyclical and volatile, and our cash flows will be less
stable, than the business performance and cash flows of most publicly traded partnerships. As a result, our quarterly
distributions will be cyclical and volatile and are expected to vary quarterly and annually. Unlike most publicly traded
partnerships, we will not have a minimum quarterly distribution or employ structures intended to consistently maintain
or increase distributions over time. The amount of our quarterly distributions will be dependent on the performance of
our business, which will be volatile as a result of fluctuations in the price of crude oil and other feedstocks and the
demand for our finished products. Because our quarterly distributions will be subject to significant fluctuations directly
related to the available cash we generate, future quarterly distributions paid to our unitholders will vary significantly
from quarter to quarter and may be zero. For example, we
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
28
are forecasting available cash of $92.7 million for the three months ending September 30, 2012 as compared to $22.8
million for the three months ending June 30, 2013. See “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions.”
The amount of cash we have available for distribution to unitholders depends primarily on our cash flow and
not solely on profitability.
The amount of cash we have available for distribution depends primarily upon our cash flow and not solely on
profitability, which may be affected by non-cash items. For example, we may have working capital changes as well as
extraordinary capital expenditures and major maintenance expenses in the future. See “Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Capital Spending.” While
these items may not affect our profitability in a quarter, they would reduce the amount of cash available for distribution
with respect to such quarter. As a result, we may make cash distributions during periods when we report losses and
may not make cash distributions during periods when we report net income.
For the year ended December 31, 2011 and the three months ended March 31, 2012, in each case on a pro
forma basis, we would not have generated sufficient available cash to have paid the quarterly distributions
that we project that we will be able to pay for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and for the three
months ending September 30, 2013.
We project that we will be able to pay aggregate distributions of $          per unit for the twelve months ending June
30, 2013 and a distribution of $         per unit for the three months ending September 30, 2013. In order to pay these
projected distributions, we must generate approximately $245.9 million of available cash in the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013 and $61.8 million of available cash in the three months ending September 30, 2013. However, for the
years ended December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012, on a pro forma basis, we would have generated $11.7 million
and $9.1 million, respectively, of available cash. The increases in projected available cash compared to the
forecasted available cash for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 is primarily driven by the lower projected
realized losses from derivative activities. There can therefore be no assurance that we will generate enough available
cash to pay distributions of $          per unit or $         per unit, respectively, or any distribution at all, with respect to
the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and the three months ending September 30, 2013, or any future period. We
have a limited operating history upon which to rely in evaluating whether we will have sufficient cash to allow us to
pay distributions on our common units. For a description of the price assumptions upon which we have based our
projected per unit distribution for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and the three months ending September 30,
2013, see “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions—Assumptions and Considerations.”
The board of directors of our general partner may modify or revoke our distribution policy at any time at its
discretion. Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay any distributions at all.
The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a distribution policy pursuant to which we will distribute an
amount equal to the available cash we generate each quarter. However, the board may change such policy at any
time at its discretion and could elect not to pay distributions for one or more quarters. See “Distribution Policy and
Restrictions on Distributions.”
Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay any distributions at all. Accordingly, investors are cautioned not
to place undue reliance on the permanence of such a policy in making an investment decision. Any modification or
revocation of our distribution policy could substantially reduce or eliminate the amounts of distributions to our
unitholders. The amount of distributions we make, if any, and the decision to make any distribution at all will be
determined by the board of directors of our general partner, whose interests may differ from those of our public
unitholders. Our general partner
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
29
has limited fiduciary and contractual duties, which may permit it to favor its own interests or the interests of its
owners, including ACON Refining and TPG Refining, to the detriment of our public unitholders.
The assumptions underlying the forecast of available cash that we include in “Distribution Policy and
Restrictions on Distributions—Forecasted Available Cash” are inherently uncertain and are subject to
significant business, economic, regulatory and competitive risks and uncertainties that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those forecasted.
Our forecast of available cash set forth in “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions—Forecasted Available
Cash” includes our forecast of our results of operations and available cash for the twelve months ending June 30,
2013 and the three months ending September 30, 2013. The assumptions underlying the forecast are inherently
uncertain and are subject to significant business, economic, regulatory and competitive risks and uncertainties,
including those discussed in this section, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those forecasted.
Such forward-looking statements are based on assumptions and beliefs that we believe to be reasonable; however,
assumed facts almost always vary from actual results, and the differences between assumed facts and actual results
can be material, depending upon the circumstances. Where we express an expectation or belief as to future results,
that expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and based on assumptions believed to have a reasonable basis. It
cannot be assured, however, that the stated expectation or belief will occur or be achieved or accomplished. If the
forecasted results are not achieved, we would not be able to pay the forecasted annual distribution or any distribution
at all, in which event the market price of the common units may decline materially. The prospective financial
information included in this prospectus has been prepared by, and is the responsibility of, our management. Neither
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP nor any other independent accountants, have examined, compiled, or performed any
procedures with respect to the accompanying prospective financial information and, accordingly,
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP does not express an opinion or any other form of assurance with respect thereto. The
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP reports included herein relate to our successor’s and predecessor’s historical financial
information. Those reports do not extend to the prospective financial information and should not be read to do so. A
net loss in any period in which we forecasted net income would disproportionately affect our ability to pay cash
distributions under the covenants in our indenture, because 100% of any consolidated net loss decreases the
restricted payment basket while only 50% of any consolidated net income increases the basket. The forecasted
results relate to the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and the three months ending September 30, 2013 and are
not indicative of the results we may achieve for any other period or of our future performance more generally.
Investors should review the forecast of our results of operations for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and the
three months ending September 30, 2013 together with the other information included elsewhere in this prospectus,
including “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Management’s Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Our arrangements with Marathon expose us to Marathon related credit and performance risk.
We have a contract with Marathon under which we supply substantially all of the gasoline and diesel requirements for
the 90 independently owned and operated Marathon branded stores in our marketing area. Marathon has
indemnification obligations to us pursuant to the agreements entered into in connection with the Marathon Acquisition.
Marathon’s indemnification obligation resulting from any breach of representations and warranties generally are limited
by an indemnification deductible of $25 million and an indemnification ceiling of $100 million and are guaranteed by
Marathon Petroleum.
Marathon Petroleum has guaranteed the performance of all of Marathon’s obligations under all of the acquisition
agreements entered into in connection with the Marathon Acquisition obligations
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
30
discussed above. Nevertheless, relying on Marathon’s ability to honor its fuel requirements purchase obligations and
indemnity obligations, and on Marathon Petroleum’s ability to honor its guaranty obligations, exposes us to
Marathon’s and Marathon Petroleum’s respective credit and business risks. There can be no assurance that claims
resulting from any breach of Marathon’s representations and warranties under the acquisition agreements entered into
in connection with the Marathon Acquisition will not exceed the $100 million indemnification ceiling. Moreover, selling
products to Marathon under the supply contract can expose us to Marathon’s credit and general business risks. An
adverse change in Marathon’s or Marathon Petroleum’s business, results of operations or financial condition could
adversely affect their respective ability to perform each of these obligations, which could consequently have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or liquidity and, as a result, our ability to make
distributions.
Our historical financial statements may not be indicative of future performance.
The historical financial statements for periods prior to December 1, 2010 presented in this prospectus reflect carve-out
financial statements of several operating units of Marathon, which, except for certain assets that were not acquired
(e.g., cash other than in-store cash at our convenience stores and receivables and assets sold to third parties) and
certain liabilities (e.g., accounts payable, payroll and benefits payable and deferred taxes) that were not assumed in
connection with the Marathon Acquisition, represent the assets and liabilities that were transferred to us upon the
closing of the Marathon Acquisition. We now own the assets and operate them as a standalone business. Prior to the
closing of the Marathon Acquisition, we had no history of operating these assets, and they were never operated as a
standalone business, thus the historical results presented in the financial statements for the periods prior to the
Marathon Acquisition are not necessarily comparable to our financial statements following the Marathon Acquisition or
indicative of the results for any future period. Additionally, we entered into certain arrangements at the closing of the
Marathon Acquisition, including our crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC and a lease arrangement
with Realty Income Properties 3 LLC (“Realty Income”), that resulted in our working capital needs and operating costs
varying from those affecting the assets that we acquired from Marathon. The pre-Marathon Acquisition historical
financial information reflects intercompany allocations of expenses which may not be indicative of the actual
expenses that would have been incurred had the combined businesses been operating as a company independent
from Marathon for the periods presented. In addition, our results of operations for periods subsequent to the closing of
this offering may not be comparable to our results of operations for periods prior to the closing of this offering as a
result of certain transactions undertaken in connection with this offering described in “Prospectus Summary—IPO
Transactions.” See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—
Comparability of Historical Results” for a discussion of factors that affect comparability. As a result, it is difficult to
evaluate our historical results of operations to assess our future prospects and viability.
Our liquidity may be adversely affected by a reduction in third party credit.
We rely on third party credit for approximately 50% of our crude oil and other feedstock purchases. We purchase the
remaining crude oil and other feedstocks via a crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC, which
provides logistical and administrative support to us for both the crude oil we source from them as well as the crude oil
we source from our suppliers. We pay for both domestic crude oil purchases and Canadian crude oil purchases during
the month following delivery. If our suppliers who sell crude oil and other feedstocks to us on trade credit were to
reduce or eliminate our credit lines, we would be required to fund our purchases through our revolving credit facility or
our crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC, which would have a negative impact on liquidity and, as
a result, our ability to make distributions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
31
We may have capital needs for which our internally generated cash flows and other sources of liquidity may
not be adequate.
If we cannot generate sufficient cash flows or otherwise secure sufficient liquidity to support our short-term and long-
term capital requirements, we may not be able to meet our payment obligations, comply with certain deadlines related
to environmental regulations and standards or pursue our business strategies, any of which could have a material
adverse effect on our results of operations or liquidity. We have substantial short-term capital needs and may have
substantial long-term capital needs. Our short-term working capital needs are primarily related to financing our refined
product inventory and accounts receivable. Our long-term needs for cash include those to support ongoing capital
expenditures for equipment maintenance and upgrades during turnarounds at our refinery and to complete our routine
and normally scheduled maintenance, regulatory and security expenditures. We currently expect our next major
turnaround to occur in April 2013 for which we have budgeted approximately $50 million. The refinery is currently
expected to be shut down during the month of April 2013 to complete the turnaround. In addition, from time to time,
we are required to spend significant amounts for repairs when one or more processing units experiences temporary
shutdowns. We continue to utilize significant capital to upgrade equipment, improve facilities, and reduce operational,
safety and environmental risks. We may incur substantial compliance costs in connection with any new
environmental, health and safety regulations. In addition, the board of directors of our general partner will adopt a
distribution policy pursuant to which we will distribute an amount equal to the available cash we generate each quarter
to unitholders. As a result, we will need to rely on external financing sources, including commercial bank borrowings
and the issuance of debt and equity securities, to fund our growth. Our liquidity will affect our ability to satisfy any of
these needs.
Competition from companies having greater financial and other resources than we do could materially and
adversely affect our business and results of operations.
Our refining operations compete with domestic refiners and marketers in the PADD II region of the United States, as
well as with domestic refiners in other PADD regions and foreign refiners that import products into the United States.
In addition, we compete with producers and marketers in other industries that supply alternative forms of energy and
fuels to satisfy the requirements of our industrial, commercial and individual customers. Certain of our competitors
have larger, more complex refineries, and may be able to realize lower per-barrel costs or higher margins per barrel of
throughput. Several of our principal competitors are integrated national or international oil companies that are larger
and have substantially greater resources than we do and have access to proprietary sources of controlled crude oil
production. Unlike these competitors, we obtain substantially all of our feedstocks from unaffiliated sources. Because
of their integrated operations and larger capitalization, these companies may be more flexible in responding to volatile
industry or market conditions, such as shortages of crude oil supply and other feedstocks or intense price
fluctuations.
Newer or upgraded refineries will often be more efficient than our refinery, which may put us at a competitive
disadvantage. While we have taken significant measures to maintain and upgrade units in our refinery by installing
new equipment and repairing equipment to improve our operations, these actions involve significant uncertainties,
since upgraded equipment may not perform at expected throughput levels, the yield and product quality of new
equipment may differ from design specifications and modifications may be needed to correct equipment that does not
perform as expected. Any of these risks associated with new equipment, redesigned older equipment or repaired
equipment could lead to lower revenues or higher costs or otherwise have an adverse effect on future results of
operations and financial condition and our ability to make distributions. Over time, our refinery may become obsolete,
or be unable to compete, because of the construction of new, more efficient facilities by our competitors.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
32
Our retail operations compete with numerous convenience stores, gasoline service stations, supermarket chains, drug
stores, fast food operations and other retail outlets. Increasingly, national high-volume grocery and dry-goods retailers
are entering the gasoline retailing business. Many of these competitors are substantially larger than we are. Because
of their diversity, integration of operations and greater resources, these companies may be better able to withstand
volatile market conditions or levels of low or no profitability. In addition, these retailers may use promotional pricing or
discounts, both at the pump and in the store, to encourage in-store merchandise sales. These activities by our
competitors could adversely affect our profit margins. Additionally, our convenience stores could lose market share,
relating to both gasoline and merchandise, to these and other retailers, which could adversely affect our business,
results of operations and cash flows. Our convenience stores compete in large part based on their ability to offer
convenience to customers. Consequently, changes in traffic patterns and the type, number and location of competing
stores could result in the loss of customers and reduced sales and profitability at affected stores, and adversely
affect our ability to make distributions.
Difficult conditions resulting from the ongoing U.S. and worldwide financial and credit crisis, and potential
further deteriorating conditions in the United States and globally, may materially adversely affect our
business, results of operations, financial condition and our ability to make distributions.
Continued volatility and disruption in worldwide capital and credit markets and potential further deteriorating conditions
in the United States and globally could affect our revenues and earnings negatively and could have a material adverse
effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and our ability to make distributions. We are indirectly
exposed to risks faced by our suppliers, customers and other business partners. The impact on these constituencies
of the risks posed by continued economic turmoil have included, or can include, interruptions or delays in the
performance by counterparties to our contracts, reductions and delays in customer purchases, delays in or the
inability of customers to obtain financing to purchase our products and the inability of customers to pay for our
products. All of these events may significantly adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial
condition and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
The geographic concentration of our refinery and retail assets creates a significant exposure to the risks of the
local economy and other local adverse conditions. The location of our refinery also creates the risk of
significantly increased transportation costs should the supply/demand balance change in our region such
that regional supply exceeds regional demand for refined products.
As our refinery and a significant number of our stores are located in Minnesota, Wisconsin and South Dakota, we
primarily market our refined and retail products in a single, relatively limited geographic area. As a result, we are more
susceptible to regional economic conditions than the operations of more geographically diversified competitors, and
any unforeseen events or circumstances that affect our operating area could also materially adversely affect our
revenues and our ability to make distributions. These factors include, among other things, changes in the economy,
weather conditions, demographics and population.
Should the supply/demand balance shift in our region as a result of changes in the local economy discussed above,
an increase in refining capacity or other reasons, resulting in supply in the PADD II region exceeding demand, we
would have to deliver refined products to customers outside of the region and thus incur considerably higher
transportation costs, resulting in lower refining margins, if any. Changes in market conditions could have a material
adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations and, as a result, our ability to make
distributions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
33
Our operating results are seasonal and generally lower in the first and fourth quarters of the year for our
refining business and in the first quarter of the year for our retail business. We depend on favorable weather
conditions in the spring and summer months.
Demand for gasoline is generally higher during the summer months than during the winter months due to seasonal
increases in highway traffic. Decreased demand during the winter months can lead to lower gasoline prices. As a
result, the operating results of our refining business for the first and fourth calendar quarters are generally lower than
those for the second and third calendar quarters of each year.
Seasonal fluctuations in traffic also affect sales of motor fuels and merchandise in our retail fuel and convenience
stores. As a result, the operating results of our retail business are generally lower for the first quarter of the year.
Weather conditions in our operating area also have a significant effect on our retail operating results. Customers are
more likely to purchase higher profit margin items at our retail fuel and convenience stores, such as fast foods,
fountain drinks and other beverages and more gasoline during the spring and summer months, thereby typically
generating higher revenues and gross margins for us in these periods. Unfavorable weather conditions during these
months and a resulting lack of the expected seasonal upswings in traffic and sales could have a material adverse
effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
As the amount of cash we will be able to distribute with respect to a quarter principally depends on the amount of
cash we generate from operations and because we do not intend to reserve or borrow cash to pay distributions in
subsequent quarters, distributions with respect to the first and fourth quarters of the year may be significantly lower
than with respect to the second and third quarters.
Weather conditions and natural disasters could materially and adversely affect our business and operating
results.
The effects of weather conditions and natural disasters can lead to volatility in the costs and availability of energy and
raw materials or negatively impact our operations or those of our customers and suppliers, which could have a
significant adverse effect on our business and results of operations and, as a result, our ability to make cash
distributions.
We may not be able to successfully execute our strategy of growth within the refining and retail industry
through acquisitions.
A component of our growth strategy is to selectively consider accretive acquisitions within the refining industry and
retail market based on sustainable performance of the targeted assets through the refining cycle, access to
advantageous crude oil supplies, attractive demand and supply market fundamentals, access to distribution and
logistics infrastructure and potential operating synergies. Our ability to do so will be dependent upon a number of
factors, including our ability to identify acceptable acquisition candidates, consummate acquisitions on favorable
terms, successfully integrate acquired assets and obtain financing to fund acquisitions and to support our growth and
many other factors beyond our control. Risks associated with acquisitions include those relating to:
diversion of management time and attention from our existing business;
diversion of management time and attention from our existing business;
Ÿ
Ÿ  challenges in managing the increased scope, geographic diversity and complexity of operations;
Ÿ  difficulties in integrating the financial, technological and management standards, processes, procedures and
controls of an acquired business with those of our existing operations;
Ÿ  liability for known or unknown environmental conditions or other contingent liabilities not covered by
indemnification or insurance;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
34
Ÿ  greater than anticipated expenditures required for compliance with environmental, safety or other regulatory
standards or for investments to improve operating results;
Ÿ  our inability to offer competitive terms to our franchisees to grow our franchise business;
Ÿ  difficulties in achieving anticipated operational improvements; and
Ÿ  incurrence of additional indebtedness to finance acquisitions or capital expenditures relating to acquired
assets.
We may not be successful in acquiring additional assets, and any acquisitions that we do consummate may not
produce the anticipated benefits or may have adverse effects on our business and operating results.
Our business may suffer if any of the executive officers of our general partner or other key employees
discontinues employment with us. Furthermore, a shortage of skilled labor or disruptions in our labor force
may make it difficult for us to maintain labor productivity.
Our future success depends to a large extent on the services of the executive officers of our general partner and other
key employees and on our continuing ability to recruit, train and retain highly qualified employees in all areas of our
operations, including accounting, business operations, finance and other key back-office and mid-office personnel.
Furthermore, our operations require skilled and experienced employees with proficiency in multiple tasks. The
competition for these employees is intense, and the loss of these executives or employees could harm our business.
If any of these executives or other key personnel resign or become unable to continue in their present roles and are
not adequately replaced, our business could be materially adversely affected. We do not maintain, nor do we plan to
obtain, any insurance against the loss of any of these individuals.
Our operations could be disrupted if our information systems fail, causing increased expenses and loss of
sales.
Our business is highly dependent on financial, accounting and other data processing systems and other
communications and information systems, including our enterprise resource planning tools. We process a large
number of transactions on a daily basis and rely upon the proper functioning of computer systems. If a key system
were to fail or experience unscheduled downtime for any reason, even if only for a short period, our operations and
financial results could be affected adversely. Our systems could also be damaged or interrupted by a security breach,
fire, flood, power loss, telecommunications failure or similar event. Our formal disaster recovery plan may not prevent
delays or other complications that could arise from an information systems failure. Further, our business interruption
insurance may not compensate us adequately for losses that may occur.
We may incur significant liability under, or costs and capital expenditures to comply with, environmental,
health and safety regulations, which are complex and change frequently.
Our refinery, pipelines and retail operations are subject to federal, state and local laws regulating, among other things,
the generation, storage, handling, use and transportation of petroleum and hazardous substances, the emission and
discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, characteristics and composition of gasoline and
diesel and other matters otherwise relating to the protection of the environment. Our operations are also subject to
various laws and regulations relating to occupational health and safety. Compliance with the complex array of federal,
state and local laws relating to the protection of the environment, health and safety is difficult and likely will require us
to make significant expenditures. Moreover, our business is inherently subject to accidental spills, discharges or other
releases of petroleum or hazardous substances into the environment including at neighboring areas or third party
storage, treatment or disposal facilities. For example, we have performed
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
35
remediation of known soil and groundwater contamination beneath certain of our retail locations primarily as a result of
leaking underground storage tanks, and we will continue to perform remediation of this known contamination until the
appropriate regulatory standards have been achieved. Certain environmental laws impose joint and several liability
without regard to fault or the legality of the original conduct in connection with the investigation and cleanup of such
spills, discharges or releases. As such, we may be required to pay more than our fair share of such investigation or
cleanup. We may not be able to operate in compliance with all applicable environmental, health and safety laws,
regulations and permits at all times. Violations of applicable legal or regulatory requirements could result in substantial
fines, criminal sanctions, permit revocations, injunctions and/or facility shutdowns. We may also be required to make
significant capital expenditures or incur increased operating costs or change operations to achieve compliance with
applicable standards.
We cannot predict what additional environmental, health and safety legislation or regulations will be enacted or
become effective in the future or how existing or future laws or regulations will be administered or interpreted with
respect to our operations. Many of these laws and regulations are becoming increasingly stringent, and the cost of
compliance with these requirements can be expected to increase over time. For example, on June 1, 2012, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) issued final amendments to the New Source Performance
Standards (“NSPS”) for petroleum refineries, including standards for emissions of nitrogen oxides from
process heaters and work practice standards and monitoring requirements for flares. We are evaluating the
regulation and amended standards, as may be applicable to the flare, process heaters and operations at our
refinery. We cannot currently predict the costs that we may have to incur, if any, to comply with the amended
NSPS, but costs could be material. In addition, the EPA has announced that it plans to propose new “Tier 3”
motor vehicle emission and fuel standards sometime in the second half of 2012. It has been reported that
these new Tier 3 regulations may, among other things, lower the maximum average sulfur content of gasoline
from 30 parts per million to 10 parts per million. If the Tier 3 regulations are eventually implemented and
lower the maximum allowable content of sulfur or other constituents in fuels that we produce, we may at
some point in the future be required to make significant capital expenditures and/or incur materially increased
operating costs to comply with the new standards. Expenditures or costs for environmental, health and safety
compliance could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition and
profitability and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
We could incur significant costs in cleaning up contamination at our refinery, terminal and convenience
stores.
Our refinery site has been used for refining activities for many years. Petroleum hydrocarbons and various
substances have been released on or under our refinery site. Marathon performed remediation of known soil
and groundwater contamination beneath the refinery for many years, and we will continue to perform
remediation of this known contamination until the appropriate regulatory standards have been achieved.
These remediation efforts are being overseen by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (“MPCA”) pursuant
to a remediation settlement agreement entered into by Marathon and MPCA in 2007. Releases of petroleum
hydrocarbons have also occurred at several of our convenience stores, and we have performed and will
continue to perform remediation of this known contamination until the applicable regulatory standards are
met. Costs for such remediation activities are often unpredictable, and there can be no assurance that the
future costs will not be material. It is possible that we may identify additional contamination in the future,
which could result in additional remediation obligations and expenses, including fines and penalties.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
36
We are subject to strict laws and regulations regarding employee and business process safety, and failure to
comply with these laws and regulations could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and
financial condition.
We are subject to the requirements of OSHA and comparable state statutes that regulate the protection of the
health and safety of workers. In addition, OSHA requires that we maintain information about hazardous
materials used or produced in our operations and that we provide this information to employees, state and
local governmental authorities, and local residents. Failure to comply with OSHA requirements, including
general industry standards, process safety standards and control of occupational exposure to regulated
substances, could subject us to significant fines or cause us to spend significant amounts on compliance,
which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition and the cash flows
of the business and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
Compliance with and changes in tax laws could adversely affect our performance.
We are subject to extensive tax liabilities, including federal, state and transactional taxes such as excise,
sales/use, payroll, franchise, withholding and ad valorem taxes. New tax laws and regulations and changes in
existing tax laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed that could result in increased
expenditures for tax liabilities in the future. Certain of these liabilities are subject to periodic audits by the
respective taxing authority, which could increase our tax liabilities. Subsequent changes to our tax liabilities
as a result of these audits may also subject us to interest and penalties. Any such changes in our tax
liabilities could adversely affect our ability to make distributions to our unitholders.
Our insurance policies may be inadequate or expensive.
Our insurance coverage does not cover all potential losses, costs or liabilities. We could suffer losses for
uninsurable or uninsured risks or in amounts in excess of our existing insurance coverage. Our ability to
obtain and maintain adequate insurance may be affected by conditions in the insurance market over which we
have no control. In addition, if we experience insurable events, our annual premiums could increase further
or insurance may not be available at all or if it is available, on restrictive coverage items. The occurrence of
an event that is not fully covered by insurance or the loss of insurance coverage could have a material
adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations and, as a result, our ability to
make distributions.
Our level of indebtedness may increase and reduce our financial flexibility.
In the future, we may incur significant indebtedness in order to make future acquisitions or to develop our
properties. Our level of indebtedness could affect our operations in several ways, including the following:
Ÿ  a significant portion of our cash flows could be used to service our indebtedness;
Ÿ  a high level of debt would increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions;
Ÿ  the covenants contained in the agreements governing our outstanding indebtedness will limit our ability to
borrow additional funds, dispose of assets, pay distributions and make certain investments;
Ÿ  a high level of debt may place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors that are less
leveraged, and therefore may be able to take advantage of opportunities that our indebtedness would prevent
us from pursuing;
our debt covenants may also affect our flexibility in planning for, and reacting to, changes in the economy
our debt covenants may also affect our flexibility in planning for, and reacting to, changes in the economy
and in our industry;
Ÿ
37
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Ÿ  a high level of debt may make it more likely that a reduction in our borrowing base following a periodic
redetermination could require us to repay a portion of our then-outstanding bank borrowings; and
Ÿ  a high level of debt may impair our ability to obtain additional financing in the future for working capital, capital
expenditures, acquisitions, general corporate or other purposes.
A high level of indebtedness increases the risk that we may default on our debt obligations. Our ability to
meet our debt obligations and to reduce our level of indebtedness depends on our future performance.
General economic conditions and financial, business and other factors affect our operations and our future
performance. Many of these factors are beyond our control. We may not be able to generate sufficient cash
flows to pay the interest on our debt, and future working capital, borrowings or equity financing may not be
available to pay or refinance such debt. Factors that will affect our ability to raise cash through an offering of
our units or a refinancing of our debt include financial market conditions, the value of our assets and our
performance at the time we need capital.
In addition, our bank borrowing base is subject to periodic redeterminations. We could be forced to repay a
portion of our bank borrowings due to redeterminations of our borrowing base. If we are forced to do so, we
may not have sufficient funds to make such repayments. If we do not have sufficient funds and are otherwise
unable to negotiate renewals of our borrowings or arrange new financing, we may have to sell significant
assets. Any such sale could have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition and, as a
result, our ability to make distributions.
Increased costs of capital could adversely affect our business.
Our business and operating results can be harmed by factors such as the availability, terms and cost of
capital, increases in interest rates or a reduction in credit rating. Changes in any one or more of these factors
could cause our cost of doing business to increase, limit our access to capital, limit our ability to pursue
acquisition opportunities, reduce our cash flows and place us at a competitive disadvantage. Recent and
continuing disruptions and volatility in the global financial markets may lead to an increase in interest rates
or a contraction in credit availability impacting our ability to finance our operations.
Additionally, as with other yield-oriented securities, we expect that our unit price will be impacted by the level
of our quarterly cash distributions and implied distribution yield. The distribution yield is often used by
investors to compare and rank related yield-oriented securities for investment decision-making purposes.
Therefore, changes in interest rates may affect the yield requirements of investors who invest in our common
units, and a rising interest rate environment could have a material adverse impact on our unit price and our
ability to issue additional equity to fund our operations or to make acquisitions or to incur debt as well as
increasing our interest costs.
We require continued access to capital. In particular, the board of directors of our general partner will adopt a
distribution policy pursuant to which we will distribute an amount equal to the available cash we generate
each quarter to unitholders. As a result, we will need to rely on external financing sources to fund our growth.
A significant reduction in the availability of credit could materially and adversely affect our ability to achieve
our planned growth and operating results.
The indenture governing our senior secured notes, our revolving credit facility and our hedge agreements
contain certain covenants that may inhibit our ability to make certain investments, incur certain additional
indebtedness and engage in certain other transactions, which could adversely affect our ability to pursue our
business strategies.
The indenture governing our senior secured notes and our revolving credit facility contain a number of
restrictive covenants that impose significant operating and financial restrictions on us and
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
38
may limit our ability to engage in acts that may be in our long-term best interest, including restrictions on our
ability, among other things, to:
Ÿ  incur, assume or guarantee additional debt or issue redeemable stock or preferred stock;
Ÿ  make distributions or prepay, redeem, or repurchase certain debt;
Ÿ  enter into agreements that restrict distributions from restricted subsidiaries;
Ÿ  incur liens;
Ÿ  sell or otherwise dispose of assets, including capital stock of subsidiaries;
Ÿ  enter into new lines of business;
Ÿ  enter into transactions with affiliates; and
Ÿ  merge, consolidate or sell substantially all of our assets.
A breach of the covenants under the indenture governing the senior secured notes or under the credit
agreement governing the revolving credit facility could result in an event of default under the applicable
indebtedness. Such default may allow the creditors to accelerate the related debt and may result in the
acceleration of any other debt to which a cross-acceleration or cross-default provision applies. In addition, an
event of default under our revolving credit facility would permit the lenders under our revolving credit facility
to terminate all commitments to extend further credit under that facility. Furthermore, if we were unable to
repay the amounts due and payable under our revolving credit facility or indenture, those creditors could
proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure that indebtedness. In the event our lenders or
noteholders accelerate the repayment of our borrowings, we may not have sufficient assets to repay that
indebtedness. As a result of these restrictions, we may be:
Ÿ  limited in how we conduct our business;
Ÿ  unable to raise additional debt or equity financing to operate during general economic or business downturns;
or
Ÿ  unable to compete effectively or to take advantage of new business opportunities.
In addition, our hedge agreements with J. Aron & Company and Macquarie Bank Limited contain a number of
restrictive covenants that limit our ability to, among other things, incur, assume or guarantee funded debt that
is secured by a priority lien or sell all or any portion of the refinery. A breach of any of the covenants under
these hedge agreements could result in an event of default. Such default allows the counterparties to
terminate all outstanding transactions governed by the hedge agreements. If we are unable to find a
replacement counterparty for our crack spread hedge agreements, such a termination will limit our capacity to
hedge our crack spread risk with respect to any portion of the refinery’s projected monthly production of
some or all of its refined products.
These restrictions may affect our ability to grow in accordance with our plans.
We are a holding company and depend upon our subsidiaries for our cash flow.
We are a holding company. All of our operations are conducted and all of our assets are owned by our
subsidiaries. Consequently, our cash flow and our ability to meet our obligations or to make distributions to
our unitholders in the future will depend upon the cash flow of our subsidiaries and the payment of funds by
our subsidiaries to us in the form of dividends or otherwise. The ability of our subsidiaries to make any
payments to us will depend on their respective earnings, the terms of their indebtedness, including the terms
of any credit facilities and indentures, and legal restrictions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
39
Risks Primarily Related to Our Refining Business
The price volatility of crude oil, other feedstocks, refined products and fuel and utility services may have a
material adverse effect on our earnings, cash flows and liquidity and our ability to make distributions to our
unitholders.
Our refining and retail earnings, cash flows and liquidity from operations depend primarily on the margin
above operating expenses (including the cost of refinery feedstocks, such as crude oil and natural gas liquids
that are processed and blended into refined products) at which we are able to sell refined products. Refining
is primarily a margin-based business and, to increase earnings, it is important to maximize the yields of high
value finished products while minimizing the costs of feedstock and operating expenses. When the margin
between refined product prices and crude oil and other feedstock costs contracts, our earnings, and cash
flows are negatively affected. Refining margins historically have been volatile, and are likely to continue to be
volatile, as a result of a variety of factors, including fluctuations in the prices of crude oil, other feedstocks,
refined products and fuel and utility services. For example, from January 2005 to March 2012, the price for
NYMEX WTI crude oil fluctuated between $33.87 and $145.29 per barrel, while the price for U.S. Gulf Coast
conventional gasoline fluctuated between $39.16 per barrel and $140.08 per barrel. While an increase or
decrease in the price of crude oil may result in a similar increase or decrease in prices for refined products,
there may be a time lag in the realization of the similar increase or decrease in prices for refined products.
The effect of changes in crude oil prices on our refining margins therefore depends in part on how quickly
and how fully refined product prices adjust to reflect these changes.
In addition, the nature of our business requires us to maintain substantial refined product inventories.
Because refined products are commodities, we have no control over the changing market value of these
inventories. Our refined product inventory is valued at the lower of cost or market value under the last-in, first-
out (“LIFO”), inventory valuation methodology. If the market value of our refined product inventory were to
decline to an amount less than our LIFO cost, we would record a write-down of inventory and a non-cash
charge to cost of sales.
Prices of crude oil, other feedstocks and refined products depend on numerous factors beyond our control,
including the supply of and demand for crude oil, other feedstocks, gasoline, diesel, asphalt and other refined
products. Such supply and demand are affected by, among other things:
Ÿ  changes in global and local economic conditions;
Ÿ  domestic and foreign demand for fuel products, especially in the United States, China and India;
Ÿ  worldwide political conditions, particularly in significant oil producing regions such as the Middle East, West
Africa and Latin America;
Ÿ  the level of foreign and domestic production of crude oil and refined products and the volume of crude oil,
feedstock and refined products imported into the United States;
Ÿ  availability of and access to transportation infrastructure;
Ÿ  utilization rates of U.S. refineries;
Ÿ  the ability of the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) to affect oil prices
and maintain production controls;
Ÿ  development and marketing of alternative and competing fuels;
Ÿ  commodities speculation;
Ÿ  natural disasters (such as hurricanes and tornadoes), accidents, interruptions in transportation, inclement
weather or other events that can cause unscheduled shutdowns or otherwise adversely affect our refineries;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
40
Ÿ  federal and state government regulations and taxes; and
Ÿ  local factors, including market conditions, weather conditions and the level of operations of other refineries
and pipelines in our markets.
Our direct operating expense structure also impacts our earnings. Our major direct operating expenses
include employee and contract labor, maintenance and energy costs. Our predominant variable direct
operating cost is energy, which is comprised primarily of fuel and other utility services. The volatility in costs
of fuel, principally natural gas, and other utility services, principally electricity, used by our refinery and other
operations affect our operating costs. Fuel and utility prices have been, and will continue to be, affected by
factors outside our control, such as supply and demand for fuel and utility services in both local and regional
markets. Natural gas prices have historically been volatile and, typically, electricity prices fluctuate with
natural gas prices. Future increases in fuel and utility prices may have a negative effect on our earnings and
cash flows. Fuel and other utility services costs constituted approximately 14.2% and 13.3% of our total direct
operating expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011,
respectively.
Volatility in refined product prices also affects our borrowing base under our revolving credit facility. A
decline in prices of our refined products reduces the value of our refined product inventory collateral, which,
in turn, may reduce the amount available for us to borrow under our revolving credit facility.
Our results of operations are affected by crude oil differentials, which may fluctuate substantially.
Our results of operations are affected by crude oil differentials, which may fluctuate substantially. Since 2010,
refined product prices have been more correlated to prices of Brent than to NYMEX WTI, the traditional U.S.
crude oil benchmark, as the discount to which a barrel of NYMEX WTI traded relative to a barrel of Brent has
widened significantly relative to historical levels. This differential has also been very volatile as a result of
various continuing geopolitical events as well as logistical and infrastructure constraints to move crude oil
from Cushing, Oklahoma into the U.S. Gulf Coast. Between December 1, 2010 and March 31, 2012, the
discount at which a barrel of NYMEX WTI traded relative to a barrel of Brent increased from $2.12 to $19.86.
The widening of this price differential benefited refineries, such as ours, that are capable of sourcing and
utilizing crude oil that is priced more in line with NYMEX WTI. The refinery not only realized relatively lower
feedstock costs but also was able to sell refined products at prices that had been pushed upward by higher
Brent prices. The discount has since decreased to $14.26 as of June 28, 2012. This decrease is partially
attributable to the announcement during the fourth quarter of 2011 of the reversal of the Seaway Pipeline,
which will carry crude oil from Cushing, Oklahoma to Freeport, Louisiana. The initial phase of the Seaway
Pipeline reversal came onstream on May 17, 2012. Further narrowing of the differential may have a material
adverse effect on our business and results from operations and our ability to pay distributions.
The dangers inherent in our operations could cause disruptions and could expose us to potentially significant
losses, costs or liabilities and reduce our liquidity. We are particularly vulnerable to disruptions in our
operations because all of our refining operations are conducted at a single facility.
Our operations are subject to significant hazards and risks inherent in refining operations and in transporting
and storing crude oil, intermediate products and refined products. These hazards and risks include, but are
not limited to, natural disasters, fires, explosions, pipeline ruptures and spills, third party interference and
mechanical failure of equipment at our facilities, any of which could result in production and distribution
difficulties and disruptions, pollution (such as oil spills, etc.), personal injury
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
41
or wrongful death claims and other damage to our properties and the property of others. For example, in
December 2007, a fuel oil tank roof caught on fire at our refinery when an operator was attempting to thaw a
level gauge. The tank’s roof was destroyed and the operator was fatally injured during the fire.
There is also risk of mechanical failure and equipment shutdowns both in the normal course of operations
and following unforeseen events. In such situations, undamaged refinery processing units may be dependent
on, or interact with, damaged process units and, accordingly, are also subject to being shut down. For
example, on May 6, 2012, our refinery experienced a temporary shutdown due to a power outage that appears
to have originated from outside the plant as a result of high winds and thunderstorms. In the case of such a
shutdown, the refinery must initiate a standard start-up process, and such process typically lasts several
days. We were able to resume normal operations on May 13, 2012. Because all of our refining operations are
conducted at a single refinery, any of such events at our refinery could significantly disrupt our production
and distribution of refined products, including the supply of our refined products to our convenience stores,
which receive substantially all of their supply of gasoline and diesel from the refinery. Any disruption in our
ability to supply our convenience stores would increase the cost of purchasing refined products for our retail
business. Any sustained disruption would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
We are subject to interruptions of supply and distribution as a result of our reliance on pipelines for
transportation of crude oil, blendstocks and refined products.
Our refinery receives most of its crude oil and delivers a portion of its refined products through pipelines. The
Minnesota Pipeline system is our primary supply route for crude oil and has transported substantially all of
the crude oil used at our refinery. We also distribute a portion of our transportation fuels through pipelines
owned and operated by Magellan Pipeline Company, L.P. (“Magellan”), including the Aranco Pipeline, which
Magellan leases from us. We could experience an interruption of supply or delivery, or an increased cost of
receiving crude oil and delivering refined products to market, if the ability of these pipelines to transport
crude oil, blendstocks or refined products is disrupted because of accidents, weather interruptions,
governmental regulation, terrorism, other third party action or any of the types of events described in the
preceding risk factor. For example, there was a leak in 2006 prior to the completion of the expansion of the
Minnesota Pipeline, and the refinery was temporarily shut off from any receipts from the Minnesota Pipeline
other than crude oil that was already in the tanks at Cottage Grove, Minnesota. At that time, the only
alternative to receive crude oil was the Wood River Pipeline, a pipeline extending from Wood River, Illinois to
a connection with the Minnesota Pipeline near Pine Bend, Minnesota, which had limited capacity to meet the
refinery’s needs. While the refinery can receive crude oil deliveries from the Wood River Pipeline if the
Minnesota Pipeline system experiences another disruption, this would result in an increase in the cost of
crude oil and therefore lower refining margins.
In addition, due to the common carrier regulatory obligation applicable to interstate oil pipelines, capacity
must be prorated among shippers in an equitable manner in accordance with the tariff then in effect in the
event there are nominations in excess of capacity. Therefore, nominations by new shippers or increased
nominations by existing shippers may reduce the capacity available to us. Any prolonged interruption in the
operation or curtailment of available capacity of the pipelines that we rely upon for transportation of crude oil
and refined products could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
42
We must make substantial capital expenditures on our operating facilities to maintain their reliability and
efficiency. If we are unable to complete capital projects at their expected costs and/or in a timely manner, or if
the market conditions assumed in our project economics deteriorate, our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows, and our ability to make distributions to unitholders, could be materially and
adversely affected.
Delays or cost increases related to the engineering, procurement and construction of new facilities (or
improvements and repairs to our existing facilities and equipment) could have a material adverse effect on
our business, financial condition or results of operations, and our ability to make distributions to our
unitholders. Such delays or cost increases may arise as a result of unpredictable factors in the marketplace,
many of which are beyond our control, including:
Ÿ  denial or delay in issuing regulatory approvals and/or permits;
Ÿ  unplanned increases in the cost of construction materials or labor;
Ÿ  disruptions in transportation of modular components and/or construction materials;
Ÿ  severe adverse weather conditions, natural disasters or other events (such as equipment malfunctions,
explosions, fires or spills) affecting our facilities, or those of our vendors and suppliers;
Ÿ  shortages of sufficiently skilled labor, or labor disagreements resulting in unplanned work stoppages;
Ÿ  market-related increases in a project’s debt or equity financing costs; and/or
Ÿ  nonperformance or force majeure by, or disputes with, our vendors, suppliers, contractors or sub-contractors.
Our refinery consists of many processing units, a number of which have been in operation for many years.
Equipment, even if properly maintained, may require significant capital expenditures and expenses to keep it
operating at optimum efficiency. For example, as part of installing safety instrumentation systems throughout
the refinery to improve operational and safety performance, approximately $17 million was spent from 2006
through March 2012, and we have budgeted for additional related expenditures through 2013 to complete the
instrumentation project. One or more of the units may require unscheduled downtime for unanticipated
maintenance or repairs that may be more frequent than our scheduled turnarounds for such units. Scheduled
and unscheduled maintenance could reduce our revenues during the period of time that the units are not
operating. Our next major turnaround is scheduled for 2013 for which we have budgeted approximately
$50 million. While we are still finalizing our planning for this turnaround, we currently expect the refinery to
be shut down during the month of April 2013 to complete the turnaround. We do not intend to reserve cash to
pay distributions during periods of scheduled or unscheduled maintenance, though we do intend to reserve
for turnaround expenses.
Any one or more of these occurrences could have a significant impact on our business. If we were unable to
make up the delays or to recover the related costs, or if market conditions change, it could materially and
adversely affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows and, as a result, our ability to make
distributions.
A portion of our workforce is unionized, and we may face labor disruptions that would interfere with our
operations.
Approximately 179 of our employees associated with the operations of our refining business are covered by a
collective bargaining agreement that expires in December 2013. In addition, 20 of our employees associated
with the operations of our retail business are covered by a collective bargaining agreement that expires in
August 2012. We may not be able to renegotiate our collective bargaining
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
43
agreements on satisfactory terms or at all when such agreements expire. A failure to do so may increase our
costs associated with our workforce. Other employees of ours who are not presently represented by a union
may become so represented in the future as well. In 2006, the unionized refinery employees conducted a
strike when Marathon sought to revise certain working terms and conditions. Another work stoppage resulting
from, among other things, a dispute over a term or condition of a collective bargaining agreement that covers
employees who work at our refinery or in our retail business, could cause disruptions in our business and
negatively impact our results of operations and ability to make distributions.
Product liability claims and litigation could adversely affect our business and results of operations.
Product liability is a significant commercial risk. Substantial damage awards have been made in certain
jurisdictions against manufacturers and resellers based upon claims for injuries caused by the use of or
exposure to various products. Failure of our products to meet required specifications could result in product
liability claims from our shippers and customers arising from contaminated or off-specification commingled
pipelines and storage tanks and/or defective quality fuels. There can be no assurance that product liability
claims against us would not have a material adverse effect on our business or results of operations and on
our ability to make distributions.
Laws and regulations restricting emissions of greenhouse gases could force us to incur increased capital and
operating costs and could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
In December 2009, the EPA determined that emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and other “greenhouse
gases” (“GHGs”) endanger public health and the environment because emissions of such gases are,
according to the EPA, contributing to warming of the earth’s atmosphere and other climatic changes. Based
on these findings, the EPA has begun adopting and implementing regulations to restrict emissions of GHGs
under existing provisions of the federal Clean Air Act, as amended (“CAA”). The EPA adopted two sets of
rules effective January 2, 2011 regulating GHG emissions under the CAA, one of which requires a reduction in
emissions of GHGs from motor vehicles and the other of which regulates emissions of GHGs from certain
large stationary sources. While the EPA’s rules relating to emissions of GHGs from large stationary sources
of emissions are currently subject to a number of legal challenges, the federal courts have thus far declined to
issue any injunctions to prevent the EPA from implementing or requiring state environmental agencies to
implement the rules. The EPA has also implemented rules requiring the reporting of GHG emissions from
specified large GHG emission sources in the United States, including petroleum refineries, on an annual
basis, for emissions occurring after January 1, 2010.
In addition, the U.S. Congress has from time to time considered adopting legislation to reduce emissions of
GHGs, and almost one-half of the states have already taken legal measures to reduce emissions of GHGs
primarily through the planned development of GHG emission inventories and/or regional GHG cap and trade
programs. These cap and trade programs generally work by requiring major sources of emissions, such as
electric power plants, or major producers of fuels, such as refineries and gas processing plants, to acquire
and on an annual basis surrender emission allowances. The number of allowances available for purchase is
reduced over time in an effort to achieve the overall GHG emission reduction goal. Minnesota is a participant
in the Midwest Regional GHG Reduction Accord, a non-binding resolution that could lead to the creation of a
regional GHG cap-and-trade program if the Minnesota legislature and the legislatures of other participating
states enact implementing legislation.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
44
The adoption of legislation or regulatory programs to reduce emissions of GHGs could require us to incur
increased operating costs, such as costs to purchase and operate emissions control systems, to acquire
emissions allowances or comply with new regulatory or reporting requirements. Any such legislation or
regulatory programs could also increase the cost of consuming, and thereby reduce demand for, the refined
products that we produce. Consequently, legislation and regulatory programs to reduce emissions of GHGs
could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations and, as a result,
our ability to make distributions.
In addition, some scientists have concluded that increasing concentrations of GHGs in the Earth’s
atmosphere may produce climate changes that have significant physical effects, such as increased frequency
and severity of storms, droughts, floods and other climatic events. If any such events were to occur, they
could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations and and, as a
result, our ability to make distributions.
Renewable fuels mandates may reduce demand for the petroleum fuels we produce, which could have a
material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition, and our ability to make
distributions to our unitholders.
Pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, the EPA
has issued Renewable Fuels Standards (“RFS”) implementing mandates to blend renewable fuels into the
petroleum fuels produced and sold in the United States. Under RFS, the volume of renewable fuels that
obligated refineries like us must blend into their finished petroleum fuels increases annually over time until
2022. We currently purchase renewable identification number credits (“RINS”) for some fuel categories on the
open market, as well as waiver credits for cellulosic biofuels from the EPA, in order to comply with the RFS.
In the future, we may be required to purchase additional RINS on the open market and waiver credits from the
EPA to comply with the RFS. We cannot currently predict the future prices of RINS or waiver credits, but the
costs to obtain the necessary number of RINS and waiver credits could be material. Additionally, Minnesota
law currently requires that all diesel sold in the state for use in internal combustion engines must contain at
least 5% biodiesel. Under this statute, if certain preconditions are met, the minimum biodiesel content in
diesel sold in the state will increase to 10% beginning on May 1, 2012, and to 20% beginning on May 1, 2015.
The increase to 10% did not occur on May 1, 2012, because the Minnesota commissioners of agriculture,
commerce, and pollution control did not certify that all statutory pre-conditions were satisfied by the statutory
deadline, but instead jointly recommended delaying the increase to 10% by one year, to May 1, 2013.
Minnesota law also currently requires, with limited exceptions, that all gasoline sold or offered for sale in the
state must contain the maximum amount of ethanol allowed under federal law for use in all gasoline-powered
motor vehicles. On October 13, 2010, the EPA raised the maximum amount of ethanol allowed under federal
law from 10% to 15% for cars and light trucks manufactured since 2007, and on January 21, 2011, EPA
extended the maximum allowable ethanol content of 15% to apply to cars and light trucks manufactured since
2001. The maximum amount allowed under federal law currently remains at 10% ethanol for all other vehicles.
Existing laws and regulations could change, and the minimum volumes of renewable fuels that must be
blended with refined petroleum fuels may increase. Because we do not produce renewable fuels, increasing
the volume of renewable fuels that must be blended into our products displaces an increasing volume of our
refinery’s product pool, potentially resulting in lower earnings and materially adversely affecting our ability to
make distributions.
Our pipeline interests are subject to federal and/or state rate regulation, which could reduce
our profitability.
Our transportation activities are subject to regulation by multiple governmental agencies, and compliance
with such regulation increases our cost of doing business and affects our profitability. Additional proposals
and proceedings that affect the oil industry are regularly considered by Congress,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
45
the states, FERC and the courts. We cannot predict when or whether any such proposals may become
effective or what impact such proposals may have. Projected expenditures related to the Minnesota Pipeline
reflect the recurring costs resulting from compliance with these regulations, and these costs may increase
due to future acquisitions, changes in regulation, changes in use, ongoing expenditures to maintain reliability
and efficiency or discovery of existing but unknown compliance issues. In addition, if the current lease with
Magellan of the Aranco Pipeline were terminated and we were to operate the Aranco Pipeline or, if the Cottage
Grove pipelines were required to comply with these regulations, we would incur similar costs.
The Minnesota Pipeline is a common carrier pipeline providing interstate transportation service, which is
subject to regulation by FERC under the Interstate Commerce Act (“ICA”). The ICA requires that tariff rates for
interstate petroleum pipelines transportation service be just and reasonable and that the rates and terms of
service of such pipelines not be unduly discriminatory or unduly preferential. The tariff rates are generally set
by the board of managers of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company, which we do not control. Because we
currently do not operate the Minnesota Pipeline or control the board of managers of the Minnesota Pipe Line
Company, we do not control how the Minnesota Pipeline’s tariff is applied, including the tariff provisions
governing the allocation of capacity, or control of decision-making with respect to tariff changes for the
pipeline.
FERC can investigate the pipeline’s rates and certain terms of service on its own initiative. In addition,
shippers may file with FERC protests against new tariff rates and/or terms and conditions of service or
complaints against existing tariff rates and/or terms and conditions of services. Under certain circumstances,
FERC could limit the Minnesota Pipe Line Company’s ability to set rates based on its costs, or could order
the Minnesota Pipe Line Company to reduce its rates and could require the payment of reparations to
complaining shippers for up to two years prior to the complaint or refunds to all shippers in the context of a
protest proceeding. If it found the Minnesota Pipeline’s rates or terms of service to be contrary to statutory
requirements, FERC could impose conditions it considers appropriate and/or impose penalties. Further,
FERC could declare pipeline-related facilities to be common carrier facilities and require that common carrier
access be provided or otherwise alter the terms of service and/or rates of such facilities, to the extent
applicable. Rate regulation or a successful challenge to the rates the Minnesota Pipeline charges could
adversely affect its financial position, cash flows, or results of operations and, thus, our financial position,
cash flows or results of operations. Conversely, reduced rates on the Minnesota Pipeline would reduce the
rates for transportation of crude oil into our refinery.
FERC currently allows petroleum pipelines to change their rates within prescribed ceiling levels tied to an
inflation index. The Minnesota Pipeline currently bases its rates on the indexing methodology. If the
Minnesota Pipeline were to attempt to increase rates beyond the maximum allowed by the indexing
methodology, it would be required to file a cost-of-service justification, obtain approval from an unaffiliated
party that intends to ship on the pipeline (with respect to initial rates for any new service), obtain approval
from all current shippers (i.e., settlement), or obtain prior approval to file market-based rates. FERC’s
indexing methodology is subject to review every five years. In an order issued in December 2010, FERC
announced that, effective July 1, 2011, the index would equal the change in the producer price index for
finished goods plus 2.65% (previously, the index was equal to the change in the producer price index for
finished goods plus 1.3%). This index is to be in effect through July 2016. If the increases in the index are not
sufficient to fully reflect actual increases to our costs, our financial condition could be adversely affected. If
the index results in a rate increase that is substantially in excess of the pipeline’s actual cost increases, or it
results in a rate decrease that is substantially less than the pipeline’s actual cost decrease, the rates may be
protested, and, if such protests are successful, result in the lowering of the pipeline’s rates. FERC’s rate-
making methodologies may limit the pipeline’s ability to set rates based on our true costs and may delay or
limit the use of rates that reflect increased costs of providing transportation service.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
46
If we were to operate the Aranco Pipeline to provide transportation of crude oil or petroleum products in
interstate commerce, we would expect to also be regulated by FERC as an interstate oil pipeline and the
Aranco Pipeline would be subject to the same regulatory risks discussed above.
Terrorist attacks and other acts of violence or war may affect the market for our units, the industry in which we
conduct our operations and our results of operations and our ability to make distributions to our unitholders.
Terrorist attacks may harm our business results of operations. We cannot provide assurance that there will
not be further terrorist attacks against the United States or U.S. businesses. Such attacks or armed conflicts
may directly impact our refinery, properties or the securities markets in general. More generally, any of these
events could cause consumer confidence and spending to decrease or result in increased volatility in the
United States and worldwide financial markets and economy. Adverse economic conditions could harm the
demand for our products or the securities markets in general, which could harm our operating results and
ability to make distributions.
While we have insurance that provides some coverage against terrorist attacks, such insurance has become
increasingly expensive and difficult to obtain. As a result, insurance providers may not continue to offer this
coverage to us on terms that we consider affordable, or at all.
Some of our operations are conducted with partners, which may decrease our ability to manage risks
associated with those operations.
We sometimes enter into arrangements to conduct certain business operations, such as pipeline
transportation, with partners in order to share risks associated with those operations. However, these
arrangements may also decrease our ability to manage risks and costs associated with those operations,
particularly where we are not the operator. We could have limited influence over and control of the behaviors
and performance of these operations. This could affect our operational performance, financial position and
reputation.
We own 17% of the outstanding common interests of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and 17% of the
outstanding preferred shares of MPL Investments, Inc. which owns 100% of the preferred units of the
Minnesota Pipe Line Company. The Minnesota Pipe Line Company owns the Minnesota Pipeline, a crude oil
pipeline system in Minnesota that transports crude oil to the Twin Cities area and which consistently
transports most of our crude oil input. The remaining interests in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company are held
by a subsidiary of Koch Industries, Inc., which operates the system and is an affiliate of the only other refinery
owner in Minnesota, with a 74.16% interest, and TROF Inc. with an 8.84% interest. For more information about
the economic effect of our investments in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and MPL Investments, see
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Critical
Accounting Policies and Estimates” and “—Results of Operations.” Because our investments in the
Minnesota Pipe Line Company and MPL Investments are limited, we do not have significant influence over or
control of the performance of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company’s operations, which could impact our
operational performance, financial position and reputation.
If we are unable to obtain our crude oil supply without the benefit of the crude oil supply and logistics
agreement with JPM CCC or similar agreement, our exposure to the risks associated with volatile crude oil
prices may increase.
Our supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC allows us to price all crude oil processed at the refinery
one day after it is received at the plant. This arrangement minimizes the amount of in-transit inventory and
reduces our exposure to fluctuations in crude oil prices. In excess of 90% of the crude oil delivered at the
refinery is handled through our agreement with JPM CCC independent of
Table of Contents
47
Index to Financial Statements
whether crude oil is sourced from our suppliers or from JPM CCC directly. If we are unable to obtain our
crude oil supply through the crude oil supply and logistics agreement or similar agreement, our exposure to
crude oil pricing risks may increase as the number of days between when we pay for the crude oil and when
the crude oil is delivered to us increases. Such increased exposure could negatively impact our liquidity
position due to our increased working capital needs as a result of the increase in the value of crude oil
inventory we would have to carry on our balance sheet and, therefore, could adversely affect our ability to
make distributions.
Our suppliers source a substantial amount of our crude oil from the Bakken Shale of North Dakota and may
experience interruptions of supply from that region.
Our suppliers source a substantial amount of our crude oil from the Bakken Shale of North Dakota. As a
result, we may be disproportionately exposed to the impact of delays or interruptions of supply from that
region caused by transportation capacity constraints, curtailment of production, unavailability of equipment,
facilities, personnel or services, significant governmental regulation, natural disasters, adverse weather
conditions, plant closures for scheduled maintenance or interruption of transportation of oil or natural gas
produced from the wells in that area.
Our commodity derivative contracts may limit our potential gains, exacerbate potential losses and involve
other risks.
We may enter into commodity derivatives contracts to mitigate our crack spread risk with respect to a portion
of our expected gasoline and diesel production. We enter into these arrangements with the intent to secure a
minimum fixed cash flow stream on the volume of products hedged during the hedge term. However, our
hedging arrangements may fail to fully achieve these objectives for a variety of reasons, including our failure
to have adequate hedging contracts, if any, in effect at any particular time and the failure of our hedging
arrangements to produce the anticipated results. We may not be able to procure adequate hedging
arrangements due to a variety of factors. Moreover, while intended to reduce the adverse effects of
fluctuations in crude oil and refined product prices, such transactions may limit our ability to benefit from
favorable changes in margins. In addition, our hedging activities may expose us to the risk of financial loss in
certain circumstances, including instances in which:
Ÿ  the volumes of our actual use of crude oil or production of the applicable refined products is less than the
volumes subject to the hedging arrangement;
Ÿ  accidents, interruptions in feedstock transportation, inclement weather or other events cause unscheduled
shutdowns or otherwise adversely affect our refinery, or those of our suppliers or customers;
Ÿ  the counterparties to our futures contracts fail to perform under the contracts; or
Ÿ  a sudden, unexpected event materially impacts the commodity or crack spread subject to the hedging
arrangement.
As a result, the effectiveness of our risk mitigation strategy could have a material adverse impact on our
financial results and our ability to make distributions. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk.”
In addition, these risk mitigation activities involve basis risk. Basis risk in a hedging arrangement occurs
when the price of the commodity we hedge is more or less variable than the index upon which the hedged
commodity is based, thereby making the hedge less effective. For example, a NYMEX index used for hedging
certain volumes of crude oil or refined products may have more or less variability than the cost or price for
such crude oil or refined products. We do not expect to hedge the basis risk inherent in our derivatives
contracts.
48
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Our commodity derivative activities could result in period-to-period earnings volatility.
We do not apply hedge accounting to our commodity derivative contracts and, as a result, unrealized gains
and losses are charged to our earnings based on the increase or decrease in the market value of the unsettled
position. These gains and losses are reflected in our income statement in periods that differ from when the
underlying hedged items (i.e., gross margins) are reflected in our income statement. Such derivative gains or
losses in earnings may produce significant period-to-period earnings volatility that is not necessarily
reflective of our underlying operational performance.
Derivatives regulation included in current financial reform legislation could impede our ability to manage
business and financial risks by restricting our use of derivative instruments as hedges against fluctuating
commodity prices.
The U.S. Congress adopted the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act in 2010 (the
“Dodd-Frank Act”). This comprehensive financial reform legislation establishes federal oversight and
regulation of the over-the-counter derivatives market and entities, such as us, that participate in that market.
The legislation was signed into law by the President on July 21, 2010 and requires the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (“CFTC”) and the SEC to promulgate rules and regulations implementing the new
legislation within 360 days from the date of enactment. In December 2011, the CFTC extended temporary
exemptive relief from the deadline for certain regulations applicable to swaps until no later than July 16, 2012.
The CFTC has since adopted regulations to set position limits for certain futures and option contracts in the
major energy markets. The CFTC has also proposed to establish minimum capital requirements, although it is
not possible at this time to predict whether or when the CFTC will adopt these rules as proposed or include
comparable provisions in its rulemaking under the Dodd-Frank Act. The Dodd-Frank Act may also require
compliance with margin requirements and with certain clearing and trade-execution requirements in
connection with certain derivative activities, although the application of those provisions is uncertain at this
time. The legislation may also require the counterparties to our commodity derivative contracts to spinoff
some of their derivatives activities to a separate entity, which may not be as creditworthy as the current
counterparty, or cause the entity to comply with the capital requirements, which could result in increased
costs to counterparties such as us.
The Dodd-Frank Act and any new regulations could significantly increase the cost of some commodity
derivative contracts (including through requirements to post collateral, which could adversely affect our
available liquidity), materially alter the terms of some commodity derivative contracts, reduce the availability
of some derivatives to protect against risks we encounter, reduce our ability to monetize or restructure our
existing commodity derivative contracts and potentially increase our exposure to less creditworthy
counterparties. If we reduce our use of derivatives as a result of the Dodd-Frank Act and any new regulations,
our results of operations may become more volatile and our cash flows may be less predictable, which could
adversely affect our ability to make distributions or plan for and fund capital expenditures. Increased volatility
may make us less attractive to certain types of investors. Finally, the Dodd-Frank Act was intended, in part, to
reduce the volatility of oil and natural gas prices, which some legislators attributed to speculative trading in
derivatives and commodity instruments related to oil and natural gas. If the Dodd-Frank Act and any new
regulations result in lower commodity prices, our revenues could be adversely affected. Any of these
consequences could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations and therefore
could have an adverse effect on our ability to make distributions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
49
Risks Primarily Related to Our Retail Business
Our retail business depends on one principal supplier for a substantial portion of its merchandise inventory.
A change of merchandise suppliers, a disruption in merchandise supply, a significant change in our
relationship with our principal merchandise supplier or material changes in the payment terms or availability
of trade credit provided by our merchandise suppliers could have a material adverse effect on our retail
business and results of operations or liquidity.
Eby-Brown Company (“Eby-Brown”) is a wholesale grocer that has been the primary supplier of general
merchandise, including most tobacco and grocery items, for all our retail stores since 1993. For the three
months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, our retail business purchased
approximately 75% of its convenience store inside merchandise requirements from Eby-Brown. Our retail
business also purchases a variety of merchandise, including soda, beer, bread, dairy products, ice cream and
snack foods, directly from a number of manufacturers and their wholesalers. A change of merchandise
suppliers, a disruption in merchandise supply or a significant change in our relationship with Eby-Brown
could have a material adverse effect on our retail business and results of operations. In addition, our retail
business is impacted by the availability of trade credit to fund merchandise purchases. Any material changes
in the payments terms, including payment discounts, or availability of trade credit provided by our
merchandise suppliers could adversely affect our liquidity or results of operations and, as a result, our ability
to make distributions.
If the locations of our current convenience stores become unattractive to customers and attractive alternative
locations are not available for a reasonable price, then our ability to maintain and grow our retail business
will be adversely affected.
We believe that the success of any retail store depends in substantial part on its location. There can be no
assurance that the locations of our retail stores will continue to be attractive to customers as demographic
patterns change. Neighborhood or economic conditions where retail stores are located could decline in the
future, resulting in potentially reduced sales in these locations. If we cannot obtain desirable locations at
reasonable prices, our ability to maintain and grow our retail business could be adversely affected, which
could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations and, as a result, our
ability to make distributions.
The growth of our retail business depends in part on our ability to open and profitably operate new
convenience stores and to successfully integrate acquired sites and businesses in the future.
We may not be able to open new convenience stores and any new stores we open may be unprofitable.
Additionally, acquiring sites and businesses in the future involves risks that could cause our actual growth or
operating results to be lower than expected. If these events were to occur, each would have a material adverse
impact on our financial results. There are several factors that could affect our ability to open and profitably
operate new stores or to successfully integrate acquired sites and businesses. These factors include:
Ÿ  competition in targeted market areas;
Ÿ  difficulties during the acquisition process in discovering certain liabilities of the businesses that we acquire;
Ÿ  the inability to identify and acquire suitable sites or to negotiate acceptable leases for such sites;
Ÿ  difficulties associated with the growth of our financial controls, information systems, management resources
and human resources needed to support our future growth;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
50
Ÿ  difficulties with hiring, training and retaining skilled personnel, including store managers;
Ÿ  difficulties in adapting distribution and other operational and management systems to an expanded network of
stores;
Ÿ  the potential inability to obtain adequate financing to fund our expansion;
Ÿ  limitations on investments contained in our revolving credit facility and other debt instruments;
Ÿ  difficulties in obtaining governmental and other third-party consents, permits and licenses needed to operate
additional stores;
Ÿ  difficulties in obtaining any cost savings, accretion and financial improvements anticipated from future
acquired stores or their integration; and
Ÿ  challenges associated with the consummation and integration of any future acquisition.
Our retail store franchisees are independent business operators that could take actions that harm our brand,
reputation or goodwill, which could adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition or
cash flows.
Our retail store franchisees are independent business operators, not employees, and, as such, we cannot
control their operations. These franchisees could hire and fail to train unqualified sales associates and other
employees, or operate the franchised retail stores in a manner inconsistent with our operating standards. If
our retail store franchisees provide diminished quality of service to customers, or if they engage or are
accused of engaging in unlawful or tortious acts, such as sexual harassment or discriminatory practices in
violation of applicable laws, then our brand, reputation or goodwill could be harmed, which could have an
adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows and, as a result, our
ability to make distributions.
Additionally, as independent business operators, our retail store franchisees could occasionally disagree with
us or with our strategies regarding our retail business or with our interpretation of the rights and obligations
set forth under our retail franchise agreement. This could lead to disputes with our retail store franchisees,
which we expect to occur from time to time in the future as we continue to offer and sell retail store
franchises. To the extent we have such disputes, the attention of our management and our retail store
franchisees could be diverted, which could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations,
financial condition or cash flows and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
Credit and debit card data loss, litigation and/or liability could significantly harm our reputation and adversely
impact our business.
In connection with credit and debit card sales at our retail stores, we transmit confidential credit and debit
card information securely over public networks. Third parties may have the technology or know-how to
breach the security of this customer information, and our security measures may not effectively prohibit
others from obtaining improper access to this information. If a person is able to circumvent our security
measures, he or she could destroy or steal valuable information or disrupt our operations. Any security
breach could expose us to risks of data loss, litigation and liability and could seriously disrupt our operations
and any resulting negative publicity could significantly harm our reputation.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
51
Our failure or inability to enforce our current and future trademarks and trade names could adversely affect
our efforts to establish brand equity and expand our retail franchising business.
Our ability to successfully expand our retail franchising business will depend on our ability to establish brand
equity through the use of our current and future trademarks, service marks, trade dress and other proprietary
intellectual property, including our name and logos. Some or all of these intellectual property rights may not
be enforceable, even if registered, against any prior users of similar intellectual property or our competitors
who seek to use similar intellectual property in areas where we operate or intend to conduct operations. If we
fail to enforce any of our intellectual property rights, then we may be unable to capitalize on our efforts to
establish brand equity.
We could encounter claims from prior users of similar intellectual property in areas where we operate or
intend to conduct operations, which could result in additional expenditures and divert our management’s
time and attention from our operations. Conversely, competing businesses, including any of our former retail
store franchisees, could infringe on our intellectual property, which would necessarily require us to defend
our intellectual property possibly at a significant cost to us.
Our retail business is vulnerable to changes in consumer preferences, economic conditions and other trends
and factors that could harm our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
Our retail business is affected by consumer preferences, national, regional and local economic conditions,
demographic trends and consumer confidence in the economy. Factors such as traffic patterns, weather
conditions, local demographics and the number and locations of competing retail service stations and
convenience stores also affect the performance of our retail stores. In addition, we cannot ensure that our
retail customers will continue to frequent our retail stores or that we will be able to find new retail store
franchisees or encourage our existing retail store franchisees to grow their franchised business or renew their
franchise rights. Adverse changes in any of these trends or factors could reduce our retail customer traffic or
sales, or impose limits on our pricing, which could adversely affect our business, results of operations,
financial condition or cash flows and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
We face the risk of litigation in connection with our retail operations.
We are from time to time the subject of complaints or litigation from our consumers alleging illness, injury or
other health or operational concerns. Adverse publicity resulting from these allegations may materially
adversely affect us and our brand, regardless of whether the allegations are valid or whether we are liable. In
addition, employee claims against us based on, among other things, discrimination, harassment or wrongful
termination, or labor code violations may divert financial and management resources that would otherwise be
used to benefit our future performance. There is also a risk of litigation from our franchisees. We have been
subject to a variety of these and other claims from time to time and a significant increase in the number of
these claims or the number that are successful could materially adversely affect our business, prospects,
financial condition, operating results or cash flows and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
Failure of our retail business to comply with state and local laws regulating the sale of alcohol and tobacco
products could result in the loss of necessary licenses and the imposition of fines and penalties on us, which
could have a material adverse effect on our business, liquidity and results of operations.
State and local laws regulate the sale of alcohol and tobacco products. In certain areas where our stores are
located, state or local laws limit the hours of operation for the sale of alcohol, or prohibit the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
52
sale of alcohol, and permit the sale of alcohol and tobacco products only to persons older than a certain age.
State and local regulatory agencies have the authority to approve, revoke, suspend or deny applications for,
and renewals of, permits and licenses relating to the sale of alcohol and tobacco products and to issue fines
to stores for the improper sale of alcohol and tobacco products. Most jurisdictions, in their permit and license
applications, require an applicant to disclose past denials, suspensions, or revocations of permits or licenses
relating to the sale of alcohol and tobacco products in any jurisdiction. Thus, if we experience a denial,
suspension, or revocation in one jurisdiction, then it could have an adverse effect on our ability to obtain
permits and licenses relating to the sale of alcohol and tobacco products in other jurisdictions. In addition,
the failure of our retail business to comply with state and local laws regulating the sale of alcohol and
tobacco products could result in the loss of necessary licenses and the imposition of fines and penalties on
us. Such a loss or imposition could have a material adverse effect on our business, liquidity and results of
operations and, as a result, our ability to make distributions.
Risks Related to an Investment in Us
The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a policy to distribute an amount equal to the available
cash we generate each quarter, which could limit our ability to grow and make acquisitions.
The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a policy to distribute an amount equal to the available
cash we generate each quarter to our unitholders, beginning with the quarter ending September 30, 2012. As a
result, we will rely primarily upon external financing sources, including commercial bank borrowings and the
issuance of debt and equity securities, to fund our acquisitions and expansion capital expenditures. As such,
to the extent we are unable to finance growth externally, our distribution policy will significantly impair our
ability to grow.
In addition, because of our distribution policy, our growth, if any, may not be as robust as that of businesses
that reinvest their available cash to expand ongoing operations. To the extent we issue additional units in
connection with any acquisitions or expansion capital expenditures or as in-kind distributions, current
unitholders will experience dilution and the payment of distributions on those additional units will decrease
the amount we distribute on each outstanding unit. There are no limitations in our partnership agreement on
our ability to issue additional units, including units ranking senior to the common units. The incurrence of
additional commercial borrowings or other debt to finance our growth strategy would result in increased
interest expense, which, in turn, would reduce the available cash that we have to distribute to our unitholders.
See “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions.”
Our general partner, the indirect owners of which include ACON Refining, TPG Refining and certain members
of our management team, has fiduciary duties to its owners, and the interests of ACON Refining, TPG Refining
and certain members of our management team may differ significantly from, or conflict with, the interests of
our public unitholders.
Our general partner is responsible for managing us. Although our general partner has fiduciary duties to
manage us in a manner that it believes is in our best interests, the fiduciary duties are specifically limited by
the express terms of our partnership agreement, and the directors and officers of our general partner also
have fiduciary duties to manage our general partner in a manner beneficial to its owners, which include ACON
Refining, TPG Refining and certain members of our management team. The interests of ACON Refining, TPG
Refining and these management team members may differ from, or conflict with, the interests of our
unitholders. In resolving these conflicts, our general partner may favor its own interests or the interests of its
owners over our interests and those of our unitholders.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
53
The potential conflicts of interest include, among others, the following:
Ÿ  Neither our partnership agreement nor any other agreement will require the owners of our general partner to
pursue a business strategy that favors us. The affiliates of our general partner have fiduciary duties to make
decisions in their own best interests and in the best interest of their owners, which may be contrary to our
interests. In addition, our general partner is allowed to take into account the interests of parties other than us
or our unitholders, such as its owners, in resolving conflicts of interest, which has the effect of limiting its
fiduciary duty to our unitholders.
Ÿ  Our general partner has limited its liability and reduced its fiduciary duties under our partnership agreement
and has also restricted the remedies available to our unitholders for actions that, without those limitations and
reductions, might constitute breaches of fiduciary duty. As a result of purchasing common units, unitholders
consent to some actions and conflicts of interest that might otherwise constitute a breach of fiduciary or other
duties under applicable state law.
Ÿ  The board of directors of our general partner will determine the amount and timing of asset purchases and
sales, capital expenditures, borrowings, repayment of indebtedness and issuances of additional partnership
interests, each of which can affect the amount of cash that is available for distribution to our unitholders.
Ÿ  Our partnership agreement does not restrict our general partner from causing us to pay it or its affiliates for
any services rendered to us or entering into additional contractual arrangements with any of these entities on
our behalf. There is no limitation in our partnership agreement on the amounts our general partner can cause
us to pay it or its affiliates.
Ÿ  Our general partner may exercise its rights to call and purchase all of our common units and PIK units if at
any time it and its affiliates own more than 80% of the units.
Ÿ  Our general partner will control the enforcement of obligations owed to us by it and its affiliates. In addition,
our general partner will decide whether to retain separate counsel or others to perform services for us.
Ÿ  Our general partner determines which costs incurred by it and its affiliates are reimbursable by us.
See “Conflicts of Interest and Fiduciary Duties.”
Our partnership agreement limits the liability and reduces the fiduciary duties of our general partner and
restricts the remedies available to us and our common unitholders for actions taken by our general partner
that might otherwise constitute breaches of fiduciary duty.
Our partnership agreement limits the liability and reduces the fiduciary duties of our general partner, while
also restricting the remedies available to our common unitholders for actions that, without these limitations
and reductions, might constitute breaches of fiduciary duty. Delaware partnership law permits such
contractual reductions of fiduciary duty. By purchasing common units, common unitholders consent to some
actions that might otherwise constitute a breach of fiduciary or other duties applicable under state law. Our
partnership agreement contains provisions that reduce the standards to which our general partner would
otherwise be held by state fiduciary duty law. For example:
Ÿ  Our partnership agreement permits our general partner to make a number of decisions in its individual
capacity, as opposed to its capacity as general partner. This entitles our general partner to consider only the
interests and factors that it desires, and it has no duty or obligation to give any consideration to any interest
of, or factors affecting, our common unitholders. Decisions made by our general partner in its individual
capacity will be made by its owners and
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
54
not by the board of directors of our general partner. Examples include the exercise of the general partner’s call
right, its voting rights with respect to any common units or PIK units it may own and its determination whether
or not to consent to any merger or consolidation or amendment to our partnership agreement.
Ÿ  Our partnership agreement provides that our general partner will not have any liability to us or our unitholders
for decisions made in its capacity as general partner so long as it acted in good faith, meaning it believed that
the decisions were not adverse to the interests of our partnership.
Ÿ  Our partnership agreement provides that our general partner and the officers and directors of our general
partner will not be liable for monetary damages to us for any acts or omissions unless there has been a final
and non-appealable judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction determining that our general partner
or those persons acted in bad faith or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with knowledge that such
person’s conduct was unlawful.
Ÿ  Our partnership agreement provides that our general partner will not be in breach of its obligations under the
partnership agreement or its duties to us or our limited partners if a transaction with an affiliate or the
resolution of a conflict of interest is:
•
•
Approved by the conflicts committee of the board of directors of our general partner, although our
general partner is not obligated to seek such approval; or
Approved by the vote of a majority of the outstanding units, excluding any units owned by our general
partner and its affiliates.
In connection with a situation involving a transaction with an affiliate or a conflict of interest, any
determination by our general partner must be made in good faith. If an affiliate transaction or the resolution of
a conflict of interest is not approved by our unitholders or the conflicts committee then it will be presumed
that, in making its decision, taking any action or failing to act, the board of directors acted in good faith, and
in any proceeding brought by or on behalf of any limited partner or the partnership, the person bringing or
prosecuting such proceeding will have the burden of overcoming such presumption. See “Conflicts of
Interest and Fiduciary Duties.”
By purchasing a common unit, a unitholder will become bound by the provisions of our partnership
agreement, including the provisions described above. See “Description of Our Common Units—Transfer of
Common Units.”
Northern Tier Holdings has the power to appoint and remove our general partner’s directors.
Upon the consummation of this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will have the power to elect all of the
members of the board of directors of our general partner. Our general partner has control over all decisions
related to our operations. See “Management—Our Management.” Our public unitholders do not have an
ability to influence any operating decisions and will not be able to prevent us from entering into any
transactions. Furthermore, the goals and objectives of the owners of our general partner may not be
consistent with those of our public unitholders.
Common units and PIK units are subject to our general partner’s call right.
If at any time our general partner and its affiliates own more than 80% of the units, our general partner will
have the right, which it may assign to any of its affiliates or to us, but not the obligation, to acquire all, but
not less than all, of the units held by unaffiliated unitholders at a price not less than their then-current market
price, as calculated pursuant to the terms of our partnership agreement. As a result, you may be required to
sell your units at an undesirable time or price and may not receive any return on your investment. You may
also incur a tax liability upon a sale of your units. Our general
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
55
partner is not obligated to obtain a fairness opinion regarding the value of the units to be repurchased by it
upon exercise of the call right. There is no restriction in our partnership agreement that prevents our general
partner from issuing additional units and then exercising its call right. Our general partner may use its own
discretion, free of fiduciary duty restrictions, in determining whether to exercise this right. See “The
Partnership Agreement—Call Right.”
Our unitholders have limited voting rights and are not entitled to elect our general partner or our general
partner’s directors.
Unlike the holders of common stock in a corporation, our unitholders have only limited voting rights on
matters affecting our business and, therefore, limited ability to influence management’s decisions regarding
our business. Unitholders will have no right to elect our general partner or our general partner’s board of
directors on an annual or other continuing basis. The board of directors of our general partner, including the
independent directors, will be chosen entirely by Northern Tier Holdings as the direct owner of the general
partner and not by our common unitholders. Unlike publicly traded corporations, we will not hold annual
meetings of our unitholders to elect directors or conduct other matters routinely conducted at annual
meetings of stockholders. Furthermore, even if our unitholders are dissatisfied with the performance of our
general partner, they will have no practical ability to remove our general partner. These limitations could
adversely affect the price at which the common units will trade.
Our public unitholders will not have sufficient voting power to remove our general partner without Northern
Tier Holdings’ consent.
Our general partner may only be removed by a vote of the holders of at least two-thirds of the outstanding
units, including any units owned by our general partner and its affiliates (including Northern Tier Holdings).
Following the closing of this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own approximately     % of our units (or
approximately     % of our units if the underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional common units
in full), which means holders of common units purchased in this offering will not be able to remove the
general partner, under any circumstances, unless Northern Tier Holdings sells some of the units that it owns
or we sell additional units to the public.
Our partnership agreement restricts the voting rights of unitholders owning 20% or more of our common
units (other than our general partner and its affiliates and permitted transferees).
Our partnership agreement restricts unitholders’ voting rights by providing that any units held by a person
that owns 20% or more of any class of units then outstanding, other than our general partner, its affiliates,
their transferees and persons who acquired such units with the prior approval of the board of directors of our
general partner, may not vote on any matter. Our partnership agreement also contains provisions limiting the
ability of common unitholders to call meetings or to acquire information about our operations, as well as
other provisions limiting the ability of our common unitholders to influence the manner or direction of
management.
Cost reimbursements due to our general partner and its affiliates will reduce cash available for distribution to
you.
Prior to making any distribution on our outstanding units, we will reimburse our general partner for all
expenses it incurs on our behalf including, without limitation, salary, bonus, incentive compensation and
other amounts paid to its employees and executive officers who perform services for us. There are no limits
contained in our partnership agreement on the amounts or types of expenses for which our general partner
and its affiliates may be reimbursed. The payment of these amounts, including allocated overhead, to our
general partner and its affiliates could adversely affect our ability to make
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
56
distributions to our unitholders. See “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions,” “Certain
Relationships and Related Person Transactions” and “Conflicts of Interest and Fiduciary Duties—Conflicts of
Interest.”
Unitholders may have liability to repay distributions.
In the event that: (1) we make distributions to our unitholders when our nonrecourse liabilities exceed the
sum of (a) the fair market value of our assets not subject to recourse liability and (b) the excess of the fair
market value of our assets subject to recourse liability over such liability, or a distribution causes such a
result, and (2) a unitholder knows at the time of the distribution of such circumstances, such unitholder will
be liable for a period of three years from the time of the impermissible distribution to repay the distribution
under Section 17-607 of the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act (the “Delaware Act”).
Likewise, upon the winding up of the partnership, in the event that (1) we do not distribute assets in the
following order: (a) to creditors in satisfaction of their liabilities; (b) to partners and former partners in
satisfaction of liabilities for distributions owed under our partnership agreement; (c) to partners for the return
of their contribution; and finally (d) to the partners in the proportions in which the partners share in
distributions and (2) a unitholder knows at the time of such circumstances, then such unitholder will be liable
for a period of three years from the impermissible distribution to repay the distribution under Section 17-804
of the Delaware Act.
A purchaser of common units who becomes a limited partner is liable for the obligations of the transferring
limited partner to make contributions to us that are known by the purchaser at the time it became a limited
partner and for unknown obligations if the liabilities could be determined from our partnership agreement.
Our general partner’s interest in us and the control of our general partner may be transferred to a third party
without unitholder consent.
Our general partner may transfer its general partner interest in us to a third party without the consent of the
unitholders. Furthermore, there is no restriction in our partnership agreement on the ability of the owners of
our general partner to transfer their equity interests in our general partner to a third party. The new equity
owner of our general partner would then be in a position to replace the board of directors and the officers of
our general partner with its own choices and to influence the decisions taken by the board of directors and
officers of our general partner.
There is no existing market for our common units, and we do not know if one will develop to provide you with
adequate liquidity. If our unit price fluctuates after this offering, you could lose a significant part of your
investment.
Prior to this offering, there has not been a public market for our common units. If an active trading market
does not develop, you may have difficulty selling any of our common units that you buy. The initial public
offering price for the common units will be determined by negotiations between us and the underwriters and
may not be indicative of prices that will prevail in the open market following this offering. Consequently, you
may not be able to sell our common units at prices equal to or greater than the price paid by you in this
offering. The market price of our common units may be influenced by many factors including:
Ÿ  our operating and financial performance;
Ÿ  quarterly variations in our financial indicators, such as net (loss) earnings per unit, net earnings (loss) and
revenues;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
57
Ÿ  the amount of distributions we make and our earnings or those of other companies in our industry or other
publicly traded partnerships;
Ÿ  strategic actions by our competitors;
Ÿ  changes in revenue or earnings estimates, or changes in recommendations or withdrawal of research
coverage, by equity research analysts;
Ÿ  speculation in the press or investment community;
Ÿ  sales of our common units by us or other unitholders, or the perception that such sales may occur;
Ÿ  changes in accounting principles;
Ÿ
additions or departures of key management personnel;
additions or departures of key management personnel;
Ÿ  actions by our unitholders;
Ÿ  general market conditions, including fluctuations in commodity prices; and
Ÿ  domestic and international economic, legal and regulatory factors unrelated to our performance.
As a result of these factors, investors in our common units may not be able to resell their common units at or
above the initial offering price. In addition, the stock market in general has experienced extreme price and
volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of
companies like us. These broad market and industry factors may materially reduce the market price of our
common units, regardless of our operating performance.
Our new standalone finance and accounting information systems may fail to operate effectively or as
intended, which could adversely affect the reliability of our financial statements.
Pursuant to a transition services agreement, Marathon agreed to provide us with, among other things,
administrative and support services, including finance, accounting and information system services, for up to
18 months following the closing of the Marathon Acquisition to allow us time to build the infrastructure
required to operate these functions independently. During the fourth quarter of 2011, we transitioned the
finance, accounting information system services and functions from Marathon to our own standalone
information systems and processes. It is possible that we will discover material shortcomings in our new
standalone finance accounting information systems and processes, including those that may represent
material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting, that are not currently known to us. Any
such defects could adversely affect the reliability of our financial statements.
If, after this offering, we are unable to satisfy the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, or
our internal control over financial reporting are not effective, the reliability of our financial statements may be
questioned, and our unit price may suffer.
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires any company subject to the reporting requirements of the U.S.
securities laws to perform a comprehensive evaluation of its and its subsidiaries’ internal controls. To comply
with these requirements, we will be required to document and test our internal control procedures, our
management will be required to assess and issue a report concerning our internal control over financial
reporting, and, under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, our independent auditors will be required to issue an opinion
on management’s assessment and the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. Our
compliance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act will first be reported on in connection with the filing
of our second Annual Report on Form 10-K. The rules governing the standards that must be met for
management to assess our
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
58
internal control over financial reporting are complex and require significant documentation, testing and
possible remediation. During the course of its testing, our management may identify material weaknesses,
which may not be remedied in time to meet the deadline imposed by the SEC rules implementing
Section 404. If our management cannot favorably assess the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting, or our auditors identify material weaknesses in our internal control, investor confidence in
our financial results may weaken, and the price of our common units may suffer.
You will incur immediate and substantial dilution in net tangible book value per common unit.
The initial public offering price of our common units is substantially higher than the pro forma net tangible
book value of our outstanding units. As a result, if you purchase common units in this offering, you will incur
immediate and substantial dilution in the amount of $         per common unit. See “Dilution.”
We may issue additional common units and other equity interests without your approval, which would dilute
your existing ownership interests.
Under our partnership agreement, we are authorized to issue an unlimited number of additional interests
without a vote of the unitholders. For example, we will issue additional PIK units, in lieu of making cash
distributions, to the holders of the PIK units during the PIK period. In addition, at the end of the PIK period,
the PIK units will convert into common units. The issuance by us of additional common units or other equity
interests of equal or senior rank will have the following effects:
Ÿ  the proportionate ownership interest of unitholders immediately prior to the issuance will decrease;
Ÿ  the amount of cash distributions on each unit will decrease;
Ÿ  the ratio of our taxable income to distributions may increase;
Ÿ  the relative voting strength of each previously outstanding unit will be diminished; and
Ÿ  the market price of the common units may decline.
In addition, our partnership agreement does not prohibit the issuance of equity interests by our subsidiary,
which may effectively rank senior to the common units.
Our general partner may redeem, retire, repurchase or otherwise refinance the senior secured notes or
otherwise amend the indenture in a manner that terminates the PIK period, and may cause us to repurchase
PIK units at any time with the approval of the conflicts committee.
At any time, our general partner may, in its sole discretion and on terms determined in its sole discretion,
redeem, retire, repurchase or otherwise refinance the senior secured notes resulting in the termination of the
PIK period. Following the termination of the PIK period, distributions in respect of any outstanding PIK units
will be paid in cash (and any PIK units will automatically convert into an equal number of common units).
Under our partnership agreement, such a decision will explicitly be deemed not to be a violation of the
fiduciary duties that might otherwise be owed by our general partner to our unitholders. At any time, our
general partner may also amend the indenture in a manner that terminates the PIK period. The redemption,
retirement, repurchase or refinancing of the senior secured notes or any amendment to the indenture may be
at a substantial expense to us. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Description of Our Indebtedness—Senior Secured
Notes” for a discussion of our ability to redeem the senior secured notes and the redemption price related
thereto.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
59
Additionally, our general partner may cause us or our subsidiaries to purchase PIK units at any time during
the PIK period, so long as such purchase is approved by the conflicts committee of the board of directors of
our general partner. Our public unitholders will not be entitled to vote on any such purchase of PIK units from
affiliates of our general partner or otherwise.
Units eligible for future sale may cause the price of our common units to decline.
Sales of substantial amounts of our common units in the public market, or the perception that these sales
may occur, could cause the market price of our common units to decline. This could also impair our ability to
raise additional capital through the sale of our equity interests.
There will be units         outstanding following this offering.         common units are being sold to the public
in this offering (or         common units if the underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional
common units in full) and an aggregate of         common units and PIK units will be owned by Northern Tier
Holdings (or         common units and         PIK units if the underwriters exercise their option to purchase
additional common units in full). The common units sold in this offering will be freely transferable without
restriction or further registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), by
persons other than “affiliates,” as that term is defined in Rule 144 under the Securities Act.
In addition, we are party to a registration rights agreement with Northern Tier Holdings and certain of its
indirect owners pursuant to which we may be required to register the sale of the units they hold under the
Securities Act and applicable state securities laws.
In connection with this offering, we, Northern Tier Holdings, our general partner and our general partner’s
directors and executive officers will enter into lock-up agreements, pursuant to which they will agree, subject
to certain exceptions, not to sell or transfer, directly or indirectly, any of our units until 180 days from the date
of this prospectus, subject to extension in certain circumstances. Following termination of these lockup
agreements, all units held by Northern Tier Holdings, our general partner and our general partner’s directors
and executive officers will be freely tradable under Rule 144, subject to the volume and other limitations of
Rule 144. See “Common Units Eligible for Future Sale.”
We will incur increased costs as a result of being a publicly traded partnership.
As a publicly traded partnership, we will incur significant legal, accounting and other expenses that we did
not incur prior to this offering. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Dodd-Frank Act, as well as rules
implemented by the SEC and the NYSE, require, or will require, publicly traded entities to adopt various
corporate governance practices that will further increase our costs. Before we are able to pay distributions to
our unitholders, we must first pay our expenses, including the costs of being a public company and other
operating expenses. As a result, the amount of cash we have available for distribution to our unitholders will
be affected by our expenses, including the costs associated with being a publicly traded partnership. We
estimate that we will incur approximately $3.5 million of estimated incremental costs per year, some of which
will be direct charges associated with being a publicly traded partnership and some of which will be allocated
to us by our general partner and its affiliates; however, it is possible that our actual incremental costs of
being a publicly traded partnership will be higher than we currently estimate.
Prior to this offering, we have not filed reports with the SEC. Following this offering, we will become subject
to the public reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange
Act”). We expect these requirements will increase our legal and financial compliance costs and make
compliance activities more time-consuming and costly. For example, as a result of becoming a
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
60
publicly traded partnership, we are required to have at least three independent directors and adopt policies
regarding internal controls and disclosure controls and procedures, including the preparation of reports on
internal control over financial reporting. In addition, we will incur additional costs associated with our
publicly traded company reporting requirements.
As a publicly traded limited partnership we qualify for, and will rely on, certain exemptions from the New York
Stock Exchange’s corporate governance requirements.
As a publicly traded partnership, we qualify for, and will rely on, certain exemptions from the NYSE’s
corporate governance requirements, including:
Ÿ  the requirement that a majority of the board of directors of our general partner consist of independent
directors;
Ÿ  the requirement that the board of directors of our general partner have a nominating/corporate governance
committee that is composed entirely of independent directors; and
Ÿ  the requirement that the board of directors of our general partner have a compensation committee that is
composed entirely of independent directors.
As a result of these exemptions, our general partner’s board of directors will not be comprised of a majority
of independent directors, our general partner’s compensation committee may not be comprised entirely of
independent directors and our general partner’s board of directors does not currently intend to establish a
nominating/corporate governance committee. Accordingly, unitholders will not have the same protections
afforded to equityholders of companies that are subject to all of the corporate governance requirements of the
NYSE. See “Management.”
Tax Risks
In addition to reading the following risk factors, you should read “Material Federal Income Tax
Consequences” for a more complete discussion of the expected material federal income tax consequences of
owning and disposing of common units.
Our tax treatment depends on our status as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, as well as our not
being subject to a material amount of entity-level taxation by individual states. If the IRS were to treat us as a
corporation for federal income tax purposes, or we were to become subject to material additional amounts of
entity-level taxation for state tax purposes, then our cash available for distribution to you could be
substantially reduced.
The anticipated after-tax economic benefit of an investment in our common units depends largely on our
being treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes. We have not requested, and do not plan to
request, a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) on this or any other tax matter affecting us. To
maintain our status as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, current law requires that 90% or more of
our gross income for every taxable year consist of “qualifying income,” as defined in Section 7704 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). “Qualifying income” includes (i) income and gains
derived from the refining, transportation, processing and marketing of crude oil, natural gas and products
thereof, (ii) interest (other than from a financial business), (iii) dividends, (iv) gains from the sale of real
property and (v) gains from the sale or other disposition of capital assets held for the production of qualifying
income.
Despite the fact that we are organized as a limited partnership under Delaware law, it is possible in certain
circumstances for a partnership such as ours to be treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes.
Although we do not believe, based upon our current operations, that we will be
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
61
so treated, a change in our business (or a change in current law) could cause us to be treated as a corporation
for federal income tax purposes or otherwise subject us to taxation as an entity.
If we were treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes, we would pay federal income tax on our
taxable income at the corporate tax rate, which is currently a maximum of 35% and would likely pay state
income tax at varying rates. Distributions to you would generally be taxed again as corporate distributions,
and no income, gains, losses, deductions or credits would flow through to you. Because a tax would be
imposed upon us as a corporation, our cash available for distribution to you would be substantially reduced.
Therefore, treatment of us as a corporation would result in a material reduction in the anticipated cash flow
and after-tax return to our unitholders, likely causing a substantial reduction in the value of our common
units.
The tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships or an investment in our units could be subject to potential
legislative, judicial or administrative changes and differing interpretations, possibly on a retroactive basis.
The present federal income tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships, including us, or an investment in
our common units may be modified by administrative, legislative or judicial changes at any time. For
example, members of Congress have recently considered substantive changes to the existing federal income
tax laws that affect publicly traded partnerships. Any modification to the federal income tax laws and
interpretations thereof may be applied retroactively and could impose additional administrative requirements
on us or make it more difficult or impossible to meet the exception for certain publicly traded partnerships to
be treated as partnerships for federal income tax purposes. We are unable to predict whether any of these
changes, or other proposals will be reintroduced or will ultimately be enacted. Any such changes could
negatively impact the value of an investment in our common units.
You will be required to pay taxes on your share of our income even if you do not receive any cash
distributions from us.
Because our unitholders will be treated as partners to whom we will allocate taxable income that could be
different in amount than the cash we distribute, you will be required to pay any federal income taxes and, in
some cases, state and local income taxes on your share of our taxable income whether or not you receive
cash distributions from us. You may not receive cash distributions from us equal to your share of our taxable
income or even equal to the actual tax liability that results from that income.
The sale or exchange of 50% or more of our capital and profits interests during any twelve-month period will
result in the termination of our partnership for federal income tax purposes.
We will be considered to have terminated our partnership for federal income tax purposes if there is a sale or
exchange of 50% or more of the total interests in our capital and profits within a twelve-month period.
Following this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own more than 50% of the total interests in our capital and
profits. If transfers within a twelve-month period of common units and PIK units by Northern Tier Holdings, by
itself or in combination with other transfers of common units, represent 50% or more of the total interests in
our capital and profits, we will be considered to have terminated our partnership for federal income tax
purposes. Our termination would, among other things, result in the closing of our taxable year for all
unitholders and could result in a deferral of depreciation deductions allowable in computing our taxable
income. In the case of a unitholder reporting on a taxable year other than a fiscal year ending December 31,
the closing of our taxable year may also result in more than twelve months of our taxable income or loss
being includable in its taxable income for the year of termination. Our termination currently would not affect
our classification
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
62
as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, but instead, we would be treated as a new partnership for
federal income tax purposes. If treated as a new partnership, we must make new tax elections and could be
subject to penalties if we are unable to determine that a termination occurred. See “Material Federal Income
Tax Consequences—Disposition of Units—Constructive Termination” for a discussion of the consequences of
our termination for federal income tax purposes.
Tax gain or loss on the disposition of our common units could be more or less than expected.
If you sell your common units, you will recognize a gain or loss equal to the difference between the amount
realized and your tax basis in those common units. Because distributions in excess of your allocable share of
our net taxable income decrease your tax basis in your common units, the amount, if any, of such prior
excess distributions with respect to the units you sell will, in effect, become taxable income to you if you sell
such units at a price greater than your tax basis in those units, even if the price you receive is less than your
original cost. Furthermore, a substantial portion of the amount realized, whether or not representing gain,
may be taxed as ordinary income due to potential recapture items, including depreciation recapture. In
addition, because the amount realized includes a unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities, if you sell
your units, you may incur a tax liability in excess of the amount of cash you receive from the sale. See
“Material Federal Income Tax Consequences—Disposition of Units—Recognition of Gain or Loss” for a
further discussion of the foregoing.
Tax-exempt entities and non-U.S. persons face unique tax issues from owning common units that may result
in adverse tax consequences to them.
Investment in common units by tax-exempt entities, such as employee benefit plans and individual retirement
accounts (“IRAs”), and non-U.S. persons raises issues unique to them. For example, virtually all of our
income allocated to organizations that are exempt from federal income tax, including IRAs and other
retirement plans, will be unrelated business taxable income and will be taxable to them. Distributions to non-
U.S. persons will be reduced by withholding taxes at the highest applicable effective tax rate, and non-U.S.
persons will be required to file federal tax returns and pay tax on their share of our taxable income. If you are
a tax-exempt entity or a non-U.S. person, you should consult your tax advisor before investing in our
common units.
If the IRS contests the federal income tax positions we take, the market for our common units may be
adversely impacted and the cost of any IRS contest will reduce our cash available for distribution to you.
The IRS may adopt positions that differ from the positions we take. It may be necessary to resort to
administrative or court proceedings to sustain some or all of the positions we take. A court may not agree
with some or all of the positions we take. Any contest with the IRS may materially and adversely impact the
market for our common units and the price at which they trade. Our costs of any contest with the IRS will be
borne indirectly by our unitholders because the costs will reduce our cash available for distribution.
We will treat each purchaser of our common units as having the same tax benefits without regard to the actual
common units purchased. The IRS may challenge this treatment, which could adversely affect the value of the
common units.
Because we cannot match transferors and transferees of common units, we will adopt depreciation and
amortization positions that may not conform to all aspects of existing and proposed U.S. Treasury regulations
(the “Treasury Regulations”). A successful IRS challenge to those positions
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
63
could adversely affect the amount of tax benefits available to you. It also could affect the timing of these tax
benefits or the amount of gain from your sale of common units and could have a negative impact on the value
of our common units or result in audit adjustments to your tax returns. See “Material Federal Income Tax
Consequences—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Section 754 Election” for a further discussion of the
effect of the depreciation and amortization positions we will adopt.
We will prorate our items of income, gain, loss and deduction between transferors and transferees of our
units each month based upon the ownership of our units on the first day of each month, instead of on the
basis of the date a particular unit is transferred. The IRS may challenge this treatment, which could change
the allocation of items of income, gain, loss and deduction among our unitholders.
We will prorate our items of income, gain, loss and deduction between transferors and transferees of our
common units each month based upon the ownership of our common units on the first day of each month,
instead of on the basis of the date a particular common unit is transferred. The use of this proration method
may not be permitted under existing Treasury Regulations, and although the U.S. Treasury Department issued
proposed Treasury Regulations allowing a similar monthly simplifying convention, such regulations are not
final and do not specifically authorize the use of the proration method we have adopted. Accordingly, our
counsel is unable to opine as to the validity of this method. If the IRS were to successfully challenge our
proration method, we may be required to change the allocation of items of income, gain, loss and deduction
among our unitholders.
A unitholder whose common units are loaned to a “short seller” to cover a short sale of common units may
be considered as having disposed of those common units. If so, he would no longer be treated for tax
purposes as a partner with respect to those common units during the period of the loan and may recognize
gain or loss from the disposition.
Because there is no tax concept of loaning a partnership interest, a unitholder whose common units are
loaned to a “short seller” to cover a short sale of common units may be considered as having disposed of the
loaned units. In that case, he may no longer be treated for tax purposes as a partner with respect to those
common units during the period of the loan to the short seller and the unitholder may recognize gain or loss
from such disposition. Moreover, during the period of the loan to the short seller, any of our income, gain,
loss or deduction with respect to those common units may not be reportable by the unitholder and any cash
distributions received by the unitholder as to those common units could be fully taxable as ordinary income.
Unitholders desiring to assure their status as partners and avoid the risk of gain recognition from a loan to a
short seller should modify any applicable brokerage account agreements to prohibit their brokers from
borrowing their common units. See “Material Federal Income Tax Consequences—Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership—Treatment of Short Sales” for a further discussion of the foregoing.
Unitholders may be subject to state and local taxes and return filing requirements in jurisdictions where they
do not live as a result of investing in our common units.
In addition to federal income taxes, unitholders may become subject to other taxes, including state, local and
non-U.S. taxes, unincorporated business taxes and estate, inheritance or intangible taxes that are imposed by
jurisdictions in which we conduct business or own property in the future, even if they do not live in any of
those jurisdictions. We currently conduct business or own property in several states, each of which imposes
an income tax on corporations and other entities and a personal income tax. We may own property or conduct
business in other states or non-U.S. countries in the future. Unitholders may be required to file state and local
income tax returns and pay state and local
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
64
income taxes in some or all of those various jurisdictions. Further, unitholders may be subject to penalties
for failure to comply with those requirements. It is the unitholder’s responsibility to file all federal, state, local
and non-U.S. tax returns.
As part of the IPO Transactions, some of our subsidiaries will elect to be treated as corporations for federal
income tax purposes and will become subject to corporate-level income taxes.
As part of the IPO Transactions, certain of our subsidiaries, including Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC,
which will hold all of the ownership interests in Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Bakery LLC, and
Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC, will elect to be treated as corporations for federal income tax purposes,
which will subject them to corporate-level income taxes and may reduce the cash available for distribution to
us and, in turn, to unitholders. In the future, we may conduct additional operations through these subsidiaries
or additional subsidiaries that are subject to corporate-level income taxes. Our historical financial statements
do not reflect the corporate-level taxes that these subsidiaries would be required to pay in the future, which
may affect the financial statements’ usefulness in predicting our future earnings and ability to distribute cash.
Additionally, any losses in these subsidiaries will not be available to offset income generated by our other
business operations, and may necessitate additional cash contributions that would reduce the cash available
for distribution to unitholders.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
65
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus includes “forward-looking statements.” The words “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,”
“intend,” “foresee,” “should,” “would,” “could,” “attempt,” “appears,” “forecast,” “outlook,” “estimate,”
“project,” “potential,” “may,” “will,” “are likely” or other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-
looking statements, which are generally not historical in nature. These forward-looking statements are based
on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effect on us. All
statements herein about our forecast of available cash and our forecasted results for the twelve months
ending June 30, 2013 and the three months ending September 30, 2013 constitute forward-looking statements.
While management believes that these forward-looking statements are reasonable as and when made, there
can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we anticipate, and any and all of
our forward-looking statements in this prospectus may turn out to be inaccurate.
Forward-looking statements appear in a number of places in this prospectus, including “Prospectus
Summary,” “Risk Factors,” “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions,” “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” and “Business,” and include
statements with respect to, among other things:
Ÿ  our ability to make distributions on the common units;
Ÿ  the volatile nature of our business and the variable nature of our distributions;
Ÿ  the ability of our general partner to modify or revoke our distribution policy at any time;
Ÿ  our ability to forecast our future financial condition, results of operations, future compliance with covenants in
our debt instruments and our future sales and expenses;
Ÿ  our estimated financial results for the three months ending June 30, 2012;
Ÿ  our forecast of available cash and our forecasted results for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and the
three months ending September 30, 2013;
Ÿ  the estimated ratio of taxable income to distributions;
Ÿ  our business strategy and prospects;
Ÿ  technology;
Ÿ  our cash flows and liquidity;
Ÿ  our financial strategy, budget, projections and operating results;
Ÿ  the amount, nature and timing of capital expenditures;
Ÿ  the availability and terms of capital;
Ÿ  competition and government regulations;
Ÿ  general economic conditions and trends in the refining industry;
Ÿ  effectiveness of our risk management activities;
Ÿ  our environmental liabilities;
Ÿ  our counterparty credit risk;
our counterparty credit risk;
Ÿ  governmental regulation and taxation of the refining industry; and
Ÿ  developments in oil-producing and natural gas-producing countries.
66
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Our forward-looking statements involve significant risks and uncertainties (some of which are beyond our
control) and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our historical experience
and our present expectations or projections. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those summarized
below:
Ÿ  the overall demand for hydrocarbon products, fuels and other refined products;
Ÿ  our ability to produce products and fuels that meet our customers’ unique and precise specifications;
Ÿ  the impact of fluctuations and rapid increases or decreases in crude oil, refined products, fuel and utility
services prices and crack spreads, including the impact of these factors on our liquidity;
Ÿ  fluctuations in refinery capacity;
Ÿ  accidents or other unscheduled shutdowns or disruptions affecting our refinery, machinery, or equipment, or
those of our suppliers or customers;
Ÿ  changes in the cost or availability of transportation for feedstocks and refined products;
Ÿ  the results of our hedging and other risk management activities;
Ÿ  our ability to comply with covenants contained in our debt instruments;
Ÿ  labor relations;
Ÿ  relationships with our partners and franchisees;
Ÿ  successful integration and future performance of acquired assets, businesses or third-party product supply
and processing relationships;
Ÿ  our access to capital to fund expansions, acquisitions and our working capital needs and our ability to obtain
debt or equity financing on satisfactory terms;
Ÿ  currently unknown liabilities in connection with the Marathon Acquisition;
Ÿ  environmental liabilities or events that are not covered by an indemnity, insurance or existing reserves;
Ÿ  dependence on one principal supplier for merchandise;
Ÿ  maintenance of our credit ratings and ability to receive open credit lines from our suppliers;
Ÿ  the effects of competition;
Ÿ  continued creditworthiness of, and performance by, counterparties;
Ÿ  the impact of current and future laws, rulings and governmental regulations, including guidance related to the
Dodd-Frank Act;
Ÿ  shortages or cost increases of power supplies, natural gas, materials or labor;
Ÿ  weather interference with business operations;
Ÿ  seasonal trends in the industries in which we operate;
Ÿ  fluctuations in the debt markets;
Ÿ  potential product liability claims and other litigation;
Ÿ  the completion of our customary quarterly close and review procedures as of and for the three months ending
June 30, 2012;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
67
Ÿ  changes in economic conditions, generally, and in the markets we serve, consumer behavior, and travel and
tourism trends; and
Ÿ  changes in our treatment as a partnership for U.S. income or state tax purposes.
These factors are not necessarily all of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially
from those expressed in any of our forward-looking statements. Other unknown or unpredictable factors also
could have material adverse effects on our future results. Our future results will depend upon various other
risks and uncertainties, including those described elsewhere in this prospectus under the heading, “Risk
Factors.” Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only
as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements after the
date they are made, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. All forward-looking
statements attributable to us are qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
68
USE OF PROCEEDS
We expect to receive approximately $         million of net proceeds from the sale of the common units offered
by us, based upon the assumed initial public offering price of $         per unit (the midpoint of the price range
set forth on the cover page of this prospectus), after deducting the underwriting discount of approximately
$         million (or approximately $         million if the underwriters exercise in full their option to purchase
additional common units) and estimated offering expenses of $         million (including a $7.5 million fee
payable to ACON Management and TPG Management pursuant to a management services agreement entered
into at the time of the Marathon Acquisition). Each $1.00 increase (decrease) in the public offering price would
increase (decrease) our net proceeds by approximately $         million (assuming no exercise of the
underwriters’ option to purchase additional common units).
We intend to use the net proceeds to:
Ÿ  redeem $29 million of our senior secured notes at a redemption price of 103% of the principal amount thereof,
for an estimated $30 million;
Ÿ  pay $40 million to Marathon, which represents the cash component of a settlement agreement we entered
into with Marathon related to a contingent consideration agreement that was entered into at the time of the
Marathon Acquisition;
Ÿ  pay $92 million to J. Aron & Company, an affiliate of Goldman, Sachs & Co., for losses incurred during the
three months ending June 30, 2012 as a result of resetting the price of certain derivative contracts; and
Ÿ  distribute approximately $         million to Northern Tier Holdings, of which $         million will be used to
redeem Marathon’s existing preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings and $         million will be distributed
to ACON Refining, TPG Refining and certain members of our management team.
The remaining net proceeds of $         million will be used to fund capital expenditures and general
partnership purposes.
The senior secured notes were issued in December 2010 in connection with the consummation of the
Marathon Acquisition. The senior secured notes mature in December 2017 and bear an annual interest rate of
10.5%. $261 million of our senior secured notes will remain outstanding after the application of proceeds from
this offering. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—
Liquidity and Capital Resources—Description of Our Indebtedness—Senior Secured Notes.”
We have granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an aggregate of          additional common
units. If the underwriters do not exercise this option in full or at all, the common units that would have been
sold to the underwriters had they exercised the option in full will be issued to Northern Tier Holdings at the
expiration of the option period. Any net proceeds received from the exercise of the underwriters’ option to
purchase additional common units will be distributed to Northern Tier Holdings.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
69
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth cash and cash equivalents and capitalization as of March 31, 2012:
Ÿ  on an actual basis for Northern Tier Energy LLC; and
Ÿ  on an as adjusted basis for Northern Tier Energy LP, after giving effect to this offering, the use of proceeds
and the other transactions described in “Prospectus Summary—The IPO Transactions.”
You should read the following table in conjunction with “Prospectus Summary—The IPO Transactions,” “Use
of Proceeds,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and
our financial statements and related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this prospectus.
Cash and cash equivalents(1)
Long-term debt, including current maturities:
Senior secured notes
Revolving credit facility(2)
Lease financing obligation(3)
Total long-term debt, including current maturities
Member’s/Partners’ interest:
Member’s/partners’ interest(4)
Common units: none issued and outstanding;                  issued and
outstanding, pro forma
PIK units: none issued and outstanding;                  issued and outstanding,
pro forma
General partner interest
Additional paid-in capital
Total member’s/partners’ interest
Total capitalization
As of
March 31, 2012
Northern Tier
Energy LLC     
    
(in millions)
Actual
Northern Tier
Energy LP  
As adjusted  
 
$
$
—
$
$
$
$
64.1    
    
  
290.0    
—    
11.9    
    
301.9    
    
  
116.0
—
—    
—    
—    
    
116.0    
    
417.9
(1)
(2)
(3)
As of May 31, 2012, cash and cash equivalents were approximately $133 million.
As of May 31, 2012, we had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facility and had approximately
$62 million in outstanding letters of credit.
Relates to specific properties that did not qualify for operating lease treatment under the sale leaseback of 135
SuperAmerica convenience stores with Realty Income, a third party equity real estate investment trust.
(4) On May 22, 2012 we paid an equity distribution to Northern Tier Holdings in the amount of $40 million.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
70
DILUTION
Dilution is the amount by which the offering price paid by the purchasers of units sold in this offering will
exceed the pro forma net tangible book value per unit after the offering. On a pro forma basis as of March 31,
2012, after giving effect to the offering of common units and the application of the related net proceeds, and
assuming the underwriters’ option to purchase additional common units is not exercised, our net tangible
book value was $         million, or $         per unit. Net tangible book value excludes $         million of net
intangible assets. Purchasers of common units in this offering will experience immediate and substantial
dilution in net tangible book value per unit for financial accounting purposes, as illustrated in the following
table:
Assumed initial public offering price per unit
Pro forma net tangible book value per unit before the offering
Increase in net tangible book value per unit attributable to purchasers in the offering
Less: Pro forma net tangible book value per unit after the offering(1)
Immediate dilution in net tangible book value per unit to purchasers in the offering(2)(3)
$
$—
$—  
     
$—
(1)
(2)
(3)
Determined by dividing the net tangible book value of the contributed assets and liabilities by the number of
units (             common units and              PIK units to be issued to Northern Tier Holdings).
Determined by dividing our pro forma net tangible book value, after giving effect to the application of the
expected net proceeds of the offering by the total number of units (             common units and              PIK
units to be issued to Northern Tier Holdings) to be outstanding after the offering.
If the initial public offering price were to increase or decrease by $1.00 per common unit, then dilution in net
tangible book value per unit would equal $         and $        , respectively.
The following table sets forth the number of units that we will issue and the total consideration contributed to
us by Northern Tier Holdings and by the purchasers of common units in this offering upon consummation of
the transactions contemplated by this prospectus:
Units Acquired
Number
Percent 
 
          %  
          %  
  
 
          %
Total Consideration
Amount
$                
  
   
    
$
Percent 
          % 
          % 
  
          %
Northern Tier Holdings(1)
Purchasers in this offering(2)
Total
(1)
(2)
The assets contributed by Northern Tier Holdings were recorded at historical cost in accordance with GAAP.
Book value of the consideration provided by Northern Tier Holdings, as of March 31, 2012, equals parent net
investment, which was $119 million and is not affected by this offering.
Assumes the underwriters’ option to purchase additional common units is not exercised.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
71
DISTRIBUTION POLICY AND RESTRICTIONS ON DISTRIBUTIONS
You should read the following discussion of our distribution policy and restrictions on distributions in
conjunction with the specific assumptions upon which our distribution policy is based. See “—Assumptions
and Considerations” below. For additional information regarding our historical and our pro forma operating
results, you should refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” and our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus. In addition, you
should read “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for information
regarding statements that do not relate strictly to historical or current facts and certain risks inherent in our
business.
Our Distribution Policy
General
We expect within 60 days after the end of each quarter, beginning with the quarter ending September 30, 2012,
to make distributions to unitholders of record on the applicable record date. We expect our first distribution
will include available cash (as described below) for the period from the closing of this offering through
September 30, 2012.
The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a policy pursuant to which distributions for each
quarter (including the distributions of additional PIK units on outstanding PIK units) will equal the amount of
available cash we generate in such quarter. Distributions on our units will be in cash, but during the PIK
period described below, the board of directors of our general partner will cause distributions on the PIK units
to be payable by Northern Tier Energy LP in the form of additional PIK units to the PIK unitholders of record
on the applicable record date as described below. Available cash for each quarter will be determined by the
board of directors of our general partner following the end of such quarter. We expect that available cash for
each quarter will generally equal our cash flow from operations for the quarter, less cash needed for
maintenance capital expenditures, accrued but unpaid expenses, reimbursement of expenses incurred by our
general partner and its affiliates, debt service and other contractual obligations and reserves for future
operating or capital needs that the board of directors of our general partner deems necessary or appropriate,
including reserves for our turnaround and related expenses. In advance of scheduled turnarounds at our
refinery, the board of directors of our general partner currently intends to reserve amounts to fund
expenditures associated with such scheduled turnarounds. Such a decision by the board of directors may
have an adverse impact on the available cash in the quarter(s) in which the reserves are withheld and a
corresponding mitigating impact on the future quarter(s) in which the reserves are utilized. Actual turnaround
and related expenses will be funded with cash reserves or borrowings under our revolving credit facility. We
do not intend to maintain excess distribution coverage or reserve cash for the purpose of maintaining stability
or growth in our quarterly distribution. We do not intend to incur debt to pay quarterly distributions. We
expect to finance substantially all of our growth externally, either by debt issuances or additional issuances of
equity.
Because our policy will be to distribute (through cash and in-kind distributions) an amount equal to all
available cash we generate each quarter, our unitholders will have direct exposure to fluctuations in the
amount of cash generated by our business. We expect that the amount of our quarterly distributions, if any,
will vary based on our operating cash flow during each quarter. Our quarterly distributions, if any, will not be
stable and will vary from quarter to quarter and year to year as a direct result of variations in, among other
factors, (i) our operating performance, (ii) cash flows caused by, among other things, fluctuations in the
prices of crude oil and other feedstocks and the price we receive for refined products, working capital or
capital expenditures and (iii) any cash reserves deemed necessary and appropriate by the board of directors
of our general partner. Such variations in the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
72
amount of our quarterly distributions may be significant. Unlike most publicly traded partnerships, we will not
have a minimum quarterly distribution or employ structures intended to consistently maintain or increase
distributions over time. The board of directors of our general partner may change the foregoing distribution
policy at any time. Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay distributions to our unitholders on a
quarterly or other basis.
Notwithstanding our distribution policy, certain provisions of the indenture governing the senior secured
notes and our revolving credit facility will restrict the ability of Northern Tier Energy LLC, our operating
subsidiary, to distribute cash to us. The PIK units described below are designed to support the payment of
cash distributions to our common unitholders during any period in which the provisions of our indenture
may restrict our ability to distribute available cash to all unitholders in accordance with our distribution
policy.
As discussed above, during the PIK period described below, the board of directors of our general partner will
cause distributions on our PIK units to be payable in additional PIK units. The number of PIK units that will
be distributed on a PIK unit in lieu of a quarterly cash distribution will equal a fraction, the numerator of
which is the amount of the cash distribution paid on a common units and the denominator of which is the
volume-weighted average price of a common unit for the 10 trading days immediately preceding the ex-
dividend date for the associated distribution in respect of a common unit. This calculation is intended to
provide the holders of PIK units with a number of PIK units equal in value on a per unit basis to the cash
being simultaneously distributed to common unitholders. While the PIK units will not receive cash
distributions during the PIK period, the distribution of additional PIK units in lieu of cash distributions may
substantially increase the number of units outstanding and the amount of cash required on a quarterly and
annual basis to pay distributions on all units. The effect of paying distributions of additional PIK units on PIK
units is as if we had paid cash distributions on those PIK units, and the holders of those PIK units had in turn
recontributed that cash to us in exchange for additional PIK units. The PIK period will commence on the date
of the closing of the offering and end on the date that is the earlier of (i) December 1, 2017 (the maturity date of
our senior secured notes) and (ii) the date by which we redeem, repurchase, defease or retire all of the senior
secured notes, or amend the indenture governing the senior secured notes in a manner, as determined by our
general partner, that results in the indenture being unlikely to restrict our ability to pay cash distributions on
all units consistent with the cash distribution policy described in this prospectus, provided, that a restrictive
covenant contained in such indenture that requires us to meet a specified fixed charge coverage ratio (or
similar ratio) in order to make cash distributions shall be deemed not to restrict our ability to pay cash
distributions for purposes of our general partner’s determination. Immediately following the end of the PIK
period, each outstanding PIK unit will be automatically converted into a common unit and entitled to receive
any distributions in cash. See “How We Make Distributions—Partnership Interests” for a further description of
the features of our equity capital structure. Northern Tier Holdings will initially hold all of our PIK units.
Limitations on Cash Distributions; Our Ability to Change Our Distribution Policy
There is no guarantee that unitholders will receive quarterly cash distributions from us. Our distribution
policy may be changed at any time and is subject to certain restrictions, including:
Ÿ  Our unitholders have no contractual or other legal right to receive distributions from us on a quarterly or other
basis. The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a policy at or prior to the closing of this offering
pursuant to which distributions for each quarter (including the distributions of additional PIK units on
outstanding PIK units) will equal the amount of the available cash we generate in such quarter, as determined
quarterly by the board of directors of our general partner, but it may change this policy at any time.
Ÿ  Subject to certain exceptions, the indenture governing our senior secured notes and our revolving credit
facility place restrictions on our ability to make cash distributions. Subject to certain exceptions, the
restricted payment covenant under the indenture governing our senior
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
73
secured notes restricts us from making cash distributions unless our fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined
in the indenture, is at least 2.0 to 1.0 after giving pro forma effect to such distributions and such cash
distributions do not exceed an amount equal to the aggregate net proceeds received by us (either as a result
of capital contributions or from the sale of equity or certain debt securities) plus 50% of our consolidated net
income (or less 100% of consolidated net loss), which is defined to exclude certain non-cash charges, such
as net unrealized gains or losses from hedging obligations and impairment charges, accrued on a cumulative
basis, plus certain other items. Our revolving credit facility generally restricts our ability to make cash
distributions if (a) we fail to have excess availability under the facility at least equal to the greater of (1) 25%
of the lesser of (x) the $300 million commitment amount and (y) the then applicable borrowing base and
(2) $37.5 million or (b) we fail to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the revolving credit
facility, after giving pro forma effect to such distributions of at least 1.1 to 1.0.
Ÿ  As of December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012 (and thus before giving effect to a $40.0 million equity
distribution to Northern Tier Holdings in May 2012), our restricted payments basket under the indenture was
equal to approximately $58.3 million and $58.9 million, respectively. On a pro forma basis for this offering and
the May 2012 equity distribution, as of December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012, our restricted payments
basket under the indenture would have been equal to approximately $         million and $         million,
respectively. These financial tests and covenants are described in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Description of Our
Indebtedness.” Should we be unable to satisfy the restrictions described above or if we are otherwise in
default under our revolving credit facility or the indenture, we may be required to reduce or eliminate cash
distributions to you notwithstanding our distribution policy.
Ÿ  Unlike most publicly traded partnerships, we will not have a minimum quarterly distribution or employ
structures intended to consistently maintain or increase quarterly distributions over time. Furthermore, none
of our limited partner interests will be subordinate in right of distributions to the common units sold in this
offering.
Ÿ  Our general partner will have the authority to establish cash reserves for the prudent conduct of our business,
and the establishment of or increase in those reserves could result in a reduction in cash distributions to our
unitholders. Our partnership agreement does not set a limit on the amount of cash reserves that our general
partner may establish. Any decision to establish cash reserves made by our general partner in good faith will
be binding on our unitholders.
Ÿ  Prior to making any distributions on our units, we will reimburse our general partner and its affiliates for all
direct and indirect expenses they incur on our behalf. Our partnership agreement provides that our general
partner will determine in good faith the expenses that are allocable to us, but does not limit the amount of
expenses for which our general partner and its affiliates may be reimbursed. The reimbursement of expenses
and payment of fees, if any, to our general partner and its affiliates will reduce the amount of cash to pay
distributions to our unitholders.
Ÿ  We may lack sufficient cash to make distributions to our unitholders due to a number of factors that would
adversely affect us, including but not limited to decreases in sales or increases in operating expenses,
principal and interest payments on debt, working capital requirements, capital expenditures, disruptions in the
operations of our refinery or anticipated cash needs. See “Risk Factors” for information regarding these
factors.
Ÿ  Under Section 17-607 of the Delaware Act, we may not make a distribution to our limited partners if the
distribution would cause our liabilities to exceed the fair value of our assets.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
74
We have a limited operating history upon which to rely in evaluating our ability to make distributions on our
common units. While we believe, based on our financial forecast and related assumptions, that we should
have sufficient cash to enable us to pay the forecasted aggregate distribution in cash on all of our units for
the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and for the three months ending September 30, 2013, we may be
unable to pay the forecasted distribution or any amount on our units.
We expect to generally distribute a significant percentage of our cash from operations to our unitholders on a
quarterly basis, after, among other things, the establishment of cash reserves and payment of our expenses.
Therefore, our growth, if any, may not be comparable to those businesses that reinvest most or all of their
cash to expand ongoing operations. Moreover, any future growth may be slower than our historical growth.
We expect that we will rely upon external financing sources in large part, including bank borrowings and
issuances of debt and equity interests, to fund our expansion capital expenditures. To the extent we are
unable to finance growth externally, our distribution policy could significantly impair our ability to grow.
Unaudited Pro Forma Available Cash
The following table illustrates, on a pro forma basis for the year ended December 31, 2011 and for the twelve
months ended March 31, 2012, our available cash assuming that the IPO Transactions had occurred as of
January 1, 2011.
If we had completed the IPO Transactions on January 1, 2011, our unaudited pro forma available cash for the
year ended December 31, 2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 would have been $11.7 million
and $9.1 million, respectively. This amount would have enabled us to make an annualized distribution of
$             and $             per unit on all of our outstanding units for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the
twelve months ended March 31, 2012, respectively (assuming that distributions on the PIK units are made in
cash and not in additional PIK units). Our pro forma available cash for the year ended December 31, 2011 and
the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 includes a realized loss from derivative activities of $310.3 million
and $311.0 million, respectively. The hedge positions resulting in this realized loss were established at the
time of the Marathon Acquisition. Our plan going forward is to hedge a lesser amount of production than we
hedged at the time of the acquisition. Consequently, we plan to increase our exposure to the gross refining
margins that we would realize at our refinery on an unhedged basis.
Available cash is a cash accounting concept, while our consolidated financial statements have been prepared
on an accrual basis. The amount of pro forma available cash should only be viewed as a general indication of
the amount of available cash that we might have generated had we been formed and completed the IPO
Transactions in earlier periods.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
75
Revenue
Costs, expenses and other:
Cost of sales
Direct operating expenses
Turnaround and related expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Selling, general and administrative
Formation costs
Contingent consideration income (loss)
Other (income) expense, net
Operating income
Realized losses from derivative activities
Loss on early extinguishment of derivatives
Unrealized losses from derivative activities
Year Ended
December 31, 2011
(in millions except per unit data)
Twelve Months
Ended
March 31,
2012
4,339.7
$
4,280.8   
 
3,508.0   
260.3   
22.6   
29.5   
90.7   
7.4   
(55.8)  
(4.5)  
   
422.6   
(310.3)  
—
$
3,568.8  
259.1  
22.8  
30.7  
92.6  
4.9  
41.7  
(5.5) 
 
324.6  
(311.0) 
(44.6)
Unrealized losses from derivative activities
Interest expense, net
Earnings before income taxes
Income tax provision
Net earnings
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to Adjusted EBITDA:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Unrealized losses from derivative activities
Loss on early extinguishment of derivatives
Realized losses on derivative activities
Contingent consideration income
Formation costs
Adjusted EBITDA(a)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
76
Adjusted EBITDA(a)
Adjustments to reconcile Adjusted EBITDA to pro forma
available cash:
Less:
Pro forma incremental general and administrative expenses(b)
Pro forma income tax paid(c)
Cash interest paid
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Actual turnaround and related expenses
Maintenance capital expenditures
Turnaround and related expenses reserve(d)
Realized losses on derivative activities
Plus:
Pro forma interest expense(e)
Pro forma management fee(f)
Use of cash reserves or borrowings to fund actual turnaround and
related expenses
Pro forma available cash
Actual and implied cash distributions based on pro forma
$
$
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
$
(41.9)  
(42.1)  
   
28.3   
   
—   
   
28.3
42.1   
29.5   
   
99.9   
2.8   
22.6   
1.6   
41.9   
—   
310.3   
(55.8)  
7.4   
   
430.7
Year Ended
December 31, 2011
$
$
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
$
132.6  
(42.5)
59.1  
 
—  
 
59.1
42.5  
30.7  
 
132.3  
2.6  
22.8  
1.7  
(132.6) 
44.6  
311.0  
41.7  
4.9  
 
429.0
Twelve Months
Ended
March 31,
2012
429.0
(in millions except per unit data)
430.7
$
3.5    
5.7    
37.9    
2.8    
22.6    
45.9    
18.0    
310.3    
  
3.0    
2.1
22.6    
    
11.7
$
3.5  
6.6  
38.0  
2.6  
22.8  
45.3  
18.0  
311.0
3.0  
2.1
22.8  
 
9.1
$
$
Actual and implied cash distributions based on pro forma
available cash(g):
Aggregate pro forma available cash per unit
Cash distributions to common unitholders
Available cash attributable to PIK units(h)
Indenture(i):
Restricted payments basket(j)
Fixed charge coverage ratio
Revolving credit facility:
Fixed charge coverage ratio(k)
$
2.8x    
  
1.2x
$
2.8x
1.1x
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
For a definition of Adjusted EBITDA, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated
Financial and Other Data.”
Represents an adjustment for estimated incremental general and administrative expenses that we expect we will
incur as a publicly traded partnership, including costs associated with SEC reporting requirements, annual and
quarterly reports to unitholders, tax return and Schedule K-1 preparation and distribution, independent auditor
fees, investor relations activities, registrar and transfer agent fees, incremental director and officer liability
insurance costs and director compensation.
Represents the estimated income tax provision resulting from Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC, our subsidiary
that conducts our retail business, and Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC electing to be treated as corporations
for federal income tax purposes.
Represents a reserve of cash to fund expenditures associated with scheduled turnarounds of our refinery. We
estimate total turnaround and related expenses at our St. Paul Park refinery of approximately $110 million over
a six-year turnaround cycle. Therefore, we estimate reserving approximately $18 million of available cash per
year for turnaround and related expenses.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
77
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Reflects the reduction in interest expense related to the redemption of $29 million of our senior secured notes
with a portion of the proceeds of this offering.
Represents the reduction in management fees paid to ACON Management and TPG Management pursuant to
the management services agreement which will terminate in connection with the closing of this offering. At the
closing of this offering, ACON Management and TPG Management will receive a success fee of $7.5 million
pursuant to the management services agreement. See “Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions
—Agreements with Affiliates of Our General Partner—Management Services Agreement.”
Based on              common units and              PIK units outstanding and assumes no dilution with respect to
distributions of additional PIK units on outstanding PIK units for each quarter in the period presented.
Available cash represented by distributions of additional PIK units on outstanding PIK units for any quarter is to
be retained for general partnership purposes.
Subject to certain exceptions, the restricted payment covenant under the indenture governing our senior secured
notes restricts us from making cash distributions unless our fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the
indenture, is at least 2.0 to 1.0 and such cash distributions do not exceed an amount equal to the aggregate net
proceeds received by us (either as a result of capital contributions or from the sale of equity or certain debt
securities) plus 50% of our consolidated net income (or less 100% of consolidated net loss) accrued on a
cumulative basis plus certain other items.
Represents the amount of the restricted payments basket before giving effect to the reduction in the basket as
a result of the distributions assumed to be paid in respect of the common units as contemplated above.
(k) Our revolving credit facility generally restricts our ability to make cash distributions if (a) we fail to have excess
availability under the facility at least equal to the greater of (1) 25% of the lesser of (x) the $300 million
commitment amount and (y) the then applicable borrowing base and (2) $37.5 million or (b) we fail to maintain a
fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the revolving credit facility, after giving pro forma effect to such
distributions of at least 1.1 to 1.0.
Forecasted Available Cash
We do not as a matter of course make projections as to future sales, earnings or other results. However, we
have prepared the prospective financial information set forth below for the twelve months ending June 30,
2013 and the three months ending September 30, 2013 to supplement the historical consolidated financial
information included elsewhere in this prospectus. The table presents our expectations regarding our ability
to generate $245.9 million of available cash for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 and $61.8 million for
the three months ending September 30, 2013. These expectations of available cash do not include any
incremental capital expenditures or available cash generated as a result of the proposed pipeline initiative
described in “Prospectus Summary—Recent Developments—Proposed Pipeline Initiative” and “Business—
Recent Developments—Proposed Pipeline Initiative” or the execution of any other growth projects. The
accompanying prospective financial information was not prepared with a view toward complying with the
guidelines established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants with respect to prospective
financial information, but, in the view of our management, was prepared on a reasonable basis, reflects the
best currently available estimates and judgments, and presents, to the best of management’s knowledge and
belief, the expected course of action and our expected future financial performance. However, this information
is not fact and should not be relied upon as being indicative of future results, and readers of this prospectus
are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the prospective financial information. The prospective financial
information included in this prospectus has been prepared by, and is the responsibility of, our management.
Neither PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP nor any other independent accountants, has examined, compiled, or
performed any procedures with respect to the accompanying prospective financial information and,
accordingly, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP does not express an
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
78
opinion or any other form of assurance with respect thereto. The PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP reports
included in the registration statement relate to our successor’s and predecessor’s historical financial
information. Those reports do not extend to the prospective financial information and should not be read to
do so.
In “—Assumptions and Considerations” below, we discuss the major assumptions underlying this estimate.
We can give you no assurance that our assumptions will be realized or that we will generate any available
cash, in which event we will not be able to pay quarterly cash distributions on our common units.
When considering our ability to generate available cash and how we calculate forecasted available cash,
investors should keep in mind all of the risk factors and other cautionary statements under the headings
“Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” which describe factors that
could cause our results of operations and available cash to vary significantly from our estimates.
The assumptions and estimates underlying the prospective financial information are inherently uncertain.
Although such assumptions and estimates are considered, as of the date of this prospectus, to be reasonable
by our management team, such assumptions and estimates are subject to a wide variety of significant
business, economic and competitive risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially
from those contained in the prospective financial information. Such forward-looking statements are based on
assumptions and views that we believe to be reasonable; however, assumed facts almost always vary from
actual results, and the differences between assumed facts and actual results can be material, depending upon
the circumstances. Where we express an expectation or belief as to future results, that expectation or belief is
expressed in good faith and based on assumptions believed to have a reasonable basis. It cannot be assured,
however, that the stated expectation or belief will occur or be achieved or accomplished. Accordingly, there
can be no assurance that the prospective results are indicative of our future performance or that actual results
will not differ materially from those presented in the prospective financial information. Inclusion of the
prospective financial information in this prospectus should not be regarded as a representation by any person
that the results contained in the prospective financial information will be achieved.
We do not undertake any obligation to release publicly the results of any future revisions we may make to the
financial forecast or to update this financial forecast to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this
prospectus. In light of the above, the statement that we believe that we will have sufficient available cash to
allow us to pay the forecasted quarterly distributions on all of our outstanding common units for the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013 and the three months ending September 30, 2013 should not be regarded as a
representation by us or the underwriters or any other person that we will make such distributions. Therefore,
you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on this information.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
79
The following table shows how we calculate estimated available cash for the twelve months ending June 30,
2013 and for the three months ending September 30, 2013. The assumptions that we believe are relevant to
particular line items in the table below are explained in the corresponding footnotes and in “—Assumptions
and Considerations.”
For the Three Months Ending
September 30,
December 31,
March 31,
June 30,
For the Twelve
Months Ending
June 30,
2012
2012
2013
(dollars in millions except per barrel/gallon data)
2013
2013
For the Three
Months
Ending
September 30,
2013
Operating Data:
Refinery segment data:
Refinery feedstocks (bpd):
Light and intermediate
crude oil
 
Heavy crude oil
 
Other feedstocks / blendstocks
Total throughput
Refinery product yields (bpd):
Gasoline
Distillates
Asphalt
Other
Total production
Refinery gross product margin
per barrel of throughput
Forecasted SPP Refinery 3:2:1
crack spread (per barrel)
Forecasted Group 3 3:2:1 crack
spread (per barrel)
Forecasted WTI (per barrel)
Retail segment data:
Company operated stores:
Gallons sold (in millions)
Retail fuel margin ($/gallon)
Statement of operations data:  
Total revenue
Cost, expenses and other:
Cost of sales
Direct operating expenses
Turnaround and related
expenses
Depreciation & amortization
$
$
$
  $
 
 
 
 
  $
$
59,000   
15,000   
716
74,716   
 
37,543   
26,880   
7,970   
3,047
75,440
59,000   
15,000   
3,034
59,000   
  15,000   
 
4,383
39,550   
  10,055   
 
593
77,034   
 
40,162   
26,850   
7,831   
3,007
78,383   
 
  41,493   
  26,834   
7,760   
 
 
2,989
50,198   
 
  25,166   
  18,018   
  5,343   
  2,184
77,850
79,076
50,711
54,151   
13,767   
2,174
70,092   
 
36,091   
24,652   
7,228   
2,808
70,779
59,000  
15,000  
885  
 
74,885
37,543  
26,880  
7,970  
3,047  
 
75,440
22.74    $
19.10    $ 17.13    $ 17.85    $
19.31    $
18.35
26.18    $
22.57    $ 19.73    $ 20.45    $
22.33    $
20.58
20.13    $
83.60    $
85
0.17    $
16.29    $ 14.56    $ 15.52    $
84.56    $ 85.41    $ 85.86    $
82
0.17    $
76
82
0.18    $ 0.17    $
16.63    $
84.86    $
325   
 
0.17    $
15.90  
85.96
85  
0.17
1,028.3    $
1,024.6    $1,012.5    $ 750.7    $
3,816.1    $
1,041.5
825.4   
67.0
845.7   
66.9
2.7
853.1   
66.8
625.3   
 
60.6
10.0
40.0
3,149.5   
261.3
58.2
868.6  
67.0
–
5.5
8.0
8.0
8.8
8.8
19.9   
(3.0)
105.5
19.8   
(3.0)
19.6   
(3.1)
84.5
57.3
(0.8)
19.8   
(3.0)
(1.1)
(1.4)
(2.3)
(3.4)
1.1   
(9.0)
96.5   
(1.7)
94.8    $
1.4   
(8.9)
75.6   
(0.9)
74.7    $
2.3   
(8.9)
48.4   
(0.6)
3.4   
(8.8)
(9.6)  
(1.6)
47.8    $ (11.2)   $
80
For the Three Months Ending
September 30,
December 31,
March 31,
June 30,
Depreciation & amortization
Selling, general &
administrative expenses
Other income, net
Operating income
Realized (losses) from
derivative activities
 
Unrealized gains from derivative
activities
 
 
Interest expense
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
  $
Earnings before income taxes
Income tax provision
Net earnings
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Net earnings
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to Adjusted
EBITDA:
Interest expense
Depreciation & amortization
Income tax provision
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock based compensation
Unrealized gains from derivative activities
Realized losses from derivative activities
Adjusted EBITDA(a)
Adjustments to reconcile Adjusted EBITDA to
available cash:
Less:
Cash interest paid
Income tax provision
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Actual turnaround and related expenses
Maintenance capital expenditures
Turnaround and related expenses reserve
Realized losses from derivative activities
Plus:
Use of cash reserves or borrowings to fund actual
turnaround and related expenses
Available cash
Actual and implied cash distributions based on
$
$
$
$
33.6
79.1   
(12.1)
246.5
(8.2)
8.2   
(35.6)
210.9   
(4.8)
206.1    $
8.8
19.8  
(3.0) 
 
80.3
(2.2)
2.2  
(8.9) 
 
71.4  
(1.7) 
 
69.7
For the
Twelve
Months
Ending
June 30,
2013
For the
Three
Months
Ending
September 30,
2012
2012
(dollars in millions except per unit data)
2013
2013
94.8    $
74.7    $
47.8    $
(11.2)   $ 206.1    $
9.0   
8.0   
1.7
113.5    $
0.7   
5.5   
0.6   
1.1   
(1.1)
120.3    $
7.9   
1.7   
0.7   
5.5   
11.7   
4.5   
1.1
5.5
92.7    $
8.9   
8.0   
0.9
92.5    $
0.7   
2.7   
0.6   
1.4   
(1.4)
96.5    $
7.8   
0.9   
0.7   
2.7   
7.9   
4.5   
1.4
8.9   
8.8   
0.6
66.1    $
0.7   
10.0   
0.6   
2.3   
(2.3)
77.4    $
7.8   
0.6   
0.7   
10.0   
4.4   
4.5   
2.3
2.7
73.3    $
10.0
57.1    $
8.0    $ 280.1    $
49.3    $ 343.5    $
8.8   
8.8   
1.6
0.7   
40.0   
0.6   
3.4   
(3.4)
7.7   
1.6   
0.7   
40.0   
8.6   
4.5   
3.4
35.6   
33.6   
4.8
2.8   
58.2   
2.4   
8.2   
(8.2)
31.2   
4.8   
2.8   
58.2   
32.6   
18.0   
8.2
58.2
40.0
22.8    $ 245.9    $
2013
69.7
8.9  
8.8  
1.7  
 
89.1
0.7  
–  
0.6  
2.2  
(2.2) 
 
90.4
7.8  
1.7  
0.7  
–  
11.7  
4.5  
2.2
–  
 
61.8
available cash(b):
Available cash per unit
Cash distributions to common unitholders
Available cash attributable to PIK units(c)
Common units outstanding as of the distribution
record date for the period presented
PIK units outstanding as of the distribution record
date for period presented
Sensitivity Analysis:
Changes in available cash if:
$1/bbl increase in Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread
Impact of $1/bbl market price increase on derivative
contracts(d)
$1/bbl increase in crude oil differential
1,000 bpd increase in throughput
Indenture:
Restricted payments basket
Fixed charge coverage ratio
Revolving credit facility:
Fixed charge coverage ratio
$
$
$
x   
 
        x
5.9    $
6.2    $
6.2    $
3.9    $
22.2    $
(3.5)  
6.8   
2.1
(3.7)  
6.8   
2.0
(1.3)  
6.7   
1.9
(1.3)  
4.5   
1.1
(9.8)  
24.8   
7.1
$                 $                $                $
x   
 
        x
x   
 
        x
x   
 
        x
x   
 
        x
5.9
(1.3) 
6.8  
1.7
x
x
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
For a definition of Adjusted EBITDA, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data.”
Based on              common units and              PIK units outstanding. For each distribution, the number of outstanding units is increased to
reflect the additional PIK units issued to the holders of PIK units in respect of the prior quarter’s distribution, assuming a constant price per
common unit of $             (the mid-point of the range set forth on the cover page of this prospectus).
Available cash attributable to PIK units represents the amount of cash that would have been distributed to holders of PIK units if such units
were entitled to receive their distributions in cash during the forecast period.
We have approximately 9.8 million barrels of gasoline and diesel hedged through June 30, 2013 at a weighted average gross margin of
$20.75/bbl.
81
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Assumptions and Considerations
General
The accompanying financial forecast and specific significant forecast assumptions assume that the IPO
Transactions had occurred as of July 1, 2012.
Our next major turnaround is currently expected to occur in 2013. We have assumed for the purpose of this
forecast that the refinery will be shut down during the month of April 2013 to complete the turnaround.
Therefore, we have included a financial forecast for the three months ending September 30, 2013 to provide an
additional quarterly estimate of available cash following completion of the planned turnaround. Our
assumptions and considerations for the three months ending September 30, 2013 are materially consistent
with our assumptions and considerations described below with respect to the twelve months ending June 30,
2013.
Utilization
For the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, we estimate that our refinery will operate at an average
throughput of 67,900 barrels per day of crude oil on an annual basis after making an allowance for downtime
associated with the major turnaround on the refinery anticipated in 2013. We have assumed that the refinery is
shut down for the month of April 2013. For more information on our planned turnaround, see “—Turnaround
and Related Expenses” and “—Turnaround and Related Expenses Reserve.” Our refinery has a capacity of
approximately 74,000 barrels per calendar day and 84,500 barrels per stream day of crude oil. For the year
ended December 31, 2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 the St. Paul Park refinery operated at
an average throughput of 77,452 barrels per day and 76,188 barrels per day, respectively.
Revenue
We project revenue of $3.8 billion over the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. During each of the twelve
months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, we generated revenue of $4.3 billion.
Refining Segment
We forecast revenue from our refining segment of approximately $3.0 billion, of which approximately $784
million relates to intercompany sales to our SuperAmerica owned and operated convenience stores. Revenue
from our refining segment for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012
was approximately $3.8 billion and $3.9 billion, respectively, of which approximately $1.0 billion and $1.0
billion, respectively, related to intercompany sales to our SuperAmerica owned and operated convenience
stores.
Group 3 3:2:1 Crack Spread.    Our estimates for gasoline and distillate prices are based on the PADD II Group
3 3:2:1 crack spread, which in turn is derived from Group 3 benchmark pricing for gasoline and distillate and
WTI benchmark pricing for crude oil. The Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread is a proxy for the per barrel margin that
a sweet crude oil refinery would earn assuming it produced and sold at Group 3 prices the benchmark
production of two barrels of gasoline and one barrel of ultra low sulfur diesel for every three barrels of WTI
crude oil input. We forecast a Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread of $16.63 per barrel for the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013. The NYMEX 3:2:1 forward crack spread over the same period, as of June 18, 2012, was $19.44
per barrel.
Gasoline.    We estimate revenue from gasoline sales based on forecast future product prices multiplied by
the number of barrels of gasoline we estimate that we will produce and sell during the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013. We forecast that we will sell approximately 14.8 million barrels of
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
82
gasoline at a weighted average price of $100.60 per barrel during the twelve months ending June 30, 2013.
Forecast future product prices are estimated assuming that the purchaser will pay all shipping costs. We
project the weighted average selling price of gasoline based on projected estimates of WTI and the projected
Group 3 gasoline benchmark price differential to WTI. We assumed a weighted average gasoline price
premium to WTI of $15.81 per barrel. As an element of this price premium, we have assumed a favorable basis
differential of $1.95 per barrel at the St. Paul Park refinery as compared to the Group 3 benchmark pricing.
This is comparable to the average Group 3 gasoline benchmark basis differential the refinery has realized
based on historical data going back further than five years. The NYMEX RBOB forward price differential to WTI
over the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, as of June 18, 2012, was $16.03 per barrel. Based on these
assumptions, we forecast our net gasoline revenues for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 to be
approximately $1.5 billion, of which approximately $721 million relates to intercompany sales to our
SuperAmerica owned and operated convenience stores. For the year ended December 31, 2011, we sold
approximately 16.0 million barrels of gasoline at a weighted average price of $119.36 per barrel and realized
net gasoline revenues of approximately $1.9 billion, of which approximately $965 million was to
SuperAmerica. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, we sold approximately 16.0 million barrels of
gasoline at a weighted average price of $120.63 per barrel and realized net gasoline revenues of approximately
$1.9 billion, of which approximately $960 million was to SuperAmerica.
Distillate.    We estimate revenue from distillate sales based on forecast future product prices multiplied by
the number of barrels of distillate we estimate that we will produce and sell during the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013. Forecast future product prices are estimated assuming that the purchaser will pay all shipping
costs. We forecast that we will sell approximately 9.2 million barrels of distillate at a weighted average price of
$108.79 per barrel during the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. We project the weighted average selling
price of distillate based on projected estimates of WTI and the projected Group 3 distillate benchmark price
differential to WTI. We assumed a weighted average distillate price premium to WTI of $24.02 per barrel. As an
element of this price premium, we have assumed a favorable basis differential of $1.76 per barrel at the St.
Paul Park refinery as compared to the Group 3 benchmark pricing. This is comparable to the average Group 3
distillate benchmark basis differential the refinery has realized based on historical data going back further
than five years. The NYMEX U.S. Gulf Coast ultra low sulfur diesel forward price differential to WTI over the
twelve months ending June 30, 2013, as of June 18, 2012, was $26.27. Based on these assumptions, we
forecast our net distillate revenues for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 to be approximately $1.0
billion, of which approximately $63 million relates to intercompany sales to our SuperAmerica owned and
operated convenience stores. For the year ended December 31, 2011, we sold approximately 9.1 million
barrels of distillate at a weighted average price of $129.91 per barrel and realized net distillate revenues of
approximately $1.2 billion. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, we sold approximately 9.2 million
barrels of distillate at a weighted average price of $132.44 per barrel and realized net distillate revenues of
approximately $1.2 billion.
Asphalt.    We estimate asphalt revenue based on forecast future product prices multiplied by the number of
barrels of asphalt we estimate that we will produce and sell during the twelve months ending June 30, 2013.
Forecast future product prices are estimated assuming that the purchaser will pay all shipping costs. We
forecast that we will sell approximately 2.6 million barrels of asphalt at a weighted average price of $59.58 per
barrel during the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. We have assumed sales to our customers at a
weighted average discount of $25.18 per barrel to the applicable WTI price over the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013. The $25.18 per barrel discount to WTI is calculated from a regression formula derived from
monthly Western Canadian Select crude oil prices and St. Paul Park refinery realized asphalt prices based on
historical data going back further than five years. The WTI benchmark price per barrel is forecast based on
our view of future prices. Based on these assumptions, we forecast our net asphalt revenues for the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013 to be approximately $157 million. For the year ended December 31, 2011, we
sold approximately 3.9 million
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
83
barrels of asphalt at a weighted average price of $66.90 per barrel and realized net asphalt revenues of
approximately $259 million. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, we sold approximately 3.8 million
barrels of asphalt at a weighted average price of $70.72 per barrel and realized net asphalt revenues of
approximately $267 million. The reduction in forecasted asphalt production from the year ended December 31,
2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 is due to our assumption that our refinery will run a lighter
slate of crude oil to take advantage of favorable North Dakota light crude oil differentials and we will maximize
production of distillate in the forecast period.
Other Products.    The St. Paul Park refinery produces and sells propane, propylene, liquid sulfur and No. 6
fuel oil in addition to the products described above. We forecast that we will sell approximately 1.0 million
barrels of these products at a weighted average price of $71.85 per barrel during the twelve months ending
June 30, 2013. Based on these forecasted prices and the volumes, we forecast net revenues of other products
to be approximately $73 million during the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. For the year ended
December 31, 2011, we sold approximately 2.4 million barrels of other products at a weighted average price of
$86.93 per barrel and realized net revenues of approximately $211 million. For the twelve months ended March
31, 2012, we sold approximately 2.2 million barrels of other products at a weighted average price of $85.63 per
barrel and realized net revenues of approximately $184 million. The reduction in forecasted production of
other products from the year ended December 31, 2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 is due to
our assumption that our refinery will run a lighter slate of crude oil to take advantage of favorable North
Dakota light crude oil differentials and we will maximize production of distillate in the forecast period.
Other Revenue.    Other revenue consists of excise taxes, RIN credit sales and other miscellaneous revenues
not specifically identified above. We forecast other revenue of approximately $271 million over the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013, of which approximately $266 million are excise taxes. For the year ended
December 31, 2011, we recognized other revenue of approximately $241 million, of which approximately $233
million were excise taxes. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, we recognized other revenue of
approximately $251 million, of which approximately $242 million were excise taxes.
Retail Segment
Revenue from our retail segment includes the sale of gasoline and diesel (“light products”) and merchandise,
supplied to us both from our SuperMom’s Bakery and third party vendors, from our company owned and
operated SuperAmerica stores, royalty fees from our franchised SuperAmerica stores, sales to third parties
from our SuperMom’s Bakery and excise and sales taxes. We project revenue from our retail segment of
approximately $1.6 billion for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. We project that we will sell
approximately 325 million barrels of light products in the retail segment at an average margin of $0.17 per
gallon. We project approximately $346 million of merchandise revenue for the twelve months ending June 30,
2013. For the year ended December 31, 2011, we sold approximately 324 million barrels of light products at a
weighted average margin of $0.21 per gallon. In addition, we sold approximately $340 million of merchandise
revenue and realized total revenue from our retail segment of approximately $1.5 billion. For the twelve
months ended March 31, 2012, we sold approximately 320 million barrels of light products at a weighted
average margin of $0.20 per gallon. In addition, we sold approximately $344 million of merchandise revenue
and realized total revenue from our retail segment of approximately $1.5 billion.
Cost of Sales
We estimate that our cost of sales for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 will be approximately $3.1
billion, or approximately 83% of sales. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2011 was approximately
$3.5 billion, or approximately 82% of sales. Cost of sales for the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 was
approximately $3.6 billion, or approximately 82% of sales.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Refining Segment
84
Cost of sales for our refining segment includes the purchased raw material costs for crude oil, natural
gasoline, normal butane, isobutane, ethanol, biodiesel and other costs. Our feedstock and raw material costs
consist of blending components for the finished products production process, which are driven primarily by
commodity prices and volumes. We assume that our product yield will be approximately 101.0% over the
twelve months ending June 30, 2013. For the year ended December 31, 2011, our product yield was 101.1%.
For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, our product yield was 101.3%.
Crude Oil.    We estimate that we will purchase approximately 24.8 million barrels of crude oil for the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013. We estimate crude oil costs of approximately $2.0 billion and that our realized
crude oil cost will be $80.99 per barrel for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. We forecast that the St.
Paul Park refinery will realize an average crude oil price discount of $3.78 per barrel to the benchmark WTI
price. Our crude oil discount is based on our projection of the weighted average price of our benchmark
crude oils’ discount to WTI. We believe the St. Paul Park refinery will continue to realize favorable crude
differentials to WTI. We believe these favorable differentials will continue due to the continued logistical
bottlenecks in the U.S. Gulf Coast for sweet crude, and north of Cushing, Oklahoma, for Canadian heavy
crude oil. We believe these bottlenecks will cause the favorable crude oil price differentials off WTI for the
crude oils processed at our refinery to continue. Our average crude oil price discount relative to WTI realized
for the seven years ended December 31, 2011 was $2.25 per barrel. For the year ended December 31, 2011, we
purchased approximately 28.3 million barrels of crude oil at a weighted average price of $94.69 per barrel for a
total crude oil cost of approximately $2.7 billion. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, we purchased
approximately 27.9 million barrels of crude oil at a weighted average price of $97.22 per barrel for a total
crude oil cost of approximately $2.7 billion.
Feedstocks and Blendstocks.    Cost of sales also includes the cost of natural gasoline, normal butane,
isobutane, ethanol and biodiesel, among others, that we blend into our gasoline and distillate finished
products, excise taxes and transportation/terminal charges. We forecast these elements of cost of sales to be
approximately $457 million over the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, of which approximately $266 million
is excise taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2011, these elements of cost of sales were approximately
$527 million, of which approximately $233 million was excise taxes. For the twelve months March 31, 2012,
these elements of cost of sales were approximately $546 million, of which approximately $242 million was
excise taxes.
Retail Segment
Cost of sales from our retail segment includes the cost of gasoline and diesel products purchased from our
refining segment sold at our company owned and operated SuperAmerica stores, the cost of merchandise
sold to third parties by our SuperMom’s Bakery and at our company owned and operated SuperAmerica
stores and excise and sales taxes. We forecast cost of sales from our retail segment of approximately $1.4
billion for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. For the year ended December 31, 2011, cost of sales from
our retail segment was approximately $1.3 billion. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, cost of sales
from our retail segment was approximately $1.3 billion.
Direct Operating Expenses
Refining Segment
Direct operating expenses include all direct and indirect labor at the facility, materials, supplies, and other
expenses associated with the operation and maintenance of the facility. We estimate that our
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
85
direct operating expenses for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 will be approximately $129 million.
Refining segment direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2011 were $129 million. Refining
segment direct operating expenses for the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 were $128 million.
Retail Segment
Direct operating expenses include all direct and indirect labor at our retail stores and our SuperMom’s
Bakery, rent expense, credit card fees and other costs of operating our SuperAmerica stores. We estimate that
our direct operating expenses for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 will be approximately $132 million.
Retail segment direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2011 were $131 million. Retail
segment direct operating expenses for the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 were $131 million.
Turnaround and Related Expenses
Turnaround and related expenses represent the costs of required major maintenance projects on the refinery
processing units. We expect to perform our major turnaround during 2013. We are still finalizing our planning
for this turnaround, but we have assumed for purposes of this forecast that we will shut down the refinery
during the month of April 2013 to complete the turnaround. This assumption is subject to change as we
complete our turnaround planning. Expected turnaround expense for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013
is approximately $58 million, of which approximately $50 million is attributed to the major turnaround in 2013.
Turnaround and related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2011 were $23 million. Turnaround and
related expenses for the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 were $23 million. We intend to use cash
reserves or borrowings under our revolving credit facility to fund actual turnaround and related expenses. See
“—Turnaround and Related Expenses Reserve.”
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
We estimate the depreciation and amortization expense for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 to be
approximately $34 million, of which approximately $8 million is the depreciation of assets in our retail
segment. Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2011 was approximately $30
million. Depreciation and amortization expense for the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 was
approximately $31 million. The increase in forecasted depreciation expense from the year ended December 31,
2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 is due to the incremental depreciation expense on capital
expenditures made during the six months ending June 30, 2012 and during the forecast period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses include salary and benefits costs for executive management,
stock based compensation, accounting and information technology personnel, legal, audit, tax and other
professional service costs. We estimate that our selling, general and administrative expense will be
approximately $79 million for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, of which approximately $14 million is
attributed to our retail segment and approximately $48 million is related to our corporate infrastructure. Our
selling, general and administrative expense estimate includes approximately $3.5 million of incremental
expenses that we expect to incur as a public traded partnership. Selling, general and administrative expenses
for the year ended December 31, 2011 were approximately $91 million. Selling, general and administrative
expenses for the twelve months ended March 31, 2012 were approximately $93 million. The forecasted net
reduction in selling, general and administrative expense is due to incremental costs incurred during the year
ended December 31, 2011 as we developed our standalone infrastructure while we also paid Marathon for
transition services.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
86
Realized Losses from Derivative Activities
As of the time of this offering, approximately 50% of our remaining 2012 production is hedged and 20% of our
2013 production is hedged. For the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, we estimate losses of approximately
$8 million will be realized on these derivative instruments.
In addition, during the first quarter of 2012, we settled contracts covering approximately 3 million barrels of
our remaining gasoline and diesel production and recognized losses of approximately $45 million. Our
required payment of the loss from these settled contracts has been deferred and will be paid to our
counterparties throughout 2012 and 2013. These payments will be funded from existing cash balances on
hand at the beginning of the forecast period. As such, cash available for distribution for the twelve months
ending June 30, 2013 will not be impacted by these payments.
During the second quarter of 2012, we reset the price of our remaining derivative contracts for the period of
July 2012 through December 2012 and recognized a loss of $92 million. We plan to use a portion of the net
proceeds of this offering to settle this obligation. If this offering is not completed the loss from resetting the
price of our derivative contracts will be paid to the counterparty on the same monthly schedule as the original
contracts were scheduled to settle.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates primarily to interest incurred on our senior secured notes as well as commitment fees
and interest on our revolving credit facility and the amortization of deferred financing costs. We expect to use
a portion of the net proceeds from this offering to redeem 10% of our senior secured notes at 103% of par
value, or $30 million. We do not expect to draw on our revolving credit facility during the twelve months
ending June 30, 2013. We expect to incur approximately $36 million in net interest expense during the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013, of which approximately $4 million is non-cash interest expense attributable to
the amortization of financing costs on our senior secured debt. Interest expense for the year ended
December 31, 2011 was approximately $42 million. Interest expense for the twelve months ended March 31,
2012 was approximately $43 million.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Included in other income are the dividends and equity income related to our 17% interests in the Minnesota
Pipe Line Company, LLC and MPL Investments, Inc. For the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, we estimate
distributions of net income to us from these investments of approximately $12 million. For the year ended
December 31, 2011 and the twelve months ended March 31, 2012, we received income distributions from these
interests of approximately $9 million and $10 million, respectively.
Income Tax Expense
We estimate that we will pay approximately $5 million in federal and state income tax during the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013, all of which is attributable to our retail segment. We estimate that we will pay
no federal income tax for our refining segment during the twelve months ending June 30, 2013.
Maintenance Capital Expenditures
We estimate maintenance capital expenditures over the forecast period of approximately $33 million, of which
approximately $4 million is attributed to the retail segment. Capital expenditures for the year ended
December 31, 2011 were approximately $46 million, of which approximately $9 million is attributed to the
retail segment and $3 million were corporate related. Capital expenditures for the twelve months ended March
31, 2012 were approximately $45 million, of which approximately $9 million is attributed to the retail segment
and $2 million were corporate related.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
87
Turnaround and Related Expenses Reserve
In advance of scheduled turnarounds at our refinery, the board of directors of our general partner intends to
elect to reserve amounts to fund expenditures and working capital requirements associated with such
scheduled turnarounds. Such a decision by the board of directors may have an adverse impact on the
available cash in the quarter(s) in which the reserves are withheld and a corresponding mitigating impact on
the future quarter(s) in which the reserves are utilized.
We estimate total turnaround expense at St. Paul Park refinery of approximately $110 million over a six year
turnaround cycle. Therefore, we estimate reserving approximately $18 million of available cash for turnaround
expense over the forecast period. Expected turnaround expense for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013 is
approximately $58 million, of which approximately $50 million is attributed to the major turnaround
scheduled for 2013. We are still finalizing our planning for this turnaround, but we have assumed for
purposes of this forecast that we will shut down the refinery during the month of April 2013 to complete this
turnaround. However, this assumption is subject to change as we complete our turnaround planning.
Regulatory, Industry and Economic Factors
Our forecast for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013, is based on the following assumptions related to
regulatory, industry and economic factors:
Ÿ  No material nonperformance or credit-related defaults by suppliers, customer or vendors;
Ÿ  No new regulation or interpretation of existing regulations that, in either case, would be materially adverse to
our business;
Ÿ  No material accidents, weather-related incidents, floods, unplanned turnarounds or other downtime or similar
unanticipated events that would reduce our capacity utilization below what we are currently forecasting;
Ÿ  No material adverse change in the market in which we operate resulting from reduced demand for gasoline,
distillate, asphalt or our other products;
Ÿ  No material decreases in the prices we receive for our products; and
Ÿ  No material changes to market or overall economic conditions.
Actual conditions may differ materially from those anticipated in this section as a result of a number of
factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding
Forward-Looking Statements.”
Compliance with Debt Covenants
Our ability to make distributions could be affected if we do not remain in compliance with the covenants in
the indenture governing our senior secured notes and our revolving credit facility. We have assumed we will
remain in compliance with such covenants.
Subject to certain exceptions, the restricted payments covenant under the indenture governing our senior
secured notes restricts us from making cash distributions unless our fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined
in the senior secured notes agreement, is at least 2.0 to 1.0 after giving pro forma effect to such distributions
and such cash distributions do not exceed an amount equal to the aggregate net proceeds received by us
(either as a result of capital contributions or from the sale of equity or certain debt securities) plus 50% of our
consolidated net income (or less 100% of consolidated net loss), which is defined to exclude certain non-cash
charges, such as net unrealized gains or losses from hedging obligations and impairment charges, accrued
on a cumulative basis, plus certain other items.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
88
The restricted payments covenant in our indenture could limit our ability to distribute all available cash in
quarters in which our net earnings significantly exceed our forecast because only 50% of those earnings will
increase the restricted payment basket. Additionally, a net loss in any period in which we forecasted net
earnings would disproportionately affect our ability to pay cash distributions because 100% of any
consolidated net loss decreases the restricted payment basket while only 50% of any consolidated net income
increases the basket.
Our revolving credit facility generally restricts our ability to make cash distributions if (a) we fail to have
excess availability under the facility at least equal to the greater of (1) 25% of the lesser of (x) the $300 million
commitment amount and (y) the then applicable borrowing base and (2) $37.5 million or (b) we fail to maintain
a fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the revolving credit facility, after giving pro forma effect to such
distributions of at least 1.1 to 1.0.
Sensitivity Analysis
Our available cash is significantly impacted by volatility in prevailing crack spreads, crude oil prices and
throughput at our refinery. In the paragraphs below, we discuss the impact of changes in these variables,
while holding all other variables constant, on our ability to generate our estimated available cash for the
twelve months ending June 30, 2013.
Crack Spread Volatility
Crack spreads measure the difference between the price received from the sale of light products and the price
paid for crude oil. Holding other variables constant, and excluding the impact of our current hedges, we
expect a $1.00 charge in the Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread per barrel would change our forecasted available cash
by $22 million for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013. The impact of a $1.00 change in the market price
related to our derivative contracts would be a $10 million reduction in our available cash for the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013.
Crude Oil Price Volatility
We are exposed to significant fluctuations in the price of crude oil. Holding all other variables constant, and
excluding the impact of our current hedges, we expect a $1.00 change in our crude differential to WTI would
change our forecasted available cash by $25 million for the twelve months ending June 30, 2013.
Refinery Throughput
Holding all other variables constant, and excluding the impact of our current hedges, we expect a 1,000 bpd
change in our refinery feedstock would change our forecasted available cash by $7.1 million for the twelve
months ending June 30, 2013.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
89
HOW WE MAKE DISTRIBUTIONS
General
We expect within 60 days after the end of each quarter, beginning with the quarter ending September 30, 2012,
to make distributions, as determined by the board of directors of our general partner, to unitholders of record
on the applicable record date.
Method of Distributions
The board of directors of our general partner will adopt a policy pursuant to which distributions for each
quarter will be in an amount equal to the available cash we generate in such quarter. Available cash for each
quarter will be determined by the board of directors of our general partner following the end of such quarter.
We do not intend to maintain excess distribution coverage for the purpose of maintaining stability or growth
in our quarterly distributions or to otherwise reserve cash for distributions, and we do not intend to incur debt
to pay quarterly distributions. Accordingly, there is no guarantee that we will pay any distribution on our units
in any quarter. We do not have a legal obligation to pay distributions, and the amount of distributions paid
under our policy and the decision to make any distribution will be determined by the board of directors of our
general partner.
At the closing of this offering, we will have outstanding a non-economic general partner interest, common
units and PIK units.
Partnership Interests
Common Units
At the closing of this offering, we will have              common units outstanding. Each common unit will be
entitled to receive cash distributions. Common units will not accrue arrearages.
PIK Units
At the closing of this offering, we will have              PIK units outstanding. Northern Tier Holdings will initially
own all of our PIK units. During the PIK period, the board of directors of our general partner will cause
distributions in respect of our PIK units to be payable by Northern Tier Energy LP in additional PIK units to
PIK unitholders of record on the applicable record date. The number of PIK units that will be distributed on a
PIK unit in lieu of a quarterly cash distribution will equal a fraction, the numerator of which is the amount of
the cash distribution paid on a common units and the denominator of which is the volume-weighted average
price of a common unit for the 10 trading days immediately preceding the ex-dividend date for the associated
distribution in respect of a common unit. This calculation is intended to provide the holders of PIK units with
a number of PIK units equal in value on a per unit basis to the cash being simultaneously distributed to
common unitholders. While the PIK units will not receive cash distributions during the PIK period, the
distribution of additional PIK units in lieu of cash distributions may substantially increase the number of
units outstanding and the amount of cash required on a quarterly and annual basis to pay distributions on all
units. The effect of paying distributions of additional PIK units on PIK units, which we refer to as distributions
in kind or distributions of equity, is as if we had paid cash distributions on those PIK units, and the holders
of those PIK units had in turn recontributed that cash to us in exchange for additional PIK units. In order to
make distributions in kind on these securities, we will have to have sufficient available cash to have paid
them in cash and must pay a simultaneous cash distribution to the holders of our common units.
90
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The PIK period will commence on the date of the closing of the offering and end on the date that is the earlier
of (i) December 1, 2017 (the maturity date of our senior secured notes) and (ii) the date by which we redeem,
repurchase, defease or retire all of the senior secured notes, or amend the indenture governing the senior
secured notes in a manner, as determined by our general partner, that results in the indenture being unlikely
to restrict our ability to pay cash distributions on all units consistent with the cash distribution policy
described in this prospectus, provided, that a restrictive covenant contained in such indenture that requires
us to meet a specified fixed charge coverage ratio (or similar ratio) in order to make cash distributions shall
be deemed not to restrict our ability to pay cash distributions for purposes of our general partner’s
determination. Immediately following the end of the PIK period, each outstanding PIK unit will be
automatically converted into a common unit and entitled to receive any distributions in cash. The purpose of
this feature is to support the payment of cash distributions to our common unitholders during periods in
which we expect that certain of the provisions of the indenture may restrict the ability of Northern Tier Energy
LLC, our operating subsidiary, to distribute cash to us and thus our ability to distribute all available cash in
accordance with our distribution policy. The PIK units will not accrue arrearages.
The number of PIK units that may be distributed on PIK units in lieu of a quarterly cash distribution will equal
a fraction, the numerator of which is the amount of the cash distribution paid on a common unit and the
denominator of which is the volume-weighted average price of a common unit for the 10 trading days
immediately preceding the ex-dividend date for the associated distribution in respect of the common units.
General Partner Interest
Our general partner owns a non-economic general partner interest in us and thus will not be entitled to
distributions that we make prior to any liquidation in respect of such interest. However, it may acquire
common units and other equity interests in the future and would be entitled to receive pro rata distributions
therefrom.
Adjustments to Capital Accounts upon Issuance of Additional Common Units
We will make adjustments to capital accounts upon the issuance of additional common units (including
additional PIK units). In doing so, we will generally allocate any unrealized and, for tax purposes,
unrecognized gain or loss resulting from the adjustments to our unitholders prior to such issuance on a pro
rata basis so that after such issuance the capital account balances attributable to all common units are equal.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
91
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
The following tables present certain selected historical condensed consolidated financial data. The combined
financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2008 and 2009 and the eleven months
ended November 30, 2010 represent a carve-out financial statement presentation of several operating units of
Marathon, which we refer to as “Predecessor.” For more information on the carve-out presentation, see
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Predecessor
Carve-Out Financial Statements” and our financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this
prospectus. The historical financial data for periods prior to December 1, 2010 presented below do not reflect
the consummation of the Marathon Acquisition and the transactions related thereto or our capital structure
following the Marathon Acquisition and the transactions related thereto. Northern Tier Energy LLC was formed
on June 23, 2010 and entered into certain agreements with Marathon on October 6, 2010 to acquire the
Marathon Assets. At the closing of the Marathon Acquisition on December 1, 2010, Northern Tier Energy LLC
acquired the Marathon Assets. Northern Tier Energy LLC had no operating activities between its June 23, 2010
inception date and the closing date of the Marathon Acquisition, although it incurred various transaction and
formation costs which have been included in the 2010 Successor Period.
The selected historical financial data as of March 31, 2012 and for the three months ended March 31, 2011 and
2012 are derived from unaudited financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this
prospectus. The selected historical financial data as of December 31, 2010 and 2011, and for the year ended
December 31, 2009, the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, the 2010 Successor Period and the year
ended December 31, 2011 are derived from audited financial statements and the notes thereto included
elsewhere in this prospectus. The selected historical combined financial data as of December 31, 2007, 2008,
2009 and November 30, 2010 and for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2008 are derived from audited
financial statements and the notes thereto and the summary historical balance sheet data as of March 31, 2011
was derived from unaudited financial statements and the notes thereto not included in this prospectus.
The historical financial and other data presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results expected
for any future period.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
92
You should read these tables along with “Prospectus Summary—The IPO Transactions,” “Risk Factors,”
“Use of Proceeds,” “Capitalization,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations—Predecessor Carve-Out Financial Statements,” “Business” and financial statements
and the notes thereto, included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Predecessor
Year Ended December 31,
Eleven Months
Ended
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
November 30,
December 31,
Successor
Three Months
Ended March 31,
Year Ended
December 31,
2007
2008
2009
2010
2010
2011
2011
(In millions)
2012
Consolidated and
Combined
statements of
operations data:
Total revenue
Costs and expenses: 
Costs of sales
Direct operating
expenses
Turnaround and
related expenses
Depreciation and
amortization
Selling, general and
administrative
expenses
Formation costs
Contingent
consideration income   
Other (income)
expense, net
Operating income
Realized losses from
derivative activities    
Unrealized losses
from derivative
$3,522.8    $4,122.4    $2,940.5    $
2,820.0      3,659.0      2,507.9
3,195.2     $
2,697.9
344.9    $
4,280.8    $ 940.2    $ 999.1
307.5
3,508.0      779.0      839.8
249.0
252.7
238.3
227.0
21.4
260.3
61.9
60.7
32.6
3.7
0.6
9.5
—
22.6
3.3
3.5
33.7
39.2
40.2
37.3
2.2
29.5
7.3
8.5
61.7     
—
67.7     
—
64.7     
—
59.6      
—
6.4     
3.6
90.7     
7.4
18.4     
2.5
20.3  
—
—
—
—
—
—
(55.8)
(31.8)
65.7
0.7     
      
325.1
1.2     
      
98.9
(1.1)
(5.4)
89.9
169.3
0.1     
      
3.7
(4.5)
(1.1)    
       
422.6      100.7
(2.1) 
 
2.7
—
—
—
—
—
(310.3)
(52.2)
(52.9)
—
—
—
(40.9)
(27.1)
(41.9)     (262.9)
(88.4)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(44.6)
activities
Loss on early
extinguishment of
derivatives
Bargain purchase
gain
Interest expense
—     
0.2
—     
(0.5)
—     
(0.4)
Earnings (loss)
before income taxes    
325.3     
Income tax provision    
(129.9)    
    
      
  $ 195.4    $
Net earnings (loss)
98.4     
(39.8)    
      
58.6    $
89.5     
(34.8)
54.7    $
—      
(0.3)
128.1      
(67.1)
61.0     $
51.4     
(3.2)
24.8     
—     
      
24.8    $
—     
(42.1)
—     
(10.0)
—  
(10.4)
—
(0.1)
28.3      (224.4)     (193.6) 
–  
 
28.3    $(224.5)   $(193.6)
Consolidated and
combined
statements of cash
flow data:
Net cash provided by
(used in):
Operating activities   $ 282.7    $
(111.0)    
Investing activities
   
Financing activities    
(171.7)    
Capital expenditures    
(75.8)    
Consolidated and
combined balance
sheets data (at
period end):
Cash and cash
equivalents
Total assets
Total long-term debt
Total liabilities
Total equity
8.5    $
737.3     
—     
415.1     
322.2
$
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
47.1    $ 129.4    $
(25.0)    
(84.6)    
34.5     
(103.9)    
(29.0)    
(45.0)
145.4     $
(29.3)     
(115.4)     
(29.8)
—    $
(363.3)    
436.1     
(2.5)
209.3    $ 94.3    $ (54.8) 
(4.6) 
(156.3)     (117.8)    
—     
—  
(5.4) 
(6.0)
(2.3)    
(45.9)
5.5    $
708.2     
—     
292.7     
415.5
6.0    $
710.1     
—     
343.9     
366.2
6.7     $
717.8      
—      
405.4      
312.4
72.8    $
930.6     
314.5     
645.6     
285.0
123.5    $ 49.3    $ 64.1  
998.8      924.1      962.7  
301.9      314.5      301.9  
686.6      859.5      843.7  
312.2     
64.6      119.0
93
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in
conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this prospectus. The
following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs
and expected performance. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and
expressed in such forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those we discuss
under “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this prospectus. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections,
intentions or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be
material. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
We are an independent downstream energy company with refining, retail and pipeline operations that serves
the PADD II region of the United States. We operate our assets in two business segments: the refining
business and the retail business. For the three months ended March 31, 2012, we had total revenues of $1.0
Overview
billion, operating income of $2.7 million, a net loss of $193.6 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $81.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2011, we had total revenues of $4.3 billion, operating income of $422.6
million, net earnings of $28.3 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $430.7 million. For a definition, and
reconciliation, of Adjusted EBITDA to net (loss) earnings, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical
Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data.”
Refining Business
Our refining business primarily consists of a 74,000 bpd (84,500 barrels per stream day) refinery located in St.
Paul Park, Minnesota. Our refinery has a Nelson complexity index of 11.5, which refers to the number, type
and capacity of processing units at the refinery. We are one of only two refineries in Minnesota and one of
four refineries in the Upper Great Plains area within the PADD II region. Our refinery’s complexity allows us to
process a variety of light, heavy, sweet and sour crudes, many of which have historically priced at a discount
to the NYMEX WTI price benchmark, meaning we can process lower cost crude oils into higher value refined
products. The PADD II region covers the following states: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan,
Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Wisconsin. Our
strategic location allows us direct access, primarily via the Minnesota Pipeline, to sources of crude oil from
Western Canada and North Dakota, as well as the ability to distribute our refined products throughout the
midwestern United States. Our refinery produces a broad slate of refined products including gasoline, diesel,
jet fuel and asphalt, which are then marketed to resellers and consumers primarily in the PADD II region.
Approximately 83% and 79% of our total refinery production for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and
the year ended December 31, 2011, respectively, comprised higher value, light refined products, including
gasoline and distillates. Our refinery utilization rates, using standard industry methodologies for utilization
measurement have been 72%, 75% and 72%, respectively, for the period from inception to December 31, 2010,
for the year ended December 31, 2011 and for the three months ended March 31, 2012.
We also own various storage and transportation assets, including a light products terminal, a heavy products
terminal, storage tanks, rail loading/unloading facilities and a Mississippi river dock. Approximately 70% and
83% of our gasoline and diesel volumes for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, respectively, were sold via our light products terminal located at the refinery to our
company-operated and franchised SuperAmerica branded convenience stores, Marathon branded
convenience stores and other resellers. We have a contract with Marathon to supply substantially all of the
gasoline and diesel requirements for 90 independently owned and operated Marathon branded convenience
stores.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
94
Our refining business also includes our 17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and MPL
Investments, which owns and operates the Minnesota Pipeline, a 455,000 bpd crude oil pipeline system that
transports crude oil (primarily from Western Canada and North Dakota) for approximately 300 miles from the
Enbridge pipeline hub at Clearbrook, Minnesota to our refinery. The Minnesota Pipeline has historically
transported the majority of the crude oil used and processed in our refinery.
Retail Business
As of March 31, 2012, our retail business operated 166 convenience stores under the SuperAmerica brand and
also supported 67 franchised convenience stores, which are also operated under the SuperAmerica brand.
These convenience stores are located primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin and sell various grades of
gasoline and diesel, tobacco products and immediately consumable items such as non-alcoholic beverages,
beer, prepared food and a large variety of snacks and prepackaged items. Our refinery supplied substantially
all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated and franchised convenience stores for the three
months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011.
We also own and operate SuperMom’s Bakery, which prepares and distributes baked goods and other
prepared food items for sale in our company-operated and franchised convenience stores and other third
party locations.
Outlook
Transportation fuels demand in the Upper Great Plains of the PADD II region currently exceeds supply from
local refineries. Therefore, demand is fulfilled by products that are imported into the region mostly via
pipeline from other parts of the Midwest, the Rocky Mountains and the U.S. Gulf Coast. Overall refined
product demand declined in 2008 as a result of prevailing economic conditions and began to improve in the
first quarter of 2010. While there continues to be a significant global macroeconomic risk that may affect the
pace of growth in the United States, we have experienced continued strong overall product demand in our
geographic area of operations.
Our operating performance has benefited from the widening of the price relationship between the traditional
crude oil pricing benchmark, NYMEX WTI, and the international waterborne crude oil pricing benchmark,
Brent. We purchase crude oil which is priced based off NYMEX WTI. Refined products prices are set by global
markets and are typically priced off Brent. Therefore, we have enjoyed a benefit during the year ended
December 31, 2011 and the first quarter of 2012 from the overall widening of the price differential between our
cost of crude oil and the price of the products we sell. The widening differential may have been attributable to
several factors, including geopolitical events in the Middle East, the suspension of crude oil exports from
Libya, new U.N. sanctions on Iran’s oil exports, and limited pipeline and other infrastructure to transport
crude oil from Cushing, Oklahoma, where NYMEX WTI is settled, to alternative markets. More recently, during
the second quarter of 2012, the discount to which NYMEX WTI trades relative to Brent has narrowed due to a
number of factors, including recently announced changes in the pipeline infrastructure serving Cushing,
Oklahoma. The narrowing of this margin may affect the prices at which we sell our refined products relative to
our cost of crude oil and may therefore cause a reduction in our refining margins. Please see “Risk Factors—
Risks Primarily Related to Our Refining Business—Our results of operations are affected by crude oil
differentials, which may fluctuate substantially.”
Predecessor Carve-Out Financial Statements
As described in the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus, this
prospectus includes financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009, and the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010 for the St. Paul Park Refinery and Retail Marketing Business,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
95
representing a carve-out financial statement presentation of several operating units of Marathon (the
“Predecessor Financial Statements”). All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated in the Predecessor Financial Statements.
The Predecessor Financial Statements were prepared to reflect the way we have operated our business
subsequent to the Marathon Acquisition, which is in two segments: the refining segment and the retail
segment. Except for certain assets that were not acquired (e.g., cash other than in-store cash at our
convenience stores, receivables and assets sold to third parties pursuant to a sale-leaseback arrangement
between us, Speedway SuperAmerica LLC, an affiliate of Marathon, and Realty Income, a third party equity
real estate investment trust, and a crude oil supply and logistics purchase agreement with JPM CCC) and
certain liabilities (e.g., accounts payable, payroll and benefits payable and deferred taxes) that were not
assumed in connection with the Marathon Acquisition, the Predecessor Financial Statements represent the
Marathon Assets. In addition, the Predecessor Financial Statements include allocations of selling, general
and administrative costs and other overhead costs of Marathon Oil and its affiliates that are attributable to the
operations of the Marathon Assets. We believe the assumptions, allocations and methodologies underlying
the Predecessor Financial Statements are reasonable. However, the Predecessor Financial Statements do not
include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred had the Marathon Assets been operated on a
standalone basis during the periods presented and do not reflect the Marathon Assets’ combined results of
operations, financial position and cash flows had it been operated on a standalone basis during the periods
presented.
Marathon Acquisition and Related Transactions
Comparability of Historical Results
We commenced operations in December 2010 through the acquisition of our St. Paul Park, Minnesota
refinery, a 17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and in MPL Investments, our convenience stores
and related assets from Marathon for $554 million, which included cash and the issuance to Marathon of $80
million of a noncontrolling preferred membership interest in our parent, Northern Tier Holdings.
Prior to the Marathon Acquisition, the business was operated as several operating units of Marathon, and
participated in Marathon’s centralized cash management programs. All cash receipts were remitted to and all
cash disbursements were funded by Marathon. Following the Marathon Acquisition, we operate as a
standalone company, and our results of operations may not be comparable to the historical results of
operations for the periods presented, primarily for the reasons described below:
Ÿ  In connection with the Marathon Acquisition, we entered into a contingent consideration arrangement with
Marathon. This arrangement would have required earn-out payments if our annual consolidated EBITDA,
adjusted for certain agreed items (the “Agreement Adjusted EBITDA”), exceeded $165 million during any year
in each of the eight years following the Marathon Acquisition. Specifically, we would have been required to
pay Marathon 40% of the amount by which the Agreement Adjusted EBITDA exceeded $165 million, subject
to certain reductions, in any year in the eight years following the Marathon Acquisition. Total payments to
Marathon under this agreement could not have exceeded $125 million over the eight years following the
Marathon Acquisition.
Ÿ  Conversely, Marathon would have been required to make margin support payments to us of up to $30 million
per year if the Agreement Adjusted EBITDA was less than $145 million, subject to certain reductions, in
either of the twelve-month periods ending November 30, 2011 and 2012. Any such payments made by
Marathon would have increased the maximum amount that
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
96
we would have been required to pay Marathon over the earn-out period as described above. For the year
ended December 31, 2011, we were not required to make any earn-out payments under the agreements. As of
December 31, 2011, we recorded a receivable of $30 million relating to the margin support component of the
contingent consideration arrangement for the twelve months ended November 30, 2011. Marathon has
disputed approximately $12 million of this amount. In connection with the resolution of this dispute, we
entered into a settlement agreement with Marathon on May 4, 2012. Under the terms of this settlement
agreement, Marathon will receive $40 million of the net proceeds from this offering, and Northern Tier Holdings
will redeem Marathon’s existing preferred interest with a portion of the net proceeds from this offering and
issue Marathon a new $45 million preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings in consideration for relinquishing
all claims with respect to earn-out payments under the contingent consideration agreement. We have also
agreed, pursuant to the settlement agreement, to relinquish all claims to margin support payments under the
contingent consideration agreement. The settlement agreement is contingent upon the consummation of this
offering.
At March 31, 2012, in addition to the $30 million receivable discussed above, we had recorded at fair value, an
asset of $2.8 million related to the margin support component for the twelve months ended November 30,
2012 and a liability of $79.2 million related to the earn-out component. Upon the consummation of this
offering, we will reverse any amounts recorded for the margin support and earn-out arrangements and record
a liability of $85 million.
In connection with the Marathon Acquisition, certain additional transactions were consummated, and we
In connection with the Marathon Acquisition, certain additional transactions were consummated, and we
entered into certain agreements with respect to our operations, including the following:
Ÿ
•
•
•
•
•
Senior Secured Notes.    We issued $290 million of the 10.5% senior secured notes due December 1,
2017. We pay interest on the senior secured notes on June 1 and December 1 of each year. The net
proceeds from the sale of the senior secured notes were used to fund part of the Marathon Acquisition.
See “Liquidity and Capital Resources—Description of Our Indebtedness—Senior Secured Notes.”
Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility.    We entered into a $300 million senior secured asset-based
revolving credit facility, which is subject to a borrowing base. We did not draw on the revolving credit
facility to fund the Marathon Acquisition, other than to the extent utilized through the issuance of
letters of credit. The revolving credit facility is available through December 1, 2015. See “Liquidity and
Capital Resources—Description of Our Indebtedness—Senior Secured Asset-Based Revolving Credit
Facility.”
Sale-Leaseback Arrangement.    Marathon sold certain real property interests, including the land
underlying 135 of the SuperAmerica convenience stores associated with our retail business and
SuperMom’s Bakery, to Realty Income, a third party equity real estate investment trust. In connection
with the closing of the Marathon Acquisition, Realty Income leased those properties to us on a long-
term basis.
Crude Oil Inventory Purchase Agreement.    JPM CCC purchased substantially all of the crude oil
inventory associated with operations of the refinery directly from Marathon pursuant to an inventory
purchase agreement with Marathon.
Crude Oil Supply and Logistics Agreement.    In December 2010, we entered into a crude oil supply
and logistics agreement with JPM CCC, which agreement was amended and restated in March 2012.
JPM CCC assists us in the purchase of the crude oil requirements of our refinery and provides
transportation and other logistical services for delivery of the crude oil to our storage tanks at Cottage
Grove, Minnesota, which are approximately two miles from our refinery. We pay the price of the crude
oil plus certain
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
97
agreed fees and expenses. We believe this crude oil supply and logistics agreement significantly
reduces our need to maintain crude oil inventories and allows us to take title to and price our crude oil
at the refinery, as opposed to the crude oil origination point, reducing the time we are exposed to
market fluctuations before the finished product output is sold. For more information, see “Business—
Crude Oil Supply.”
•
Transition Services Agreement.    Marathon agreed to provide us with administrative and support
services pursuant to a transition services agreement, including finance and accounting, human
resources and information systems services, as well as support services in connection with our
transition from being a part of Marathon’s systems and infrastructure to having our own systems and
infrastructure. Marathon is no longer providing any transition services under the agreement. For more
information, see “Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions—Transactions with
Marathon.”
Ÿ
The Marathon Acquisition has been accounted for under the purchase method of accounting for business
The Marathon Acquisition has been accounted for under the purchase method of accounting for business
combinations which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be adjusted to their estimated
fair value at the date of the acquisition. This treatment changed the accounting basis for the assets acquired
and liabilities assumed from Marathon as of December 1, 2010.
Ÿ  In October 2010, at our request, Marathon initiated a crack spread derivative strategy to mitigate refining
margin risk on a portion of the business’s 2011 and 2012 projected refinery production. In connection with the
Marathon Acquisition, we assumed all corresponding rights and obligations for derivative instruments
executed pursuant to this strategy. We incurred $97.5 million and $310.3 million of realized losses and $88.4
million and $41.9 million of unrealized losses for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, respectively, related to these derivative activities.
The IPO Transactions
Our results of operations for periods subsequent to the closing of this offering may not be comparable to our
results of operations for periods prior to the closing of this offering as a result of certain aspects of this
offering and the other IPO Transactions described in “Prospectus Summary—The IPO Transactions,”
including the following:
Ÿ  We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of this offering. Specifically,
we will incur certain expenses relating to being a publicly traded partnership, including the Exchange Act
reporting expenses; expenses associated with Sarbanes-Oxley Act compliance; expenses associated with
the listing of the NYSE; independent auditors fees expenses associated with tax return and Schedule K-1
preparation and distribution; legal fees, investor relations expenses; transfer agent fees; director and officer
liability insurance costs; and director compensation.
Ÿ  Northern Tier Energy LLC and its subsidiaries have historically not been subject to federal income and certain
state income taxes. After consummation of this offering, Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC, the subsidiary of
Northern Tier Energy LLC through which we conduct our retail business, and Northern Tier Energy Holdings
LLC will elect to be treated as corporations for federal income tax purposes, subjecting these subsidiaries to
corporate-level tax. As a result of the election by Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC and Northern Tier Energy
Holdings LLC to be treated as corporations for federal income tax purposes, for periods following such
election, our financial statements will include a tax provision on income attributable to these subsidiaries. On
a pro forma basis after giving effect to such election, we would have recorded a tax benefit of approximately
$0.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and a tax provision of approximately $5.7 million for
the year ended December 31, 2011. In addition, we will record a
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
98
tax provision related to the recognition of deferred taxes equal to the tax effect of the difference between the
book and tax basis of the assets of these subsidiaries and liabilities as of the effective date of the election.
Assuming we had completed the conversion as of March 31, 2012, the amount of the deferred tax provision
would have been approximately $         million.
Ÿ  In 2010, we entered into a management services agreement with ACON Management and TPG Management
pursuant to which they provided us with ongoing management, advisory and consulting services in exchange
for management fees. This management services agreement will terminate in connection with the closing of
this offering. See “Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions—Agreements with Affiliates of Our
General Partner—Management Services Agreement.”
Major Influences on Results of Operations
Refining
Our earnings and cash flows from our refining business segment are primarily affected by the relationship
between refined product prices and the prices for crude oil and other feedstocks. Refining is primarily a
margin-based business, and in order to increase profitability, it is important for the refinery to maximize the
yields of high value finished products and to minimize the costs of feedstock and operating expenses.
Feedstocks are petroleum products, such as crude oil and natural gas liquids that are processed and blended
into refined products. The cost to acquire feedstocks and the price for which refined products are ultimately
sold depend on several factors, many of which are beyond our control, including the supply of, and demand
for, crude oil, gasoline and other refined products, which depend on changes in domestic and foreign
economies, weather conditions, domestic and foreign political affairs, production levels, availability of and
access to transportation infrastructure, the availability of imports, the marketing of competitive fuel, and the
extent of government regulation, among other factors.
Feedstock and refined product prices are also affected by other factors, such as product pipeline capacity,
local market conditions and the operating levels of competing refineries. Crude oil costs and the prices of
refined products have historically been subject to wide fluctuations. An expansion or upgrade of our
competitors’ facilities, price volatility, international political and economic developments and other factors
beyond our control are likely to continue to play an important role in refining industry economics. These
factors can impact, among other things, the level of inventories in the market, resulting in price volatility and
a negative impact on product margins. Moreover, the refining industry typically experiences seasonal
fluctuations in demand for refined products, such as increases in the demand for gasoline during the summer
driving season and for home heating oil during the winter, primarily in the Northeast. In addition to current
market conditions, there are long-term factors that may impact the demand for refined products. These factors
include mandated renewable fuels standards, proposed climate change laws and regulations, and increased
mileage standards for vehicles.
In order to assess our operating performance, we compare our refinery gross product margin against an
industry refining margin benchmark. The industry refining margin benchmark we use is referred to as Group
3 3:2:1 crack spread, which is calculated by assuming that three barrels of benchmark light sweet crude oil is
converted into two barrels of reformulated gasoline and one barrel of ultra low sulfur diesel. Because we
calculate the benchmark refining margin using the market value of PADD II Group 3 conventional gasoline
and ultra low -sulfur diesel against the market value of NYMEX WTI, we refer to the benchmark as the Group 3
3:2:1 crack spread. The Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread is expressed in dollars per barrel and is a proxy for the per
barrel margin that a sweet crude oil refinery would earn assuming it produced and sold at PADD II Group 3
prices the benchmark production of gasoline and ultra low sulfur diesel.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
99
Our direct operating expense structure is also important to our profitability. Major direct operating expenses
include employee and contract labor, maintenance and energy. Our predominant variable direct operating
cost is energy, which is comprised primarily of fuel and other utility services. The costs of fuel, principally
natural gas, and other utility services, principally electricity, used by our refinery and other operations have
historically been volatile.
Consistent, safe and reliable operations at our refinery are key to our financial performance and results of
operations. Unplanned downtime at our refinery may result in lost margin opportunity, increased maintenance
expense and a temporary increase in working capital investment and related inventory position. We seek to
mitigate the financial impact of planned downtime, such as major turnaround maintenance, through a diligent
planning process that takes into account the margin environment, the availability of resources to perform
needed maintenance, contractual commitments, feedstock logistics and other factors. Periodically, we have
planned maintenance turnarounds at our refinery, which are expensed as incurred. The refinery generally
undergoes a major facility turnaround every five to six years, and the last full plant turnaround was completed
in 2007. The length of the turnaround is contingent upon the scope of work to be completed. A major
turnaround of either of the two main refinery units (fluid catalytic cracking unit and alkylation unit) generally
takes two to four weeks to complete, and is planned and accomplished in a manner that allows for reduced
production during maintenance instead of a complete shutdown. We completed a partial turnaround in April
2011, principally to replace a catalyst in the distillate and gas oil hydrotreaters, and to conduct basic
maintenance on the No. 1 crude unit. At the end of March 2012, we started a planned turnaround of the
alkylation unit that was completed according to schedule in mid May 2012. The next major turnaround is
scheduled for 2013.
Because petroleum feedstocks and products are essentially commodities, we have no control over the
changing market. Therefore, the lower the target inventory we are able to maintain, the lesser is the impact of
commodity price volatility on our petroleum product inventory position. Our inventory of crude oil and
refined products is valued at the lower of cost or market value under the LIFO cost flow assumption. For
periods in which the market price declines below our LIFO cost basis, we are subject to significant
fluctuations in the recorded value of our inventory and related cost of products sold. Since 2009, we have
experienced LIFO liquidations based upon permanent decreased levels in our inventories. These LIFO
liquidations resulted in decreased cost of sales and increased income from operations of $1.7 million, $2.1
million, $2.1 million and $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010, the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010 and the year ended December 31, 2011,
respectively. There were no such liquidations in the three months ended March 31, 2011 and 2012.
At the closing of the Marathon Acquisition, we entered into a crude oil supply and logistics agreement with
JPM CCC pursuant to which JPM CCC assists us in the purchase of the crude oil requirements of our refinery
and provides transportation and other logistical services for delivery of the crude oil to our storage tanks in
Cottage Grove, Minnesota. In March 2012, we amended and restated the crude oil supply and logistics
agreement with JPM CCC. We pay JPM CCC the price of the crude oil plus certain agreed fees and expenses.
We believe this crude oil supply and logistics agreement significantly reduces our crude inventories and
allows us to take title to and price our crude oil at the refinery, as opposed to the crude oil origination point,
reducing the time we are exposed to market fluctuations before the finished product output is sold.
In addition, we may hedge a portion of our gasoline and distillate production with the purpose of ensuring we
can meet our fixed cost obligations, service our outstanding debt and other liabilities and meet our capital
expenditure obligations. We have entered into agreements that govern all cash-settled commodity
transactions that we enter into with J. Aron & Company and Macquarie Bank Limited for the purpose of
managing our risk with respect to the crack spread created by the purchase of crude oil for future delivery and
the sale of refined products, including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel and heating fuel,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
100
for future delivery. As market conditions permit, we have the capacity to hedge our crack spread risk with
respect to a portion of the refinery’s projected monthly production of these refined products. Consistent with
that policy, as of March 31, 2012, we had hedged approximately 15 million barrels of future gasoline and
diesel production, of which 10 million barrels related to 2012 production and the remainder to 2013
production. We intend to hedge significantly less than what we hedged at the time of the Marathon
Acquisition on an ongoing basis. Consequently, we plan to increase our exposure to the gross refining
margins that we would realize at our refinery on an unhedged basis over time.
During the first quarter of 2012, we settled contracts covering approximately 3 million barrels of our remaining
2012 gasoline and diesel production and recognized a loss of approximately $45 million. Our required
payment of the majority of the loss from these settled contracts has been deferred until 2013. In addition,
during the second quarter of 2012, we reset the price of our contracts for the period of July 2012 through
December 2012 and recognized a loss of approximately $92 million. We plan to use a portion of the net
proceeds of this offering to settle this obligation. If we do not complete this offering, the loss from resetting
the price of our derivative contracts will be paid to the counterparty on the same monthly schedule as the
original contracts were scheduled to settle.
Our refining business experiences seasonal effects. Demand for gasoline is generally higher during the
summer months than during the winter months due to seasonal increases in highway traffic. Decreased
demand during the winter months can lower gasoline prices. As a result, our operating results of our refining
business for the first and fourth calendar quarters are generally lower than those for the second and third
calendar quarters of each year.
Retail
Our earnings and cash flows from our retail business segment are primarily affected by the volumes and
margins of gasoline and diesel sold, and by the sales and margins of merchandise sold at our convenience
stores. Seasonal fluctuations in traffic also affect sales of motor fuels and merchandise in our convenience
stores. As a result, the operating results of our retail segment are generally lower for the first quarter of the
year. Weather conditions in our operating area also have a significant effect on our retail operating results.
Customers are more likely to purchase higher profit margin items at our convenience stores, such as fast
foods, fountain drinks and other beverages and more gasoline during the spring and summer months,
thereby typically generating higher revenues and gross margins for us in these periods. Margins for
transportation fuel sales are equal to the sales price (which includes the motor fuel taxes) less the delivered
cost of the fuel and motor fuel taxes, and are measured on a cents per gallon basis. Fuel margins are
impacted by local supply, demand and competition. Margins for retail merchandise sold are equal to retail
merchandise sales less the delivered cost of the merchandise, net of any supplier discounts and inventory
shrinkage, and are measured as a percentage of merchandise sales. Merchandise sales are impacted by
convenience or location, branding and competition. Franchisees are required to pay us an initial license fee
(generally, $10,000 for licensees located in Minnesota and Wisconsin and $2,000 for licensees located in
South Dakota) and a royalty fee for all products and merchandise sold at the convenience store, including
motor fuel and diesel. The initial term of the license is generally 10 years, which is renewable by the licensee
for a renewal term of 10 years, subject to the licensee satisfying certain conditions. The license agreements
also require that, if a franchise store is located within our distribution area, then the franchise store must
purchase a high minimum percentage (often 85% to 100%) of its motor fuel supply, including gasoline and
distillate, from us. However, if a franchise store is not located within our distribution area, then the franchise
store is not required to purchase any portion of its motor fuel supply from us. As of March 31, 2012, 32 of the
67 existing franchise stores are located within our distribution area and, thus, required to purchase a high
minimum percentage of their motor fuel supply from us.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
101
Results of Operations
We operate our business in two segments: the refining segment and the retail segment. Each of these
segments is organized and managed based upon the nature of the products and services they offer. Through
the refining segment, we operate the St. Paul Park, Minnesota, refinery, terminal and related assets, and
through the retail segment, we operate 166 convenience stores primarily in Minnesota. The retail segment
also includes the operations of SuperMom’s Bakery and SuperAmerica Franchising LLC, our wholly owned
subsidiary (“SAF”), through which we conduct our franchising operations.
In this “Results of Operations” section, we first review our business on a combined and consolidated basis,
and then separately review the results of operations of each of the refining segment and the retail segment.
Detailed explanations of the period over period changes in our results of operations are contained in the
discussion of individual segments. For partial year periods that do not have a corresponding period of the
same duration, comparisons are made on a run rate basis comparing the partial period results with the prior
year’s average monthly results for the corresponding period of time.
We refer to our financial statement line items in the explanation of our period over period changes in results
of operations. Below are general definitions of what those line items include and represent.
Revenue.    Revenue primarily includes the sale of refined products in our refining segment and sales of fuel
and merchandise to retail consumers in our retail segment. All sales are recorded net of customer discounts
and rebates and inclusive of federal and state excise taxes. Refining revenue includes intersegment sales of
refined products to the retail segment. For purposes of presenting sales on a combined basis, such
intersegment transactions are eliminated. Retail revenue primarily includes sales of fuel and merchandise to
customers inclusive of related excise taxes and net of any applicable discounts. Also included in retail
revenue is royalty income, revenues from car wash operations and SuperMom’s Bakery sales to third parties.
Cost of sales.    Refining cost of sales primarily include costs of crude and refinery feedstocks purchased,
ethanol and other refined products purchased and excise taxes paid to various government authorities. Retail
cost of sales consists of cost of fuel, merchandise and other products, costs of sales for SuperMom’s Bakery
merchandise sales to third parties and excise taxes paid to various government authorities. Retail cost of
sales includes intersegment purchases of refined products from the refining segment. For purposes of
presenting cost of sales on a combined and consolidated basis, such intersegment transactions are
eliminated.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses include the operating expenses of the refinery and
costs of operating the convenience stores and the bakery. Refining direct operating expenses primarily
include direct costs of labor, maintenance materials and services, chemicals and catalysts, utilities and other
direct operating expenses of the refinery. Retail direct operating expenses consist primarily of salaries, labor
and benefits, bankcard processing fees, contracted services, repair and maintenance, utilities and rent
expense.
Turnaround and related expenses.    Turnaround and related expenses represent the costs of required major
maintenance projects on refinery processing units. A turnaround is a standard industry operation to refurbish
and maintain a refinery and usually requires the shutdown and inspection of major processing units.
Processing units require major maintenance every five to six years.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization represents an allocation to expense within the
statement of operations of the carrying value of capital and intangible assets. The value is allocated based on
the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the related asset.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
102
Selling, general and administrative.    Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include
corporate costs, administrative expenses, shared service costs and marketing expenses.
Formation costs.    Formation costs represent costs incurred in the creation of Northern Tier Energy LLC and
its subsidiaries. No such costs existed for periods prior to the Marathon Acquisition.
Contingent consideration (income) expense.    Contingent consideration income (expense) relates to changes
in the estimated fair value of our margin support and earn-out arrangements with Marathon. No such
arrangement existed for periods prior to December 1, 2010.
Other income (expense), net.    Other income (expense), net primarily represents income (expense) from our
equity method investment in Minnesota Pipe Line and dividend income from our cost method investment in
MPL.
Gain (loss) from derivative activities.    Gain (loss) from derivative activities primarily includes impacts from
our crack spread risk mitigation strategy initiated in October 2010 in anticipation of the Marathon Acquisition
to mitigate market price risk. Included in gain (loss) from derivative activities are realized gains or losses
related to settled contracts during the period and unrealized gains or losses on outstanding derivatives to
partially hedge the crack spread margins for our refining business. The offsetting benefits related to these
unrealized losses should be realized over future periods as improved crack spreads are realized. Going
forward, we plan to hedge a lesser amount of our production than we hedged at the time of the Marathon
Acquisition.
Bargain purchase gain.    Bargain purchase gain represents the excess of the estimated fair value of the net
assets acquired in the Marathon Acquisition over the total purchase consideration.
Interest expense, net.    Interest expense, net subsequent to December 1, 2010 relates primarily to interest
incurred on the notes as well as commitment fees and interest on the revolving credit facility and the
amortization of deferred financing costs.
The historical financial data presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for
any future period. The historical financial data for the year ended December 31, 2009 and for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010, do not reflect the consummation of the Marathon Acquisition or our capital
structure following the Marathon Acquisition. See “—Predecessor Carve-out Financial Statements.”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Consolidated and Combined Financial Data
103
Predecessor
Successor
Eleven Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
2010
(in millions)
2,940.5    $
3,195.2
$
344.9    $
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
$
Three Months
Ended
March 31,
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
2011
2012  
 
4,280.8    $ 940.2    $ 999.1
Revenue
Costs, expenses and
other:
  
Costs of sales
  
Direct operating expenses   
Turnaround and related
expenses
Depreciation and
amortization
Selling, general and
administrative
Formation costs
Contingent consideration
(income)
Other (income) expense,
net
Operating income
Realized losses from
derivative activities
Loss on early
extinguishment of
derivatives
Unrealized losses from
derivative activities
Bargain purchase gain
Interest expense, net
Earnings (loss) before
income taxes
Income tax provision
Net earnings (loss)
$
2,507.9   
238.3
0.6
40.2
64.7   
—
—
2,697.9   
227.0
9.5
37.3
59.6   
—
—
307.5   
21.4
—
2.2
6.4   
3.6
—
3,508.0   
260.3
779.0   
 
61.9
839.8  
 
60.7
22.6
29.5
90.7   
7.4
(55.8)
3.3
7.3
18.4   
2.5
(31.8)
3.5
8.5
20.3  
–
65.7
(1.1)  
   
89.9
(5.4)  
   
169.3
0.1   
   
3.7
(4.5)  
   
422.6
(1.1)  
   
   
  100.7
(2.1) 
 
2.7
—
—
—   
—   
(0.4)
89.5   
(34.8)
54.7    $
—
—
—
—
(310.3)
—
(52.2)
—
(52.9)
(44.6)
(40.9)  
—   
(0.3)
128.1   
(67.1)  
   
61.0
$
(27.1)  
51.4   
(3.2)
24.8   
—
24.8    $
(41.9)  
—   
(42.1)
(262.9)  
–   
 
(10.0)
(88.4) 
–  
(10.4)
28.3   
—
(224.4)  
(0.1)
(193.6) 
–  
 
   
 
28.3    $(224.5)   $(193.6)
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012 (Successor) Compared to the Three Months Ended March 31, 2011
(Successor)
Revenue.    Revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2012 was $999.1 million compared to $940.2
million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 6.3%. Refining segment revenue increased
5.8% and retail segment revenue increased 1.1% compared to the three months ended March 31, 2011. The
refining segment benefited from higher average prices across our principal products driven primarily by
increased market prices for refined products offset by lower volumes. Retail revenue also benefited from
higher average fuel prices and higher merchandise sales that were partially offset by lower fuel sales
volumes. Excise taxes included in revenue totaled $65.6 million and $56.7 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales totaled $839.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to
$779.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 7.8%, due primarily to higher priced
crude oil and other feedstock costs. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $65.6 million and $56.7
million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
104
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses totaled $60.7 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 compared to $61.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, a decrease of 1.9%, due
primarily to lower utility expenses at the refinery, which were driven by lower utility rates and reduced usage
due to favorable weather conditions in the first quarter of 2012.
Turnaround and related expenses.    Turnaround and related expenses totaled $3.5 million for the three
months ended March 31, 2012 compared to $3.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. Both
periods include costs related to preparation for partial turnarounds planned for the second quarter of each
year.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $8.5 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 compared to $7.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 16.4%.
This increase was primarily due to depreciation of assets placed in service since March 31, 2011 at our
refinery and related to our systems implementation project.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses were $20.3
million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to $18.4 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2011. This increase of 10.3% from the prior year period relates primarily to higher administrative
costs as we continue to incur a significant level of third party systems support during the process
optimization portion of our standalone systems implementation.
Formation costs.    Formation costs for the three months ended March 31, 2011 were $2.5 million, all
attributable to the Marathon Acquisition. We did not incur any such costs in the three months ended March
31, 2012.
Contingent consideration loss (income).    Contingent consideration loss was $65.7 million for the three
months ended March 31, 2012 compared to contingent consideration income of $31.8 million for the three
months ended March 31, 2011. Both the contingent consideration income and loss relate to updated financial
performance estimates for the period of performance under the margin support and earn-out agreements with
Marathon related primarily to changes in the forward markets for our refined products.
Other income, net.    Other income, net was $2.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared
to $1.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. This change was driven primarily by increases in
equity income from our investment in Minnesota Pipe Line.
Loss from derivative activities.    For the three months ended March 31, 2012, we had realized losses of $52.9
million related to settled contracts compared to $52.2 million in the prior year period. Offsetting benefits
related to these losses were recognized through improved operating margins. We incurred unrealized losses
on outstanding derivatives of $88.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to $262.9
million during the three months ended March 31, 2011. These derivatives were entered into to partially hedge
the crack spread margins for our refining business. The offsetting benefits related to these unrealized losses
should be realized over future periods as improved operating margins are realized. In addition to these
losses, during the three months ended March 31, 2012, we entered into arrangements to settle a portion of our
existing derivative instruments ahead of their respective expiration dates and incurred $44.6 million of
realized losses related to these early extinguishments. The cash payments for these early extinguishments
have been deferred and will come due between December 2012 and December 2013.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
105
Interest expense, net.    Interest expense, net was $10.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and
$10.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. These interest charges relate primarily to the
issuance of our senior secured notes as well as commitment fees and interest on the ABL Facility and the
amortization of deferred financing costs.
Income tax provision.    Income tax expense was less than $0.1 million for the three months ended March 31,
2012 and for the three months ended March 31, 2011. We operate as a pass-through entity for federal tax
purposes and, as such, only state taxes have been recognized.
Net loss.    Our net loss was $193.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to a net loss
of $224.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. This reduction in the loss of 13.8% was primarily
attributable to the decrease of $129.2 million related to derivatives activities, which were partially offset by
losses from our contingent consideration arrangement with Marathon in the 2012 quarter compared to income
in the 2011 quarter.
Year Ended December 31, 2011 (Successor) Compared to the Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010
(Predecessor)
Revenue.    Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $4,280.8 million compared to $3,195.2 million
for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 22.8% from the average monthly run rate for
the 2010 period. Refining segment revenue increased 24.5% and retail segment revenue increased 7.3%
compared to the average monthly run rate for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The refining
segment benefited from higher average prices across our principal products driven primarily by increased
market prices for refined products. Retail revenue also benefited from higher average fuel prices that were
partially offset by lower sales volumes and lower merchandise sales. Excise taxes included in revenue totaled
$242.9 million and $271.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010, respectively.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales totaled $3,508.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to
$2,697.9 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 19.2% from the average
monthly run rate for the 2010 period, due primarily to higher priced crude oil and other feedstock costs. Cost
of sales as a percentage of revenue decreased from 84.4% for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 to
81.9% for the year ended December 31, 2011 due to the increased revenues resulting from higher refined
product average prices. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $242.9 million and $271.8 million for the
year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, respectively.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses totaled $260.3 million for the year ended December 31,
2011 compared to $227.0 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 5.1% from
the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period, due to higher rent costs in our retail segment as a result of
the sale-leaseback arrangement entered into in connection with the Marathon Acquisition and higher credit
card processing fees in our retail segment as a result of the higher revenues.
Turnaround and related expenses.    Turnaround and related expenses totaled $22.6 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011 compared to $9.5 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The increase
from the 2010 period is primarily due to the timing and scope of the scheduled turnaround projects
undertaken in the respective periods. The 2011 period included a scheduled partial turnaround at the refinery
in April principally to replace a catalyst in the distillate and gas oil hydrotreaters and to conduct basic
maintenance on the No. 1 crude unit.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $29.5 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011 compared to $37.3 million for the eleven months ended November 30,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
106
2010, a decrease of 27.5% from the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. As part of the Marathon
Acquisition, the real estate for the majority of our convenience stores was sold and as a result we are no
longer depreciating these convenience store buildings. Additionally, as a result of purchase accounting, the
book value of our refinery was increased and its estimated useful life was extended. The impact of these
purchase accounting adjustments is a net decrease in overall refinery depreciation.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses were $90.7
million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to $59.6 million for the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010. This increase of 39.5% from the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period reflects
higher administrative costs as we developed our standalone infrastructure throughout the year while
continuing to pay transition services fees of $21.1 million in 2011 to utilize Marathon systems. As a result,
there was a period of overlap and redundant cost structures during this infrastructure development.
Formation costs.    Formation costs for the year ended December 31, 2011 were $7.4 million, all attributable to
the Marathon Acquisition. We did not incur any such costs in the eleven months ended November 30, 2010.
Contingent consideration income.    Contingent consideration income was $55.8 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011, which is due to updated financial performance estimates for the period of performance
under the margin support and earn-out provisions included in the Marathon Acquisition agreements.
Other income, net.    Other income, net was $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to
$5.4 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. This change is driven primarily by changes in
equity income from our investment in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
Loss from derivative activities.    For the year ended December 31, 2011, we had realized losses of $310.3
million related to settled contracts. Offsetting benefits related to these losses were recognized through
improved operating margins. We incurred unrealized losses of $41.9 million for the year ended December 31,
2011 on outstanding derivatives entered into to partially hedge the crack spread margins for our refining
business through 2012. We incurred unrealized losses on these outstanding derivatives of $40.9 million for
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The offsetting benefits related to these unrealized losses should
be realized over future periods as improved operating margins are realized.
Interest expense, net.    Interest expense, net was $42.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2011
compared to $0.3 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. This increase was primarily
attributable to the issuance of the notes as well as commitment fees and interest on our revolving credit
facility and the amortization of deferred financing costs.
Income tax provision.    Income tax expense was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2011
compared to $67.1 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The effective tax rate was 52.4%
for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The effective rate was impacted primarily by the
establishment of a valuation allowance against capital losses incurred on derivative activities. The effective
tax rate is not comparable to the year ended December 31, 2011. From the date of the Marathon Acquisition,
only state taxes have been recognized and no federal provision was recognized. We operated as a pass-
through entity for federal income tax purposes for the year ended December 31, 2011.
Net earnings.    Our net earnings were $28.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to net
earnings of $61.0 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. This
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
107
decrease of 57.5% from the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period was primarily attributable to the
realized loss on derivative activities of $310.3 million and an increase in interest expense, partially offset by
increased operating income and lower income taxes.
2010 Successor Period from June 23, 2010 (inception date) through December 31, 2010
Northern Tier Energy LLC was formed on June 23, 2010 and entered into certain agreements with Marathon on
October 6, 2010 to acquire the Marathon Assets. At the closing of the Marathon Acquisition on December 1,
2010, Northern Tier Energy LLC acquired the Marathon Assets. Northern Tier Energy LLC had no operating
activities between its June 23, 2010 inception date and the closing date of the Marathon Acquisition, although
it incurred various transaction and formation costs which have been included in the 2010 Successor Period.
The discussion below presents a comparison of the 2010 Successor Period and 2009 monthly average run
rates, and does not seek to compare the 2010 Successor Period to the equivalent period in the prior year.
Revenue for the 2010 Successor Period was $344.9 million. Revenue for the 2010 Successor Period was
favorably impacted by price increases across both the refining and retail segments. Refining and retail
segment revenues increased 48.1% and 9.4% compared to 2009 average monthly run rate revenues. Cost of
sales for the 2010 Successor Period was $307.5 million. Excise taxes included in both revenue and cost of
sales were $25.1 million for the 2010 Successor Period. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was 89.2%
for the 2010 Successor Period compared to 85.3% for 2009.
The 2010 Successor Period included two significant non-recurring items: formation costs of $3.6 million and
a bargain purchase gain of $51.4 million, both related to the Marathon Acquisition. Additionally, during the
2010 Successor Period, we incurred unrealized losses of $27.1 million on outstanding derivatives entered into
in 2010 to partially hedge the crack spread margins for our refining business for 2011 through 2012. The
offsetting benefits related to these unrealized losses will be realized over future periods as the improved crack
spread margins are realized.
Our net earnings were $24.8 million for the 2010 Successor Period, compared to 2009 average monthly run
rate net earnings of $4.6 million. The net earnings in the 2010 Successor Period include $3.6 million of
formation costs, $27.1 million of unrealized derivative losses and a $51.4 million bargain purchase gain, all of
which were related to the Marathon Acquisition and did not occur in the 2009 period.
Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2009
Revenue.    Revenue for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $3,195.2 million compared to
$2,940.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, an 18.5% increase versus the average monthly run rate
for 2009. Refining and retail segment revenue increased to $2,799.8 million and $1,206.8 million, respectively,
which represent increases of 20.7% and 16.6%, respectively, versus the 2009 average monthly run rate levels.
These increases were primarily due to increases in the market prices for refined products across the periods.
Federal and state excise taxes included in revenue totaled $271.8 million and $289.6 million for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $2,697.9 million
compared to $2,507.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, a 17.3% increase versus the average
monthly run rate for 2009. This increase is primarily due to increased market prices for
108
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
crude oil in the 2010 period. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was 84.4% and 85.3% for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. Excise taxes included in
cost of sales were $271.8 million and $289.6 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year
ended December 31, 2009, respectively.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 were
$227.0 million compared to $238.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, a 3.9% increase versus the
2009 average monthly run rate. The increase was primarily due to higher utility costs in the refining segment
and higher credit card fees in retail segment.
Turnaround and related expenses.    Turnaround and related expenses totaled $9.5 million for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. This
increase is primarily due to a scheduled partial turnaround at the refinery during September and October
2010.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $37.3 million for the eleven months
ended November 30, 2010 and $40.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, a 1.2% increase versus the
2009 average monthly run rate. The increase versus the prior year relates primarily to the on-going investment
in our refinery infrastructure.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 were $59.6 million compared to $64.7 million for the year ended
December 31, 2009, a 0.5% increase versus the 2009 average monthly run rate.
Other income, net.    Other income, net was $5.4 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010
compared to other income, net of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. This improvement is due
to higher equity income from our investment in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
Loss from derivative activities.    We incurred unrealized losses of $40.9 million for the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010 on outstanding derivatives entered into during 2010. The offsetting benefits relating to
these unrealized losses should be realized over future periods as improved operating margins are realized.
No such derivative activity existed for the year ended December 31, 2009.
Interest expense, net.    Interest expense, net was $0.3 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010
and $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2009.
Income tax provision.    Income tax expense was $67.1 million for the eleven months ended November 30,
2010 and $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The effective tax rate was 52.4% for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 and 38.9% for the year ended December 31, 2009. The effective rate for the
eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was impacted primarily by the establishment of a valuation
allowance against capital losses incurred on derivative activities.
Net earnings.    Our net earnings were $61.0 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and $54.7
million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The increase in net earnings is primarily due to the improved
gross product margin in our refining business in the 2010 period. Refinery gross product margin per barrel of
throughput were $12.86 for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and $9.36 for the year ended
December 31, 2009.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Segment Financial Data
109
The segment financial data for the refining segment discussed below under “—Refining Segment” include
intersegment sales of refined products to the retail segment. Similarly, the segment financial data for the retail
segment discussed below under “—Retail Segment” contain intersegment purchases of refined products from
the refining segment. For purposes of presenting our combined and consolidated results, such intersegment
transactions are eliminated, as shown in the following tables.
Revenue:
Sales and other revenue
Intersegment sales
Segment revenue
Cost of sales:
Cost of sales
Intersegment purchases
Segment cost of sales
Revenue:
Sales and other revenue
Intersegment sales
Segment revenue
Cost of sales:
Cost of sales
Intersegment purchases
Segment cost of sales
Revenue:
Sales and other revenue
Intersegment sales
Segment revenue
Cost of sales:
Cost of sales
Intersegment purchases
Segment cost of sales
110
Successor
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012
Retail
Refining
—
240.0
Other/Elim   
(in millions)
—   
   $ 654.5     $ 344.6     $
(240.0)  
 
  
  
   
   
   $ 894.5     $ 344.6     $ (240.0)  
  
   
 
  
—   
   $ 772.0     $
(240.0)  
 
  
   
   
  
   $ 772.0     $ 307.8     $ (240.0)
67.8     $
 
240.0
—
Consolidated
$
 
   
$
$
 
   
$
999.1  
—  
 
999.1
839.8  
—  
 
839.8
Combined
$
 
   
$
$
 
   
$
940.2  
—  
 
940.2
779.0  
—  
 
779.0
Consolidated
$ 4,280.8  
 
—  
   
 
$ 4,280.8
$ 3,508.0  
—  
 
   
 
$ 3,508.0
Three Months Ended March 31, 2011
Retail
Successor
Refining
—
245.7
Other/Elim   
(in millions)
—   
   $ 599.5     $ 340.7     $
(245.7)  
 
  
  
   
   
   $ 845.2     $ 340.7     $ (245.7)  
   
  
 
  
   $ 719.0     $
—   
(245.7)  
 
  
  
   
   
   $ 719.0     $ 305.7     $ (245.7)
60.0     $
245.7
—
Retail
Successor
Year Ended December 31, 2011
Refining
—
1,043.1
Other/Elim   
(in millions)
—   
   $2,761.0     $1,519.8     $
  (1,043.1)  
  
  
   
   
   $3,804.1     $1,519.8     $(1,043.1)  
  
   
 
  
   $3,204.1     $ 303.9     $
—   
  (1,043.1)  
  
   
   
  
   $3,204.1     $1,347.0     $(1,043.1)
1,043.1
—
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Revenue:
Sales and other revenue
Intersegment sales
Segment revenue
Cost of sales:
Cost of sales
Intersegment purchases
Segment cost of sales
Revenue:
Sales and other revenue
Intersegment sales
Segment revenue
Cost of sales:
Cost of sales
Intersegment purchases
Segment cost of sales
Revenue:
Sales and other revenue
Intersegment sales
Segment revenue
Cost of sales:
Cost of sales
Intersegment purchases
Segment cost of sales
Table of Contents
111
June 23, 2010 (inception date) to December 31, 2010
Successor
Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010
Refinery
Retail
Other/Elim
(in millions)
$ 242.0    
70.2    
 
   
    
$ 312.2    
    
   
  
$ 287.2    
—    
 
   
    
$ 287.2
$ 102.9    
—    
 
   
    
$ 102.9    
    
   
  
20.2    
70.2    
    
90.4
$
 
   
$
—   
(70.2)  
   
(70.2)  
   
 
0.1   
(70.2)  
   
(70.1)
$
 
   
$
$
 
   
$
Predecessor
Refinery
Retail
(in millions)
Other
$1,988.4    
 
811.4    
   
    
$2,799.8    
   
    
  
$2,455.9    
—    
 
   
    
$2,455.9
Refinery
$1,811.3    
719.4    
 
   
    
$2,530.7    
    
   
  
$2,252.1    
—    
 
   
    
$2,252.1
$1,206.8    
 
—    
   
    
$1,206.8    
   
    
  
$ 242.0    
811.4    
 
   
    
$1,053.4
—   
$
(811.4)  
 
   
   
$ (811.4)  
   
   
 
—   
$
(811.4)  
 
   
   
$ (811.4)
Predecessor
Year Ended December 31, 2009
Retail
(in millions)
Other
$1,129.2    
—    
 
   
    
$1,129.2    
    
   
  
$ 255.8    
719.4    
 
   
    
$ 975.2
—   
$
(719.4)  
 
   
   
$ (719.4)  
   
   
 
—   
$
(719.4)  
 
   
   
$ (719.4)
Consolidated
$
 
   
$
$
 
   
$
344.9  
—  
 
344.9
307.5  
—  
 
307.5
Combined
$ 3,195.2  
 
—  
   
 
$ 3,195.2
$ 2,697.9  
—  
 
   
 
$ 2,697.9
Combined
$ 2,940.5  
—  
 
   
 
$ 2,940.5
$ 2,507.9  
—  
 
   
 
$ 2,507.9
Index to Financial Statements
Refining Segment
Predecessor
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
2010
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
2010
$
Successor
Three Months
Ended March 31,
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
2011
3,804.1    $ 845.2    $ 894.5
2012
(Dollars in millions, except per barrel data)
$
312.2    $
Revenue
Operating income
Costs, expenses and other:
 
   
Cost of sales
Direct operating expenses
   
Turnaround and related expenses    
Depreciation and amortization
   
Selling, general and administrative    
   
Other income, net
     
  $
     
 
   
   
   
 
  $
  $
Key Operating Statistics:
Total refinery production (bpd)(1)
Total refinery throughput (bpd)
Refined products sold (bpd)(2)
Per barrel of throughput:
Refinery gross margin(3)
Direct operating expenses(4)
Per barrel of refined products sold:  
Refinery gross margin(3)
Direct operating expenses(4)
$
  $
Refinery product yields (bpd):
Gasoline
Distillate(5)
Asphalt
Other(6)
Total
Refinery throughput (bpd):
Crude oil
Other feedstocks(7)
Total
Market Statistics:
Crude Oil Average Pricing:
West Texas Intermediate ($/barrel)  $
PADD II / Group 3 Average
Pricing:
Unleaded 87 Gasoline ($/barrel)
Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel ($/barrel)
$
  $
2,530.7    $
2,252.1     
138.3     
0.6     
26.0     
44.2     
(1.1)    
       
70.6    $
82,126     
81,563     
87,572
9.36    $
4.65    $
8.72    $
4.33    $
42,674     
22,876     
7,688     
8,888     
       
82,126
74,539     
7,024     
       
81,563
62.09    $
2,799.8   
 
 
2,455.9   
132.2   
9.5   
24.9   
40.0   
(5.5)
142.8
$
    $
   
    $
    $
$
           
 
80,958   
80,066   
86,682   
 
12.86   
4.94   
 
11.88   
4.56   
 
 
41,080   
22,201   
9,532   
8,145
80,958
74,095   
5,971
80,066
78.69
$
287.2     
11.2     
—     
1.7     
3.1     
(0.1)    
       
9.1    $
129.0     
22.6     
21.5     
45.3     
(6.6)
3,204.1      719.0      772.0  
31.3  
3.5  
5.8  
6.1  
(2.9) 
 
388.2    $ 78.5    $ 78.7
32.3     
3.3     
5.1     
8.6     
(1.6)
81,853     
81,136     
95,122
82,079      84,704      76,437  
81,150      84,774      76,004  
86,038      81,686      77,923
9.94    $
4.45    $
8.48    $
3.80    $
20.26    $ 16.54    $ 17.71  
4.36    $ 4.23    $ 4.53
19.11    $ 17.17    $ 17.28  
4.11    $ 4.39    $ 4.41
42,485     
26,258     
9,099     
4,011     
       
81,853
74,649     
6,487     
       
81,136
89.23    $
40,240      41,489      38,902  
24,841      23,795      24,160  
9,888      9,615      8,323  
7,110      9,805      5,052  
 
82,079      84,704      76,437
77,452      78,341      73,245  
3,698      6,433      2,759  
 
81,150      84,774      76,004
95.11    $ 94.60    $103.05
69.95    $
70.20    $
86.86   
90.38
$
    $
96.97    $
103.38    $
117.60    $110.54    $122.38  
126.26    $119.66    $131.28
Excludes fuel and coke on catalyst, which are used in our refining process. Also excludes purchased refined
products.
Includes produced and purchased refined products, including ethanol and biodiesel.
Refinery gross product margin per barrel is a per barrel measurement calculated by subtracting refinery costs of
sales from total refinery revenues and dividing the difference by the total throughput or total refined
(1)
(2)
(3)
112
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
products sold for the respective periods presented. Refinery gross product margin per barrel is a non-GAAP
performance measure that we believe is important to investors in evaluating our refinery performance as a
general indication of the amount above our cost of products that we are able to sell refined products. Each of
the components used in this calculation (revenues and cost of sales) can be reconciled directly to our
statements of operations. Our calculation of refinery gross product margin per barrel may differ from similar
calculations of other companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. For a
reconciliation of refinery gross product margin per barrel to refining segment revenue, the most directly
comparable GAAP measure, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated
Financial and Other Data.”
Direct operating expenses per barrel is calculated by dividing direct operating expenses by the total barrels of
throughput or total barrels of refined products sold for the respective periods presented.
Distillate includes diesel, jet fuel and kerosene.
(5)
(6) Other refinery products include propane, propylene, liquid sulfur, light cycle oil and No. 6 fuel oil, among others.
(4)
None of these products, by itself, contributes significantly to overall refinery product yields.
(7) Other feedstocks include gas oil, natural gasoline, normal butane and isobutane, among others. None of these
feedstocks, by itself, contributes significantly to overall refinery throughput.
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012 (Successor) Compared to the Three Months Ended March 31, 2011
(Successor)
Revenue. Revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2012 was $894.5 million compared to $845.2 million
for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 5.8%. This increase was primarily due to an
increase in average prices across our principal refined products sold offset by lower sales volumes in the
three months ended March 31, 2012. The lower volumes in the three months ended March 31, 2012 are due to
reduced throughput during the first two months of the quarter in response to weak demand locally during
those months. Excise taxes included in revenue were $63.5 million and $54.4 million for the three months
ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales totaled $772.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to
$719.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, a 7.4% increase. This increase was primarily due to
an increase in raw material costs driven principally by higher prices of crude oil in the three months ended
March 31, 2012. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $63.5 million and $54.4 million for the three
months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Refinery gross product margin per barrel of throughput
was $17.71 for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to $16.54 for the three months ended March
31, 2011, an increase of $1.17, or 7.1%, which is mostly attributable to improved crack spreads in the three
months ended March 31, 2012.
Direct operating expenses. Direct operating expenses totaled $31.3 million for the three months ended March
31, 2012 compared to $32.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, a 3.1% decrease. This
decrease was due primarily to lower utility expenses at the refinery, which resulted from lower utility rates and
reduced overall usage in the three months ended March 31, 2012.
Turnaround and related expenses. Turnaround and related expenses totaled $3.5 million for the three months
ended March 31, 2012 compared to $3.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. Both periods
include costs related to preparation for partial turnarounds planned for the second quarter of each year.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization was $5.8 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 compared to $5.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 13.7%.
This increase was primarily due to increased assets placed in service as a result
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
113
of our capital expenditures since March 31, 2011, the most significant of which was our boiler replacement
project which was placed in service in the fourth quarter of 2011.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $6.1 million
and $8.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, a decrease of 29.1%. This
decrease was due to the termination of our transition services agreement with Marathon in the fourth quarter
of 2011, as a result of which we did not incur expenses related to the agreement in the three months ended
March 31, 2012. We are no longer using Marathon’s systems infrastructure.
Other income, net. Other income, net was $2.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared
to $1.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. This increase was driven primarily by an increase
in equity income from our investment in Minnesota Pipe Line.
Operating income. Income from operations was $78.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012
compared to $78.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011. This increase from the prior year
period is due to increased equity income from Minnesota Pipe Line. Overall expense levels were essentially
flat.
Year Ended December 31, 2011 (Successor) Compared to the Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010
(Predecessor)
Revenue.    Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $3,804.1 million compared to $2,799.8 million
for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 24.5% from the average monthly run rate for
the 2010 period. This increase was primarily due to an increase in third -party sales driven by higher average
prices across our principal refined products sold and an increase in intersegment sales driven by a similar
increase in average prices across our principal refined products sold. Excise taxes included in revenue were
$232.8 million and $263.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010, respectively.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales totaled $3,204.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to
$2,455.9 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, a 19.6% increase from the average monthly
run rate for the 2010 period. This increase was primarily due to an increase in raw material costs driven
principally by higher prices of crude oil and other feedstocks. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was
84.2% and 87.7% for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended November 30, 2010,
respectively. This improvement is the result of higher revenue driven by market prices relative to the
increased cost of crude. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $232.8 million and $263.0 million for the
year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, respectively.
Refinery gross product margin per barrel of throughput was $20.26 for the year ended December 31, 2011
compared to $12.86 for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of $7.40, or 57.5%, which is
primarily due to improved market conditions and favorable crude pricing.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses totaled $129.0 million for the year ended December 31,
2011 compared to $132.2 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, a 10.6% decrease from the
average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. This variance was due to a decrease in normal maintenance
costs for the year ended December 31, 2011. These resources were directed towards turnaround and related
activities in 2011 as a result of the refinery turnaround in April 2011.
Table of Contents
114
Index to Financial Statements
Turnaround and related expenses.    Turnaround and related expenses totaled $22.6 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011 compared to $9.5 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The increase
from the 2010 period is primarily due to the timing and scope of the scheduled turnaround projects
undertaken in 2011. The 2011 period included a scheduled partial turnaround at the refinery in April
principally to replace a catalyst in the distillate and gas oil hydrotreaters and to conduct basic maintenance
on the No. 1 crude unit.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $21.5 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011 compared to $24.9 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, a decrease of
20.9% compared to the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. This decrease was primarily due to the
impact of an adjustment to the book value of our refinery as a result of the Marathon Acquisition as well as a
change in the estimated useful life of the refinery assets.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses were $45.3
million and $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended November 30,
2010, respectively. This 3.8% increase compared to the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period reflects
higher administrative costs as we developed in 2011 our standalone infrastructure while continuing to pay
transition services fees in 2011 to utilize Marathon systems.
Other income, net.    Other income, net was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to
$5.5 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. This change is driven primarily by changes in
equity income from our investment in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
Operating income.    Income from operations was $388.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2011
compared to $142.8 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. This increase was primarily due
to higher crack spreads across our principal refined products sold which helped to increase our refinery
gross product margin.
2010 Successor Period from June 23, 2010 (inception date) through December 31, 2010
The discussion below presents a comparison of the 2010 Successor Period and 2009 monthly average run
rates, and does not seek to compare the 2010 Successor Period to the equivalent period in the prior year.
Revenue for the 2010 Successor Period was $312.2 million. The revenue for the period represents a 48.1%
increase over the average monthly run rate for 2009. The increase relates primarily to an 8.6% increase in
sales volumes per day and market pricing increases for refined products when compared to the average for
2009. Cost of sales totaled $287.2 million for the 2010 Successor Period. Cost of sales as a percentage of
revenue was 92.0% and excise taxes included in both revenue and cost of sales were $24.3 million for the
2010 Successor Period. Refinery gross product margin per barrel of throughput was $9.94 for the 2010
Successor Period compared to $9.36 per barrel average monthly run rate for 2009.
Operating income for the 2010 Successor Period totaled $9.1 million, an improvement of $3.2 million versus
the average monthly run rate of fiscal 2009. The improvement in operating income is due to the increased
volumes of refined products sold and improved Group 3 3:2:1 crack spreads.
Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2009
Revenue.    Revenue for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $2,799.8 million compared to
$2,530.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The increase of 20.7% versus
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
115
the 2009 average monthly run rate is due to an increase in the market prices for refined products which more
than offset a 1.0% decline in sales volume per day. Included in revenue were excise taxes of $263.0 million
and $280.3 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009,
respectively.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $2,455.9 million compared
to $2,252.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The cost of sales for the eleven months represents a
19.0% increase over the average monthly run rate for fiscal 2009. The increase relates primarily to market
increases in crude oil costs in the 2010 period compared to the average for 2009. Cost of sales as a
percentage of revenue was 87.7% and 89.0% for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended
December 31, 2009, respectively. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $263.0 million and $280.3 million
for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively.
Refinery gross product margin per barrel of throughput was $12.86 for the eleven months ended November 30,
2010 and $9.36 for the year ended December 31, 2009. The increase was primarily due to improved market
crack spreads in the 2010 period.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010
totaled $132.2 million compared to $138.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, a 4.4% increase
compared to the 2009 average run monthly rate. The increase in direct operating expenses compared to the
2009 run rate is primarily due to higher utility costs during the 2010 period.
Turnaround and related expenses.    Turnaround and related expenses totaled $9.5 million and $0.6 million for
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. The increase in
turnaround costs versus the prior year is due to the timing, nature and extent of turnaround activities
completed in the two periods. The 2010 period included a scheduled partial turnaround at the refinery during
September and October 2010. The units involved in this turnaround were the No. 2 crude unit, No. 2 vacuum
unit and No. 2 sulfur recovery/Shell Claus Off-Gas Treating unit.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization for the eleven months ended November 30,
2010 totaled $24.9 million compared to $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The 4.4% increase
versus average 2009 monthly run rate levels relates to the ongoing investment in the refinery infrastructure.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses totaled $40.0
million and $44.2 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009,
respectively, representing a reduction of 1.1% compared to the average monthly run rate levels of 2009. This
reduction was primarily due to reduced shared service allocations from Marathon in the 2010 period.
Other income, net.    Other income, net for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 totaled $5.5 million
compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. This increase is due to higher equity income
from our investment in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
Operating income.    Income from operations for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 totaled $142.8
million compared to $70.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The increase is due to the higher
crack spreads and refining gross product margin and an increase in equity income from our investment in the
Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Revenue
116
Retail Segment
Predecessor
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
2010
Successor
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
Three Months
Ended March 31,
2011
2012
(Dollars in millions, except per gallon data)
Revenue
$
1,129.2
$
1,206.8
Costs, expenses and
other:
Cost of sales
Direct operating
expenses
Depreciation and
amortization
Selling, general and
administrative
975.2
100.0
14.2
20.5
1,053.4
94.9
12.4
19.6
26.5
$
102.9
$
1,519.8
$340.7
$344.6
90.4
10.2
0.5
1,347.0
131.3
7.2
305.7
29.6
1.9
307.8
29.4
1.8
$
$
$
1.3
20.3
5.9
6.0
0.5
$
14.0
$ (2.4)
$ (0.4)
29.1  
0.16
$
324.0  
0.21
78.1  
 
  $ 0.15
74.1  
 
  $ 0.18
26.8
$
340.3
$ 75.3
$ 78.8
19.3
$
335.7  
0.14
$
316.0  
0.17
328.4
$
309.8
$
Operating income
(loss)
$
     
Operating data:
 
Company owned stores:  
Fuel gallons sold (in
 
millions)
Fuel margin per gallon(1)  $
Merchandise sales (in
millions)
Merchandise margin %
(2)
Number of stores at
period end
Franchisee stores:
Fuel gallons sold
Royalty income
Number of stores at
period
end
Market Statistics:
PADD II gasoline prices
($/gallon)
$
$
26.8%
26.3%
24.1%
25.4%
25.5%
25.8%
166
51.3  
1.6
$
68
166
48.3  
1.5
67
2.34
$
2.76
$
166
4.1  
0.1
$
166
51.5  
1.7
166
12.2  
 
  $ 0.4
166
10.0  
 
  $ 0.5
67
67
67
67
$
3.00
$
3.53
$ 3.30
$ 3.58
(1)
Retail fuel margin per gallon is calculated by dividing retail fuel gross margin by the fuel gallons sold at
company-operated stores. Retail fuel gross margin is a non-GAAP performance measure that we believe is
important to investors in evaluating our retail performance. Our calculation of retail fuel gross margin may differ
from similar calculations of other companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a comparative
measure. For a reconciliation of retail fuel gross margin to retail segment operating income, the most directly
comparable GAAP measure, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated
Financial and Other Data.”
(2) Merchandise margin is expressed as a percentage of merchandise sales and is calculated by subtracting costs
of merchandise from merchandise sales for company-operated stores, and then dividing by merchandise sales.
Merchandise margin is a non-GAAP performance measure that we believe is important to investors in evaluating
our retail performance. Our calculation of merchandise margin may differ from similar calculations of other
companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. For a reconciliation of
merchandise margin to retail segment operating income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, see
“Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data.”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
117
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012 (Successor) Compared to the Three Months Ended March 31, 2011
(Successor)
Revenue.    Revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2012 was $344.6 million compared to $340.7
million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 1.1%. This increase was primarily due to an
increase in merchandise sales of $3.5 million, which was partially offset by a reduction in fuel sales driven
primarily by lower sales volumes. We experienced a 5.1% decrease in fuel gallons sold in our retail segment
compared to the prior year period mostly attributable to higher priced gasoline. Excise taxes included in
revenue were $2.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and $2.3 million for the three months
ended March 31, 2011.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales totaled $307.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and $305.7
million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an increase of 0.7%. Cost of sales as a percentage of
revenue was 89.3% and 89.7% for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Excise taxes
included in cost of sales were $2.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and $2.3 million for the
three months ended March 31, 2011. For company-operated stores, retail fuel margin per gallon was $0.18 for
the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to $0.15 per gallon for the three months ended March 31,
2011. The increased fuel margin per gallon in the 2012 period is due to generally favorable local market
conditions.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses totaled $29.4 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 compared to $29.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, a decrease of 0.7% from
the 2011 period.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $1.8 million for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 compared to $1.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, a decrease of 5.3%.
During 2011, our continuing involvement ended for a subset of our retail stores for which we had not achieved
sales-leaseback treatment initially. As such, the related fair value of the assets for these stores was removed
from the consolidated balance sheet and no longer depreciated. This reduction in depreciation was partially
offset by increases related to our capital expenditures since March 31, 2011.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses were $6.0
million and $5.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, which represents
an increase of 1.7% from the 2011 period.
Operating loss.    Operating loss was $0.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 compared to
$2.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2011, an improvement of $2.0 million. The improvement is
primarily attributable to increased fuel margins per gallon and higher merchandise revenues.
Year Ended December 31, 2011 (Successor) Compared to the Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010
(Predecessor)
Revenue.    Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $1,519.8 million compared to $1,206.8 million
for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 15.4% from the average monthly run rate for
the 2010 period. This increase was primarily due to an increase in fuel sales driven by higher average prices
of the fuels sold. Partially offsetting this increase was the impact of lower fuel volumes sold and lower
merchandise sales. Poor weather conditions early in the year and higher priced gasoline resulted in 6.0% less
fuel gallons sold in our retail segment compared to the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. Excise
taxes included in revenue were $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and $8.8 million for the
eleven months ended November 30, 2010.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
118
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales totaled $1,347.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to
$1,053.4 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 17.2% from the average
monthly run rate for the 2010 period. This increase was primarily due to higher prices for purchased fuel. Cost
of sales as a percentage of revenue was 88.6% and 87.3% for the year ended December 30, 2011 and the
eleven months ended November 30, 2010, respectively. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $10.1
million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and $8.8 million for the eleven months ended November 30,
2010. For company-operated stores, retail fuel margin per gallon was $0.21 for the year ended December 31,
2011 and $0.17 per gallon for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. The increased fuel margin per
gallon in 2011 is due to generally stronger local market conditions.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses totaled $131.3 million for the year ended December 31,
2011 compared to $94.9 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, an increase of 26.8% from
the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. This increase was primarily due to higher rent expense as
well as increased credit card fees due to higher fuel prices. Concurrent with the Marathon Acquisition, we
entered into a sale-leaseback arrangement for the majority of our convenience stores. We therefore have
operating leases for the majority of our convenience stores, which results in higher rent expense.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $7.2 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011 compared to $12.4 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, a decrease of
46.8% from the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. Due to the sale-leaseback arrangement noted
above, we have operating leases for the majority of our convenience stores, which results in lower
depreciation costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses were $20.3
million and $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the eleven months ended November 30,
2010, respectively, which represents a decrease of 5.1% from the average monthly run rate for the 2010 period.
This decrease is primarily the result of timing differences for certain services incurred such as advertising
expenses and other administrative expenses.
Operating income.    Income from operations was $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011
compared to $26.5 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, a decrease of 51.6% from the
average monthly run rate for the 2010 period. The decrease in operating income is attributable to increased
direct operating expenses caused by higher rents, lower merchandise volumes and increased credit card fees,
which more than offset improved fuel margins and lower depreciation and selling, general and administrative
expenses.
2010 Successor Period from June 23, 2010 (inception date) through December 31, 2010
The discussion below presents a comparison of the 2010 Successor Period and 2009 monthly average run
rates, and does not seek to compare the 2010 Successor Period to the equivalent period in the prior year.
Revenue for the 2010 Successor Period was $102.9 million, an increase of 9.4% compared to the monthly
average run rate for fiscal 2009. The increase in the 2010 Successor Period as compared to the 2009 average
monthly run rate is due to higher average market prices for fuel and a 4.0% increase in fuel volumes, which
more than offset a 2.1% decline in merchandise revenue in the period. Cost of sales for the 2010 Successor
Period was $90.4 million, an 11.2% increase from the 2009 average monthly run rate. Cost of sales as a
percentage of revenue was 87.9% for the 2010 Successor Period compared to 86.4% for 2009. Excise taxes
included in revenue and cost of sales were $0.8 million for the 2010 Successor Period. For company-operated
stores, retail fuel margin per gallon was $0.16 for the 2010 Successor Period compared to $0.14 during 2009.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
119
Income from operations for the 2010 Successor Period totaled $0.5 million compared to average monthly run
rate operating income of $1.6 million for 2009.
Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2009
Revenue.    Revenue for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $1,206.8 million compared to
$1,129.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, an increase of 16.6% compared to the average monthly
run rate for 2009. The increase in the 2010 period as compared to the 2009 average monthly run rate levels is
due to higher average market prices for fuel, a 2.7% increase in fuel volumes and a 2.9% increase in
merchandise revenue in the period. Excise taxes included in revenue totaled $8.8 million and $9.3 million for
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively.
Cost of sales.    Cost of sales for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $1,053.4 million compared
to $975.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, an increase of 17.8% from the 2009 average monthly
run rate due to higher average fuel costs in the 2010 period. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was
87.3% and 86.4% for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009,
respectively. Excise taxes included in cost of sales were $8.8 million and $9.3 million for the eleven months
ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. For company-operated stores,
retail fuel margin per gallon was $0.17 for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and $0.14 per gallon
for the year ended December 31, 2009.
Direct operating expenses.    Direct operating expenses totaled $94.9 million and $100.0 million for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively, a 3.5% increase compared
to the 2009 average monthly run rate levels. This increase in the period is primarily due to higher credit card
fees associated with the higher average selling prices for fuel.
Depreciation and amortization.    Depreciation and amortization was $12.4 million for the eleven months
ended November 30, 2010 compared to $14.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, a 4.7% decrease
from the average monthly run rate for 2009.
Selling, general and administrative expenses.    Selling, general and administrative expenses for the eleven
months ended November 30, 2010 were $19.6 million compared to $20.5 million for the year ended
December 31, 2009, a 4.3% increase from the average monthly run rate levels for 2009.
Operating income.    Income from operations the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 totaled $26.5
million compared to $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, an increase of 49.8% from the 2009
average monthly run rate levels. The improvement in operating income for the 2010 period is primarily due to
higher fuel margins per gallon and higher fuel volumes compared to the 2009 average monthly run rate levels.
Adjusted EBITDA
Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a measure of operating performance to assist in comparing
performance from period to period on a consistent basis and to readily view operating trends, as a measure
for planning and forecasting overall expectations and for evaluating actual results against such expectations,
and in communications with the board of directors of our general partner, creditors, analysts and investors
concerning our financial performance. We also believe Adjusted EBITDA may be used by some investors to
assess the ability of our assets to generate sufficient cash flow to make distributions to our unitholders. The
revolving credit facility and other contractual
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
120
obligations also include similar measures as a basis for certain covenants under those agreements which
may differ from the Adjusted EBITDA definition described below.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a presentation made in accordance with GAAP and our computation of Adjusted
EBITDA may vary from others in our industry. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA contains some, but not all,
adjustments that are taken into account in the calculation of the components of various covenants in the
agreements governing the notes, the revolving credit facility, earn-out, margin support and management
services. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to operating earnings or net (loss)
earnings as measures of operating performance. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA is not presented as and should
not be considered an alternative to cash flows from operations as a measure of liquidity. Adjusted EBITDA is
defined as EBITDA before turnaround and related expenses, stock-based compensation expense, gains
(losses) from derivative activities, contingent consideration, formation costs, bargain purchase gain and
adjustments to reflect proportionate EBITDA from the Minnesota Pipeline operations. Other companies,
including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its
usefulness as a comparative measure. Adjusted EBITDA also has limitations as an analytical tool and should
not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of
these limitations include that Adjusted EBITDA:
Ÿ  does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual
commitments;
Ÿ  does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
Ÿ  does not reflect our interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal
payments, on our debt;
Ÿ  does not reflect the equity income in our Minnesota Pipe Line investment, but includes 17% of the calculated
EBITDA of Minnesota Pipe Line;
Ÿ  does not reflect realized and unrealized gains and losses from hedging activities, which may have a
substantial impact on our cash flow;
Ÿ  does not reflect certain other non-cash income and expenses; and
Ÿ  excludes income taxes that may represent a reduction in available cash.
121
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The following tables reconcile net (loss) earnings as reflected in the results of operations tables and segment
footnote disclosures to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipe Line proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Unrealized losses on derivative activities
Contingent consideration
Early extinguishment of derivatives
Realized losses on derivative activities
Adjusted EBITDA
Successor
Three Months Ended March 31, 2012
Refining
Retail
Other
(in millions)
$ 78.7    
  
  —    
5.8    
 
   
    
  84.5    
0.7    
 
 
3.5    
  —    
  —    
  —    
  —    
  —
$(0.4)  
 
  —   
  1.8   
   
   
  1.4   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —
$(271.9)  
 
10.4   
 
0.9   
 
   
   
  (260.6)  
—   
 
—   
 
0.4   
 
 
88.4   
65.7   
 
44.6   
 
 
52.9
Total
$(193.6)
10.4  
 
8.5  
 
   
 
  (174.7) 
0.7  
 
3.5  
 
0.4  
 
 
88.4  
65.7  
 
44.6  
 
 
52.9
Adjusted EBITDA
(in millions)
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Income tax provision
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipe Line proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Unrealized losses on derivative activities
Contingent consideration
Formation costs
Realized losses on derivative activities
Adjusted EBITDA
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipe Line proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Unrealized losses on derivative activities
Contingent consideration
Formation costs
Realized losses on derivative activities
Adjusted EBITDA
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
122
$ 88.7
$ 1.4
$ (8.6)
Successor
Three Months Ended March 31, 2011
Refining
Retail
Other
(in millions)
$ 78.5    
  
  —    
  —    
 
5.1    
   
    
  83.6    
0.9    
 
 
3.3    
  —    
  —    
  —    
  —    
  —    
   
    
$ 87.8
$(2.4)  
 
  —   
  —   
  1.9   
   
   
  (0.5)  
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
  —   
   
   
$(0.5)
$(300.6)  
 
 
10.0   
 
0.1   
 
0.3   
   
   
  (290.2)  
—   
 
 
—   
 
0.3   
  262.9   
(31.8)  
 
 
2.5   
52.2   
 
   
   
$ (4.1)
$ 81.5
Total
$(224.5)
10.0  
 
0.1  
 
7.3  
   
 
  (207.1) 
0.9  
 
 
3.3  
 
0.3  
  262.9  
(31.8) 
 
 
2.5  
52.2  
 
   
 
$ 83.2
Successor
Year Ended December 31, 2011
Refining
Retail
Other
$
$
388.2    
  
—    
21.5    
    
409.7    
2.8    
22.6    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
    
435.1
$
$
(in millions)
14.0    
  
—    
7.2    
    
21.2    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
    
21.2
$ (373.9)  
 
42.1   
0.8   
   
(331.0)  
—   
—   
1.6   
41.9   
(55.8)  
7.4   
310.3   
   
(25.6)
$
Successor
June 23, 2010 (inception date) to December 31, 2010
Refining
Retail
Other
$
9.1
$
(in millions)
0.5    
$
15.2
Total
28.3
$
42.1  
 
29.5  
 
 
   
99.9  
 
2.8  
 
22.6  
 
1.6  
 
41.9  
 
(55.8) 
 
 
7.4  
  310.3  
   
 
$ 430.7
Total     
 
24.8
$
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Stock-based compensation expense
Unrealized losses on derivative activities
Formation costs
Bargain purchase gain
Adjusted EBITDA
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
Income tax provision
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Unrealized losses on derivative activities
Adjusted EBITDA
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
Income tax provision
EBITDA subtotal
Minnesota Pipeline proportionate EBITDA
Turnaround and related expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Adjusted EBITDA
—    
1.7    
    
10.8    
0.3    
—    
—    
—    
—    
    
11.1
$
—    
0.5    
    
1.0    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
    
1.0
$
3.2   
—   
   
18.4   
—   
0.1   
27.1   
3.6   
(51.4)  
   
(2.2)
$
3.2  
2.2
30.2  
0.3  
0.1  
27.1  
3.6  
(51.4) 
 
9.9
$
123
Predecessor
Eleven Months Ended November 30, 2010
Refining
Retail
Other
(in millions)
$ 142.8    
  
  —    
  24.9    
  —    
   
    
  167.7    
3.7    
 
9.5    
 
 
0.3    
  —    
   
    
$ 181.2
$26.5    
  
  —    
  12.4    
  —    
   
    
  38.9    
  —    
  —    
  —    
  —    
   
    
$38.9
$ (108.3)  
 
0.3   
 
—   
 
67.1   
 
   
   
(40.9)  
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
40.9   
 
   
   
$ —
Predecessor
Year Ended December 31, 2009
Refining
Retail
Other
(in millions)
$ 70.6    
  
  —    
  26.0    
  —    
   
    
  96.6    
4.2    
 
0.6    
 
 
0.3    
   
    
$ 101.7
$19.3    
  
  —    
  14.2    
  —    
   
    
  33.5    
  —    
  —    
  —    
   
    
$33.5
$ (35.2)  
 
 
0.4   
 
—   
 
34.8   
   
   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
   
   
$ —
Total
$ 61.0
0.3  
 
  37.3  
  67.1  
   
 
  165.7  
3.7  
 
9.5  
 
 
0.3  
  40.9  
   
 
$ 220.1
Total
$ 54.7
0.4  
 
  40.2  
  34.8  
   
 
  130.1  
4.2  
 
0.6  
 
 
0.3  
   
 
$ 135.2
Our primary sources of liquidity have traditionally been cash generated from our operating activities and
Liquidity and Capital Resources
borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our ability to generate sufficient cash flows from our operating
activities will continue to be primarily dependent on producing or purchasing and selling sufficient quantities
of refined products and merchandise at margins sufficient to cover fixed and variable expenses. For
discussions on our refinery gross product margin per barrel and retail fuel margin per gallon and
merchandise margin for company-operated stores, see “—Results of Operations—Refining Segment” and “—
Results of Operations—Retail Segment,” and for discussions on factors that affect our results of operations,
see “—Major Influences on Results of Operations.” For more information on our revolving credit facility, see
“—Description of Our Indebtedness—Senior Secured Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility.”
Based on current and anticipated levels of operations and conditions in our industry and markets, we believe
that cash on hand, together with cash flows from operations and borrowings available to us under our
revolving credit facility, will be adequate to meet our working capital, capital expenditures, any debt service
and other cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
124
The indenture governing our senior secured notes and our revolving credit facility may substantially restrict
our ability to make distributions to our unitholders. Subject to certain exceptions, the restricted payment
covenant under the indenture governing our senior secured notes restricts us from making cash distributions
unless our fixed charge coverage ratio is at least 2.0 to 1.0 after giving pro forma effect to such distributions
and such cash distributions do not exceed an amount equal to the aggregate net proceeds received by us
(either as a result of capital contributions or from the sale of equity or certain debt securities) plus 50% of our
consolidated net income (or less 100% of consolidated net loss), which is defined to exclude certain non-cash
charges, such as net unrealized gains or losses from hedging obligations and impairment charges, accrued
on a cumulative basis, plus certain other items. Our revolving credit facility generally restricts our ability to
make cash distributions if (a) we fail to have excess availability under the facility at least equal to the greater
of (1) 25% of the lesser of (x) the $300 million commitment amount and (y) the then applicable borrowing base
and (2) $37.5 million or (b) we fail to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio after giving pro forma effect to
such distributions of at least 1.1 to 1.0.
As of December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012 (and thus before giving effect to the $40.0 million equity
distribution paid to Northern Tier Holdings in May 2012), our restricted payments basket under the indenture
was equal to approximately $58.3 million and $58.9 million, respectively. On a pro forma basis for this
offering and the May 2012 equity distribution, as of December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012, our restricted
payments basket under the indenture would have been equal to approximately $         million and $        
million, respectively.
We may use a variety of derivative instruments to enhance the stability of our cash flows. In general, we may
attempt to mitigate risks related to the variability of our future cash flow and profitability resulting from
changes in applicable commodity prices or interest rates so that we can maintain cash flows sufficient to
meet debt service, required capital expenditures and similar requirements. See “—Quantitative and Qualitative
Disclosures About Market Risk.” During the first quarter of 2012, we agreed to settle a portion of our existing
derivative instruments ahead of their respective expiration dates and recognized a $44.6 million loss related to
the early extinguishment. The cash payments for the settlement of these derivative instruments have been
deferred and will begin to come due in December 2012. As of March 31, 2012, $7.9 million of this liability is
included in current liabilities and $36.7 million is included in non-current liabilities with the final amount to
be paid in December 2013.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
125
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Predecessor
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
Eleven
Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
June 23,
2010
(inception date) to
December 31,
2010
(In millions)
Successor
Year Ended 
December 31,
2011
Three Months
Ended March 31,
2011
2012
Net cash provided
by (used in)
operating activities   
Net cash used in
investing activities   
Net cash provided
by (used in)
financing activities
$
129.4
(25.0)
$
145.4
(29.3)
(103.9)
(115.4)
Net increase
(decrease) in cash
and cash
equivalents
Cash and cash
equivalents at
beginning of period
0.5
0.7
5.5
6.0
Cash and cash
equivalents at end
of period
$
6.0
$
6.7
$
$
—
(363.3)
$
209.3
$ 94.3
$ (54.8)
(156.3)
(117.8)
(4.6)
436.1
(2.3)
—
—
72.8
50.7
(23.5)
(59.4)
—
72.8
72.8
123.5
72.8
$
123.5
$ 49.3
$ 64.1
Net Cash (Used In) Provided By Operating Activities.    Net cash used in operating activities for the three
months ended March 31, 2012 was $54.8 million. The most significant providers of cash were our operating
income ($2.7 million) adjusted for non-cash adjustments, such as depreciation and amortization expense
($8.5 million) and non-cash contingent consideration loss ($65.7 million). Offsetting these impacts were
realized losses from derivative activities ($52.9 million), increases in accounts receivable ($45.0 million) and
decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses ($23.5 million).
Net cash provided by operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2011 was $94.3 million. The
most significant providers of cash were operating income ($100.7 million) adjusted for non-cash adjustments,
such as depreciation and amortization ($7.3 million) and contingent consideration income ($31.8 million).
Additionally, cash was provided by reduced accounts receivables ($18.5 million) and other current assets
($19.9 million) and increased accounts payable and accrued expenses ($81.0 million). Offsetting these sources
of cash were realized losses from derivative activities ($52.2 million) and increased inventory ($40.0 million).
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $209.3 million. The most
significant providers of cash were our net earnings ($28.3 million) adjusted for non-cash adjustments, such as
depreciation and amortization expense ($29.5 million), unrealized losses from derivative activities ($41.9
million) and non-cash contingent consideration income ($55.8 million). Additionally, cash was provided by
decreases in accounts receivable ($18.3 million) and increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses
($146.4 million).
Net cash used in operating activities for the 2010 Successor Period was less than $0.1 million. The most
significant providers of cash were net earnings ($24.8 million) and adjustments to reconcile net
126
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
earnings to net cash provided from operating activities, such as depreciation and amortization ($2.2 million),
unrealized losses from derivative activities ($27.1 million), changes in inventories ($38.6 million) and changes
in accounts payable and accrued expenses ($86.4 million). These increases in cash were offset by a net cash
outflow from changes in current receivables ($100.2 million), changes in other current assets ($27.7 million)
and an adjustment for non-cash bargain purchase gain ($51.4 million).
Net cash provided by operating for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $145.4 million. The most
significant providers of cash were net earnings ($61.0 million) and adjustments to reconcile net earnings to
net cash provided from operating activities, such as depreciation and amortization ($37.3 million), unrealized
losses from derivative activities ($40.9 million) and changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses ($23.8
million). These increases in cash were partially offset by a net cash outflow from changes in current
receivables ($17.5 million).
Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2009 was $129.4 million. The
most significant providers of cash were our net earnings ($54.7 million) and adjustments to reconcile net
earnings to net cash provided from operating activities, such as depreciation and amortization ($40.2 million)
and changes in current accounts payable and accrued expenses ($31.2 million) and receivables from/payables
to related parties ($23.8 million). These increases in cash were partially offset by a net cash outflow from
changes in accounts receivables ($14.7 million) and inventories ($6.8 million).
Changes in accounts payable and receivable and accrued expenses described above primarily relate to the
changes in our total revenue, costs and expenses for such period discussed above under “Results of
Operations.” Other factors affecting these changes were not material.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities.    Net cash used in investing activities for the three months ended
March 31, 2012 was $4.6 million, relating primarily to capital expenditures ($5.4 million) offset by return of
capital on our equity and cost basis investments ($0.8 million).
Net cash used in investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2011 was $117.8 million, relating
primarily to capital expenditures ($6.0 million) and cash paid to Marathon Oil as part of the Marathon
Acquisition ($112.8 million).
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $156.3 million, relating
primarily to capital expenditures ($45.9 million) and cash paid to Marathon Oil with respect to a payable
related to crude oil inventory purchased as part of Marathon Acquisition ($112.8 million). Capital spending for
the year ended December 31, 2011 primarily included a multi-year boiler replacement project at the refinery,
safety related enhancements and facility improvements at the refinery and the implementation of our new
information and accounting systems.
Net cash used in investing activities for the 2010 Successor Period was $363.3 million, primarily relating to
net cash paid for the Marathon Acquisition ($360.8 million).
Net cash used in investing activities for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 was $29.3 million,
primarily relating to capital expenditures ($29.8 million). Capital spending for the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010 primarily included ongoing expenditures related to the revamp of the No. 2 crude unit, the
multi-year boiler replacement project at the refinery, safety related enhancements and facility improvements at
the refinery.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2009 was $25.0 million, primarily
relating to capital expenditures ($29.0 million), partially offset by the return of capital on our
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
127
cost method investment ($3.3 million). Capital spending for 2009 included ongoing expenditures related to the
revamp of the No. 2 crude unit, the multi-year boiler replacement project at the refinery, safety related
enhancements and facility improvements.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities.    Net cash used in financing activities was $2.3 million
for the year ended December 31, 2011, representing tax distributions to Northern Tier Holdings, LLC. Net cash
from financing activities for the 2010 Successor Period were $436.1 million representing borrowing from our
senior secured notes ($290.0 million) and investments from members ($180.2 million) offset by financing
costs related to the establishment of our credit facilities ($34.1 million). Net cash used in financing activities
for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and the year ended December 31, 2009 were $115.4 million
and $103.9 million, respectively, each representing net distributions to Marathon.
Working Capital
Working capital at March 31, 2012 was negative $25.3 million, consisting of $413.8 million in total current
assets and $439.1 million in total current liabilities. The working capital at March 31, 2012 was impacted by
the short-term derivative liability for unrealized losses of $185.5 million related to our crack spread risk
management program. It is expected that these unrealized losses will be offset by future margin
improvements that will be realized from sales of refined products at improved crack spreads over the next two
years.
Working capital at December 31, 2011 was $77.4 million, consisting of $425.0 million in total current assets
and $347.6 million in total current liabilities. The working capital at December 31, 2011 was impacted by the
short-term derivative liability for unrealized losses of $109.9 million related to our crack spread risk
management program. The offsetting benefits related to these unrealized losses should be realized over
future periods as improved crack spread margins are realized. Working capital at December 31, 2010 was
$108.6 million, consisting of $358.1 million in total current assets and $249.5 million in total current liabilities.
At the closing of the Marathon Acquisition, we entered into a crude oil and supply and logistics agreement
with JPM CCC pursuant to which JPM CCC assists us in the purchase of the crude oil requirements of our
refinery and provides transportation and other logistical services for delivery of the crude oil to our storage
tanks at Cottage Grove, Minnesota, which are approximately two miles from our refinery. In March 2012, we
amended and restated the crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC. Upon delivery of the crude
oil to us we pay JPM CCC the price of the crude oil plus certain agreed fees and expenses. We believe this
crude oil supply and logistics agreement significantly reduces our crude inventories and allows us to take
title to and price our crude oil at the refinery, as opposed to the crude oil origination point, reducing the time
we are exposed to market fluctuations before the finished product output is sold.
Acquisition Financing
We financed the Marathon Acquisition through a combination of capital contributions from ACON Refining,
TPG Refining, and certain members of our senior management, the issuance of an $80 million noncontrolling
preferred membership interest to Marathon, the issuance of $290 million in notes and through certain third-
party transactions. See “—Comparability of Historical Results.”
Capital Spending
Capital spending was $5.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012, which primarily included safety
related enhancements and facility improvements at the refinery and the implementation of our new
information and accounting systems. We currently expect to spend approximately $40 million in capital
expenditures during 2012.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
128
Capital spending for the year ended December 31, 2011 primarily included a multi-year boiler replacement
project at the refinery, safety related enhancements and facility improvements at the refinery and the
implementation of our new information and accounting systems. We completed a multi-year boiler
replacement project, which entailed $19.9 million of capital expenditures over the project life, $12.7 million
during the period from 2008 through November 30, 2010 and $7.2 million during the period from December 1,
2010 through December 31, 2011.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have the following contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2011:
Long-term debt(a)
Lease obligations(b)
Capital expenditures(c)
Environmental remediation costs
Less than 1
Payments Due by Period
More than 5
year
1-3 Years
3-5 Years
Years
$
32.3    
22.2    
1.4    
4.2
$
64.7    
43.6    
—    
1.5
(in millions)
$
62.8    
42.1    
—    
1.0
$
320.5    
180.3    
—    
1.9
Total
$480.3  
  288.2  
1.4  
 
 
8.6
(a)
(b)
(c)
Long-term debt represents (i) the repayment of the $290 million of notes at their 2017 maturity date, (ii) cash
interest payments for the notes through the 2017 maturity date and (iii) commitment fees of 0.625% on an
assumed $300 million undrawn balance under our revolving credit facility with a maturity date of 2015.
Lease obligations represent payments for a variety of facilities and equipment under lease, including existing
real property leases and payments pursuant to our lease arrangement with Realty Income, office equipment and
vehicles, as well as rail tracks for storage of rail tank cars near the refinery and numerous rail tank cars.
Capital expenditures represent our contractual commitments to acquire property, plant and equipment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Historically we have not had any off-balance sheet arrangements. In connection with the closing of the
Marathon Acquisition, we entered into a lease arrangement with Realty Income, pursuant to which we leased
135 SuperAmerica convenience stores and one support facility over a 15-year initial term at an aggregate
annual rent fixed for five years at an annual rate of $20.3 million, with consumer price index-based rent
increases thereafter. For more information on the sale-leaseback arrangement, see “—Comparability of
Historical Results.”
Description of Our Indebtedness
Senior Secured Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility
We are negotiating an amendment to our current revolving credit facility that would modify its pricing and
extend its term. The proposed amended revolving facility is expected to be similar in size to our current
facility, but with a larger expansion capacity. We expect that the pricing and terms of our potential amended
credit facility will be more favorable than the corresponding terms of our current facility. We are currently
seeking commitments for this facility. If we decide to proceed with the potential amendment to our credit
facility, we anticipate that the process will be finalized during the third quarter of 2012.
Summarized below are the principal terms of our current revolving credit facility. This summary is not a
description of all of the terms of such indebtedness and is qualified in its entirety by reference to
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
129
our credit facility, which has been filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus
forms a part.
At the closing of the Marathon Acquisition, we and certain of our subsidiaries (the “ABL Borrowers”) entered
into an asset-backed lending facility with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. as administrative agent and collateral
agent (the “ABL Agent”), Bank of America, N.A., as syndication agent, and lenders party thereto. Our
revolving credit facility provides for revolving credit financing through December 1, 2015 in an aggregate
principal amount of up to $300 million (of which $150 million may be utilized for the issuance of letters of
credit and up to $30 million may be short-term borrowings upon same-day notice, referred to as swingline
loans) and may be increased up to a maximum aggregate principal amount of $400 million, subject to
borrowing base availability and lender approval. Availability under our revolving credit facility at any time will
be the lesser of (a) the aggregate commitments under our revolving credit facility and (b) the borrowing base,
less any outstanding borrowings and letters of credit. The borrowing base is calculated based on a
percentage of eligible accounts receivable, petroleum inventory and other assets.
Borrowings under our revolving credit facility bear interest, at our option, at either (a) an alternative base rate,
plus an applicable margin (ranging between 1.75% and 2.25%) or (b) a LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin
(ranging between 2.75% and 3.25%). The alternative base rate is the greater of (a) the prime rate, (b) the
Federal Funds Effective rate plus 50 basis points, or (c) one-month LIBOR rate plus 100 basis points and a
spread of up to 225 basis points based upon percentage utilization of this facility. In addition to paying
interest on outstanding borrowings, we are also required to pay an annual commitment fee ranging from
0.375% to 0.625% and letter of credit fees.
As of December 31, 2011 and the three months ended March 31, 2012, the availability under our revolving
credit facility was $108.0 million and $156.7 million respectively. This availability is net of $61.6 million in
outstanding letters of credit. We had no borrowings under our revolving credit facility at either December 31,
2011 or March 31, 2012.
In order to borrow under our revolving credit facility, if the amount available under our revolving credit facility
is less than the greater of (i) 15% of the lesser of (x) the $300 million commitment amount and (y) the then-
applicable borrowing base and (ii) $22.5 million, the ABL Borrowers must comply with a minimum fixed
charge coverage ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0. As of December 31, 2011, the fixed charge coverage ratio was 1.2 to
1.0.
Our revolving credit facility contains a negative covenant restricting the ABL Borrowers’ ability to incur
additional debt, subject to certain exceptions, including, but not limited to, the following:
Ÿ  indebtedness existing under our revolving credit facility or that was existing as of December 1, 2010, as set
forth in our revolving credit facility;
Ÿ  intercompany indebtedness, provided that such indebtedness would be permitted as an investment under our
revolving credit facility, such indebtedness is evidenced by an intercompany note in the specified form or
such indebtedness was in existence as of December 1, 2010 and such indebtedness is evidenced by an
intercompany note;
Ÿ  certain guarantees by the ABL Borrowers and their affiliates;
Ÿ  indebtedness incurred exclusively to finance the acquisition, lease, construction, repair, renovations,
replacement, expansion or improvement of any fixed or capital assets or otherwise incurred in respect of
capital expenditures, not to exceed the greater of (i) $20 million and (ii) 2.5% of the ABL Borrowers’ total
assets (in each case determined as of the date of incurrence);
Ÿ  the extension, refinancing, refunding, replacement or renewal of any permitted indebtedness, subject to
certain exceptions, as described in our revolving credit facility;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
130
Ÿ  indebtedness incurred by us, or any of our subsidiaries, with respect to letters of credit, bank guarantees,
bankers’ acceptances, warehouse receipts, or similar instruments issued or created in the ordinary course of
business, provided that upon the drawing of such letters of credit or the incurrence of such indebtedness,
such obligations are reimbursed within 30 days following such drawing or incurrence;
Ÿ  indebtedness of an entity that becomes a subsidiary after December 1, 2010 and indebtedness acquired or
assumed in connection with acquisitions permitted under our revolving credit facility, so long as (i) such
indebtedness exists at the time such entity becomes a subsidiary or at the time of such permitted acquisition
and is not created in contemplation of or in connection with a permitted acquisition and (ii) such indebtedness
is not guaranteed by us or our subsidiaries;
Ÿ  indebtedness of any of our subsidiaries issued or incurred to finance acquisitions permitted under our
revolving credit facility, subject to certain exceptions as described in our revolving credit facility;
Ÿ  indebtedness and guarantees with respect to the 10.5% senior secured notes in an aggregate principal
amount that is not in excess of $290 million;
Ÿ  other indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $50 million; and
Ÿ  unsecured subordinated indebtedness of ours or any subsidiary and any other unsecured indebtedness so
long as at the time of any such incurrence and after giving pro forma effect to such incurrence, there is
excess availability under our revolving credit facility equal to or in excess of the greater of (a) 17.5% of the
lesser of (x) the revolving credit commitment under our revolving credit facility and (y) the borrowing base
under our revolving credit facility and (B) $26.25 million.
In addition, our revolving credit facility contains negative covenants that restrict the ABL Borrowers ability to,
among other things, incur certain additional debt, grant certain liens, enter into certain guarantees, enter into
certain mergers, make certain loans and investments, dispose of certain assets, prepay certain debt, make
cash distributions, modify certain material agreements or organizational documents, or change the business
we conduct.
Our revolving credit facility also contains certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative
covenants and events of default. Events of default include, among other things, payment defaults, breach of
representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults and cross-acceleration to certain
indebtedness, certain events of bankruptcy, certain events under ERISA, material judgments, actual or
asserted failure of any guaranty or security document supporting our revolving credit facility to be in full force
and effect, and change of control. If such an event of default occurs, the lenders under our revolving credit
facility would be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under our
revolving credit facility and all actions permitted to be taken by a secured creditor.
Senior Secured Notes
Summarized below are the principal terms of our 10.5% senior secured notes due 2017. This summary is not
a description of all of the terms of such indebtedness and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the
indenture governing the terms of the notes, which has been filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of
which this prospectus forms a part.
In December 2010, in connection with the consummation of the Marathon Acquisition, we (the “Issuer”) and
Northern Tier Finance Corporation (the “Co-Issuer” and, together with the Issuer, the “Issuers”) privately
placed $290 million in aggregate principal amount of our 10.50% senior secured
Table of Contents
131
Index to Financial Statements
notes due 2017, which we refer to as the senior secured notes. The proceeds from the offering of senior
secured notes were used as part of the financing for the Marathon Acquisition. Deutsche Bank Trust Company
Americas acts as trustee for the senior secured notes.
The senior secured notes are guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior secured basis, by all of our
existing and future direct and indirect subsidiaries that borrow under, or guarantee, any obligation under our
revolving credit facility, or that guarantee our indebtedness or the indebtedness of another subsidiary and any
other material wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries. The senior secured notes and the note guarantees are
secured, subject to permitted liens, by (a) a first-priority security interest in substantially all present and
hereinafter acquired tangible and intangible assets of the Issuers and each of the subsidiary guarantors in
which liens have been granted in relation to the 10.5% senior secured notes due 2017 (other than those items
described in clause (b) below), and (b) a second-priority security interest in the (i) inventory, (ii) accounts
receivable, (iii) investment property, general intangibles (excluding trademarks, trade names and other
intellectual property), documents, instruments, deposit accounts and other bank and securities accounts (with
certain exceptions), and cash and cash equivalents, in each case, relating to the items in clauses (i) and (ii),
(iv) all books and records relating to the items in subclauses (i), (ii), and (iii), (v) all proceeds of or supporting
obligation relating to the foregoing, and (vi) certain other related assets, in each case owned or hereinafter
acquired by the issuers and each of the subsidiary guarantors.
The senior secured notes are the Issuers’ general senior secured obligations that are effectively subordinated
to the Issuers’ obligations under our revolving credit facility, structurally subordinated to any existing and
future indebtedness and claims of holders of preferred stock and other liabilities of the Issuers’ direct or
indirect subsidiaries that are not guarantors of the notes (other than Northern Tier Finance Corporation), and
pari passu in right of payment with all of the Issuers’ existing and future indebtedness that is not
subordinated. The notes rank effectively senior to all of the Issuers’ existing and future unsecured
indebtedness to the extent of the value of the collateral, effectively equal to the obligations under certain
hedge agreements and any future indebtedness which is permitted to be secured on a pari passu basis with
the notes to the extent of the value of the collateral and senior in right of payment to any future subordinated
indebtedness of the Issuers.
At any time and from time to time prior to December 1, 2013, but not more than once in any twelve-month
period commencing on December 1, 2010, the Issuers may redeem in such twelve-month period up to 10% of
the aggregate principal amount of notes issued under the indenture (together with any additional notes) at a
redemption price of 103% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but
excluding, the applicable redemption date.
At any time prior to December 1, 2013, the Issuers may, on any one or more occasions, redeem up to 35% of
the aggregate principal amount of notes issued under the indenture (together with any additional notes) at a
redemption price of 110.50% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but
excluding, the applicable redemption date, with all or a portion of the net cash proceeds of one or more
qualified equity offerings; provided that (1) at least 65% of the aggregate principal amount of notes issued
under the indenture (including any additional notes) remains outstanding immediately after the occurrence of
such redemption (excluding notes held by the Issuers and their subsidiaries); and (2) the redemption must
occur within 90 days of the date of the closing of such qualified equity offering.
At any time prior to December 1, 2013, the Issuers may, on any one or more occasions, redeem all or a part of
the notes, upon not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ notice, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the
principal amount of the notes redeemed, plus an applicable make-whole premium as of, and accrued and
unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption, subject to the rights of holders of notes on the
relevant record date to receive interest due on the relevant interest payment date.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
132
Except pursuant to the preceding paragraphs, the notes will not be redeemable at the Issuers’ option prior to
December 1, 2013.
On or after December 1, 2013, the Issuers may redeem all or a part of the notes upon not less than 30 nor
more than 60 days’ notice, at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth
below plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date, if
redeemed during the 12-month period beginning on December 1 of the years indicated below, subject to the
rights of holders of notes on the relevant record date to receive interest on the relevant interest payment date:
Year
2013
2014
2015
2016 and thereafter
Percentage 
  107.875% 
  105.250% 
  102.625% 
  100.000%
The indenture governing the senior secured notes contains certain covenants that, among other things, limit
the ability of our and certain of our subsidiaries to, subject to certain exceptions:
Ÿ  incur, assume or guarantee additional debt or issue redeemable stock and preferred stock if our fixed charge
coverage ratio, after giving effect to the issuance, assumption or guarantee of such additional debt or the
issuance of such redeemable stock or preferred stock, for the immediately preceding quarter would have
been less than 2.0 to 1.0, determined on a pro forma basis;
Ÿ  declare or pay dividends on or make any other payment or distribution on account of our or any of our
restricted subsidiaries’ equity interests;
Ÿ  make any payment with respect to, or purchase, repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire
for value our equity interests;
Ÿ  purchase, repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value or give any irrevocable notice
of redemption with respect to certain subordinated debt;
Ÿ  make certain restricted investments;
Ÿ  make loans or advances, or sell, lease or transfer any of our property or assets;
Ÿ  merge, consolidate, lease or sell substantially all of our assets;
Ÿ  create, incur, assume or otherwise cause or suffer to exist or become effective any lien;
Ÿ  conduct any business or enter into or permit to exist any contract or transaction with any affiliate involving
aggregate payments or consideration in excess of $5.0 million;
Ÿ  suffer a change of control;
Ÿ  enter into new lines of business; and
enter into agreements that restrict distributions from certain subsidiaries.
Ÿ  enter into agreements that restrict distributions from certain subsidiaries.
The senior secured notes also provide for events of default which, if any of them occurs, would permit or
require the principal of and accrued interest on such notes to become or to be declared to be due and
payable.
Inflation
Inflation in the United States has been relatively low in recent years and did not have a material impact on our
results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2009, the eleven months ended
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
133
November 30, 2010, the 2010 Successor Period and the year ended December 31, 2011. Although the impact of
inflation has been insignificant in recent years, it is still a factor in the United States economy.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our
consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and
related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Certain accounting policies involve judgments and
uncertainties to such an extent that there is reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have
been reported under different conditions, or if different assumptions had been used. We evaluate our
estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and various
other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the
basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent
from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions used in preparation of
our consolidated financial statements. We provide expanded discussion of our more significant accounting
policies, estimates and judgments below. We believe these accounting policies reflect our more significant
estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. See Note 2 to our
audited financial statements for a discussion of additional accounting policies and estimates made by
management.
Contingent Consideration and Margin Support Arrangements
We entered into a contingent consideration agreement with Marathon as part of the Marathon Acquisition.
This agreement would have required us to make earn-out payments to Marathon if the Agreement Adjusted
EBITDA exceeded $165 million, less, among other things, any rental expense accrued pursuant to the sale-
leaseback arrangement with Realty Income, during any year in each of the eight years following the Marathon
Acquisition. Agreement Adjusted EBITDA adjusts for, among other items, (i) any unrealized gains or losses
relating to derivative activities, (ii) any gains or losses generated by the liquidation of any LIFO inventory
layers, (iii) any losses related to lower of cost or market inventory adjustments, and (iv) any gains on the sale
of property, plant or equipment and certain other assets. Specifically, we would have been required to pay
Marathon 40% of the amount by which Agreement Adjusted EBITDA exceeded the specified threshold, not to
exceed $125 million over the eight years following the Marathon Acquisition. For the year ended December 31,
2011, we were not required to make any earn-out payment under the agreement. The Marathon Acquisition
agreements also include a margin support component that would have required Marathon to pay us up to $30
million per year to the extent the Agreement Adjusted EBITDA had been $145 million, less, among other
things, any rental expense accrued pursuant to the sale-leaseback arrangement with Realty Income, in either
of the twelve-month periods ending November 30, 2011 or 2012 up to a maximum of $60 million. Any such
payments made by Marathon would have increased the amount that we would have been required to pay
Marathon over the earn-out period. Subsequent fair value adjustments to these collective contingent
consideration arrangements (earn-out arrangement and margin support arrangement) would have been
recorded in the statement of operations based on quarterly remeasurements. These subsequent fair value
adjustments would have been made based on our estimates of the Agreement Adjusted EBITDA expected over
the earn-out period. As such, there are inherent risks related to the accuracy of such estimates. See Note 13 to
our audited financial statements for further information on our fair value measurements.
As of March 31, 2012, we recorded a receivable of $30 million relating to the margin support component of the
contingent consideration arrangement for the twelve months ended November 30, 2011. Marathon has
disputed approximately $12 million of this amount. In connection with the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
134
resolution of this dispute, we entered into a settlement agreement with Marathon on May 4, 2012. Under the
terms of this settlement agreement, Marathon will receive $40 million of the net proceeds from this offering,
and Northern Tier Holdings will redeem Marathon’s existing preferred interest with a portion of the net
proceeds from this offering and issue Marathon a new $45 million preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings,
in consideration for relinquishing all claims with respect to earn-out payments under the contingent
consideration agreement. We have also agreed, pursuant to the settlement agreement, to relinquish all claims
to margin support payments under the contingent consideration agreement. The settlement agreement is
contingent upon the consummation of this offering.
At March 31, 2012, in addition to the $30 million receivable discussed above, we had recorded at fair value, an
asset of $2.8 million related to the margin support component for the twelve months ended November 30,
2012 and a liability of $79.2 million related to the earn-out component. Upon the consummation of this
offering, we will reverse any amounts recorded for the margin support and earn-out arrangements and record
a liability of $85 million.
Investment in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and MPL Investments
Our 17% common interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company is accounted for using the equity method of
accounting and carried at our share of net assets in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards
Board, or the FASB, Accounting Standards Codification paragraph 323-30-35-3. Income from equity method
investment represents our proportionate share of net (loss) earnings attributed to common owners generated
by the Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
The equity method investment is assessed for impairment whenever changes in the facts and circumstances
indicate a loss in value has occurred. When the loss is deemed to be other than temporary, the carrying value
of the equity method investment is written down to fair value, and the amount of the write-down is included in
net (loss) earnings.
The investment in MPL Investments, over which we do not have significant influence and whose stock does
not have a readily determinable fair value, is carried at cost. MPL Investments owns all of the preferred
membership units of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company. Dividends received from MPL Investments are
recorded as return of capital from cost method investment and in other income.
Inventories
Inventories are carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost of inventories is determined primarily
under the LIFO method. However, we maintain other inventories in the retail segment whose cost is primarily
determined using the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method. The refining segment has a LIFO pool for crude oil
and refinery feedstocks and a separate LIFO pool for refined products. The retail segment has a LIFO pool for
refined products for inventory held by the retail stores.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets primarily include a retail marketing trade name, franchise agreements, refinery licensed
technology agreements and refinery permits and plans. The marketing trade name has an indefinite life and
therefore is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment annually and when events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the fair value of the intangible asset has been reduced below carrying value. The
other intangibles are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected remaining lives of the related
contracts, as applicable, which range from 8 to 15 years. Amortized intangible assets are reviewed for
impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may
not be recoverable. If the sum of the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
135
expected undiscounted future cash flows from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than
the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized based on the fair value of the asset.
Major Maintenance Activities
We incur costs for planned major refinery maintenance, referred to as “turnarounds.” These types of costs
include contractor repair services, materials and supplies, equipment rentals and labor costs. Such costs are
expensed in the period incurred.
Environmental Costs
Environmental expenditures are capitalized if the costs mitigate or prevent future contamination or if the costs
improve environmental safety or efficiency of the existing assets. We provide for remediation costs and
penalties when the responsibility to remediate is probable and the amount of associated costs can be
reasonably estimated. The timing of remediation accruals coincides with completion of a feasibility study or
the commitment to a formal plan of action. Remediation liabilities are accrued based on estimates of known
environmental exposure and are discounted when the estimated amounts are reasonably fixed and
determinable. If recoveries of remediation costs from third parties are probable, a receivable is recorded and
is discounted when the estimated amount is reasonably fixed and determinable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The fair value of asset retirement obligations is recognized in the period in which the obligations are incurred
if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. Conditional asset retirement obligations for removal and
disposal of fire-retardant material from certain refining assets and asset retirement obligations for the removal
of underground storage tanks from leased convenient stores have been recognized. The amounts recorded for
such obligations are based on the most probable current cost projections. Asset retirement obligations have
not been recognized for the removal of materials and equipment from or the closure of certain refinery,
pipeline, terminal and retail marketing assets because the fair value cannot be reasonably estimated since the
settlement dates of the obligations are indeterminable.
Current inflation rates and credit-adjusted-risk-free interest rates are used to estimate the fair value of asset
retirement obligations. Depreciation of capitalized asset retirement costs and accretion of asset retirement
obligations are recorded over time. Depreciation is determined on a straight-line basis, while accretion
escalates over the lives of the assets.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We are exposed to earnings and cash flow volatility based on the timing and change in refined product prices
versus crude oil prices. To manage these risks, we use derivative instruments associated with the purchase or
sale of crude oil and refined products. Crack spread option contracts are used to hedge the volatility of
refining margins. We also may use futures contracts to manage price risks associated with inventory
quantities above or below target levels. We have not designated any derivative instruments as hedges for
accounting purposes and we do not enter into derivative contracts for speculative purposes. All derivative
instruments are recorded in the consolidated balance sheet at fair value and are classified depending on the
maturity date of the underlying contracts. Changes in the fair value of its contracts are accounted for by
marking them to market and recognizing any resulting gains or losses in its statements of operations. These
gains or losses are reported within operating activities on the consolidated statement of cash flows.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Income Taxes
136
Subsequent to the Marathon Acquisition, we are structured as limited liability companies and are therefore
pass-through entities for federal income tax purposes. As a result, we do not incur federal income taxes. Prior
to the Marathon Acquisition, our taxable income was historically included in the consolidated U.S. federal
income tax returns of Marathon and also in a number of state income tax returns, which were filed as
consolidated returns.
Prior to the Marathon Acquisition, the provision for income taxes was computed as if we were a standalone
tax-paying entity and as if we paid the amount of our current federal and state tax liabilities to Marathon in
each period. As such, the accrual and payment of the current federal and state tax liabilities is recorded within
the net investment in the combined financial statements in the period incurred.
Prior to the Marathon Acquisition, deferred tax assets and liabilities were recognized based on temporary
differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of our assets and liabilities and their tax bases
as reported in Marathon’s tax filings with the respective taxing authorities. The realization of deferred tax
assets was assessed periodically based on several interrelated factors. These factors included the expectation
to generate sufficient future taxable income in order to utilize tax credits and operating loss carry-forwards.
For more information, see Note 5 to our audited historical financial statements included elsewhere in this
prospectus.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In May 2011, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2011-04, “Fair Value Measurements
(Topic 820): Amendments to Achieve Common Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure Requirements in U.S.
GAAP and IFRS” (“ASU 2011-04”). ASU 2011-04 changes the terminology used to describe many of the
requirements in U.S. GAAP for measuring fair value and for disclosing information about fair value
measurements to ensure consistency between U.S. GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards
(“IFRS”). ASU 2011-04 also expands the disclosures for fair value measurements that are estimated using
significant unobservable (Level 3) inputs. This new guidance is to be applied prospectively. ASU 2011-04 will
be effective for our quarterly and annual financial statements beginning with the first quarter of 2012. We
believe that the adoption of this standard will not materially impact our consolidated financial statements
because the guidance only provides for enhanced disclosure requirements.
On January 1, 2012, we adopted ASU No. 2011-05, “Comprehensive Income (ASC Topic 220): Presentation of
Comprehensive Income” (“ASU 2011-05”), which amends current comprehensive income guidance. This ASU
eliminates the option to present the components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of
shareholders’ equity. Instead, we must report comprehensive income in either a single continuous statement
of comprehensive income which contains two sections, net income and other comprehensive income, or in
two separate but consecutive statements. Also effective January 1, 2012, we adopted ASU No. 2011-12,
“Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Deferral of the Effective Date for Amendments to the Presentation of
Reclassifications of Items Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income in Accounting Standards Update
No. 2011-05” (“ASU 2011-12”). ASU 2011-12 defers the effectiveness for the requirement to present on the face
of our financial statements the effects of reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive income on
the components of net income and other comprehensive income.
In December 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-11, “Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities”
(“ASU 2011-11”). ASU 2011-11 retains the existing offsetting requirements and enhances
137
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
the disclosure requirements to allow investors to better compare financial statements prepared under U.S.
GAAP with those prepared under IFRS. This new guidance is to be applied retrospectively. ASU 2011-11 will
be effective for our quarterly and annual financial statements beginning with the first quarter of 2013. We
believe that the adoption of ASU 2011-11 will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial
statements.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are exposed to various market risks, including changes in commodity prices and interest rates. We may
use financial instruments such as puts, calls, swaps, forward agreements and other financial instruments to
mitigate the effects of the identified risks. In general, we may attempt to mitigate risks related to the variability
of our future cash flow and profitability resulting from changes in applicable commodity prices or interest
rates so that we can maintain cash flows sufficient to meet debt service, required capital expenditures and
similar requirements.
Commodity Price Risk
As a refiner of petroleum products, we have exposure to market pricing for products sold in the future. In
order to realize value from our processing capacity, we must achieve a positive spread between the cost of
raw materials and the value of finished products (i.e., refinery gross product margin or crack spread). The
physical commodities that comprise our raw materials and finished goods are typically bought and sold at a
spot or index price that can be highly variable. The timing, direction and overall change in refined product
prices versus crude oil prices will impact profit margins and could have a significant impact on our earnings
and cash flows. Assuming all other factors remained constant, a $1 per barrel change in our average refinery
gross product margin, based on our 2011 average refinery throughput of 81,150 bpd, would result in a change
of $29.6 million in our overall gross margin.
The prices of crude oil, refined products and other commodities are subject to fluctuations in response to
changes in supply, demand, market uncertainty and a variety of additional factors that are beyond our control.
We monitor these risks and, where appropriate under our risk mitigation policy, we will seek to reduce the
volatility of our cash flows by hedging an operationally reasonable volume of our gasoline and diesel
production. We enter into derivative transactions designed to mitigate the impact of commodity price
fluctuations on our business by locking in or fixing a percentage of the anticipated or planned gross margin
in future periods. We will not enter into financial instruments for purposes of speculating on commodity
prices. However, we may execute derivative financial instruments pursuant to our hedging policy that are not
considered to be hedges within the applicable accounting guidelines.
In addition, the crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC allows us to take title to, and price,
our crude oil at the refinery, as opposed to the crude oil origination point, reducing the time we are exposed
to market fluctuations before the finished refined products are sold. Furthermore, this agreement enables us
to mitigate potential working capital fluctuations relating to crude oil price volatility.
Basis Risk
The effectiveness of our risk mitigation strategies is dependent upon the correlation of the price index utilized
for the hedging activity and the cash or spot price of the physical commodity for which price risk is being
mitigated. Basis risk is a term we use to define that relationship. Basis risk can exist due to several factors,
for example the location differences between the derivative instrument and the underlying physical
commodity. Our selection of the appropriate index to utilize in a hedging strategy is a prime consideration in
our basis risk exposure. In hedging NYMEX or U.S. Gulf Coast (or any other
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
138
relevant benchmark) crack spreads, we experience location basis as the settlement price of NYMEX refined
products (related more to New York Harbor cash markets) or U.S. Gulf Coast refined products (related more to
U.S. Gulf Coast cash markets) may be different than the prices of refined products in our Upper Great Plains
pricing area. The risk associated with not hedging the basis when using NYMEX or U.S. Gulf Coast forward
contracts to fix future margins is if the crack spread increases based on prices traded on NYMEX or U.S. Gulf
Coast while pricing in our market remains flat or decreases, then we would be in a position to lose money on
the derivative position while not earning an offsetting additional margin on the physical position based on the
pricing in our market.
Commodities Price and Basis Risk Management Activities
We have entered into agreements that govern all cash-settled commodity transactions that we enter into with
J. Aron & Company and Macquarie Bank Limited for the purpose of managing our risk with respect to the
crack spread created by the purchase of crude oil for future delivery and the sale of refined petroleum
products, including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel and heating fuel, for future delivery. Under the agreements, as
market conditions permit, we have the capacity to mitigate our crack spread risk with respect to reasonable
percentages of the refinery’s projected monthly production of some or all of these refined products. As of
March 31, 2012, we have hedged approximately 15 million barrels of future gasoline and diesel production
under commodity derivatives contracts that are either exchange-traded contracts in the form of futures
contracts or over-the-counter contracts in the form of commodity price swaps that reference benchmark
indices such as NYMEX or U.S. Gulf Coast. Our hedge positions for 2011 and 2012 production were
established at the time of the Marathon Acquisition, and our plan is to hedge a lesser amount of the
production than we hedged at the time of the acquisition. Consequently, we plan to increase our exposure to
the gross refining margins that we would realize at our refinery on an unhedged basis over time.
During the first quarter of 2012, we settled contracts covering approximately 3 million barrels of our remaining
2012 gasoline and diesel production and recognized a loss of approximately $45 million. Our required
payment of the majority of the loss from these settled contracts has been deferred until 2013.
In addition, during the second quarter of 2012, we reset the price of our remaining contracts for the period of
July 2012 through December 2012 and recognized a loss of approximately $92 million. We plan to use a
portion of the net proceeds of this offering to settle this obligation. If this offering is not completed the loss
from resetting the price of our derivative contracts will be paid to the counterparty on the same monthly
schedule as the original contracts were scheduled to settle.
Our open positions at March 31, 2012 will expire at various times during the remainder of 2012 and 2013. We
prepared a sensitivity analysis to estimate our exposure to market risk associated with our derivative
instruments. This analysis may differ from actual results. Based on our open positions of 15 million barrels, a
$1.00 per barrel change in quoted market prices of our derivative instruments, assuming all other factors
remain constant, could change the fair value of our derivative instruments and our net (loss) earnings by
approximately $15.0 million.
We may enter into additional futures derivatives contracts at times when we believe market conditions or
other circumstances suggest that it is prudent to do so. Although we have historically been hedged at higher
rates, we intend to hedge significantly less than what we hedged at the time of the Marathon Acquisition on an
ongoing basis. We may use commodity derivatives contracts such as puts, calls, swaps, forward agreements
and other financial instruments to mitigate the effects of the identified risks; however, it is our plan to hedge a
lesser amount of production than we historically have, which will increase our exposure to the gross refining
margins that we would realize at our refinery on an unhedged basis. Additionally, we may take advantage of
opportunities to modify our derivative portfolio to change the percentage of our hedged refined product
volumes when circumstances suggest that it is prudent to do so.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Interest Rate Risk
139
As of December 31, 2011 and March 31, 2012, the availability under our revolving credit facility was $108.0
million and $156.7 million, respectively. This availability is net of $61.6 million in outstanding letters of credit.
We had no borrowings under our revolving credit facility at December 31, 2011 or at March 31, 2012.
Borrowings under our revolving credit facility bear interest, at our election, at either an alternative base rate,
plus an applicable margin (which ranges between 1.75% and 2.25% pursuant to a grid based on average
excess availability) or a LIBOR rate, plus an applicable margin (which ranges between 2.75% and 3.25%
pursuant to a grid based on average excess availability). See “—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Description
of Our Indebtedness—Senior Secured Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility.”
We have interest rate exposure on a portion of the cost of crude oil payable to JPM CCC for the crude oil
inventory that they purchase for delivery to our refinery under the crude oil supply and logistics agreement.
This exposure is offset with the credits we receive from JPM CCC for the trade terms granted by suppliers to
them on crude oil purchases intended for our refinery. Our interest rate exposure is the spread between 3-
months and 1-month LIBOR. A widening of the spread between these two rates may result in a higher cost of
crude oil to us.
Credit Risk
We are subject to risk of losses resulting from nonpayment or nonperformance by our customers. We will
continue to closely monitor the creditworthiness of customers to whom we grant credit and establish credit
limits in accordance with our credit policy.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
140
BUSINESS
Overview
We are an independent downstream energy company with refining, retail, and pipeline operations that serves
the PADD II region of the United States. We operate our assets in two business segments: the refining
business and the retail business. For the three months ended March 31, 2012, we had total revenues of
approximately $1.0 billion, operating income of $2.7 million, a net loss of $193.6 million and Adjusted EBITDA
of $81.5 million. For the year ended December 31, 2011, we had total revenues of $4.3 billion, operating
income of $422.6 million, net earnings of $28.3 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $430.7 million. For a
definition, and reconciliation, of Adjusted EBITDA to net earnings, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary
Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other Data.”
Refining Business
Our refining business primarily consists of a 74,000 bpd (84,500 barrels per stream day) refinery located in St.
Paul Park, Minnesota. Our refinery has a Nelson complexity index of 11.5, which refers to the ability of a
refinery to produce finished products based on its investment intensity and cost relative to other refineries.
Our refinery’s complexity allows us to process a variety of light, heavy, sweet and sour crudes into higher
value refined products.
We are one of only two refineries in Minnesota and one of four refineries in the Upper Great Plains area within
the PADD II region. Our strategic location allows us direct access, primarily via the Minnesota Pipeline, to
what we believe are abundant supplies of advantageously priced crude oils. Of the crude oil processed at our
refinery in the year ended December 31, 2011 and in the three months ended March 31, 2012, approximately
51% and 39%, respectively, was Canadian crude oil and the remainder was comprised of mostly light sweet
crude oil from the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Many of these crude oils have historically priced at a
discount to NYMEX WTI. Further, over the past twelve months, NYMEX WTI has traded at an additional
discount relative to waterborne crude oils such as Brent, which has contributed to strong refining margins at
our St. Paul Park refinery.
We expect to continue to benefit from our access to these growing crude oil supplies. By 2030, according to
the CAPP, total Canadian crude oil production is expected to grow to 6.2 million bpd from 2011 production of
3.0 million bpd. Crude oil production from the Bakken Shale in North Dakota has also increased significantly,
helping to grow crude oil production in North Dakota from approximately 98,000 bpd in 2005 to approximately
575,000 bpd as of March 2012, and is expected to continue to grow due to improvements in unconventional
resource production techniques.
Our location also allows us to distribute our refined products throughout the midwestern United States. Our
refinery produces a broad slate of refined products including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel and asphalt, which are
then marketed to resellers and consumers primarily in the PADD II region. Approximately 83% and 79% of our
total refinery production for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011,
respectively, comprised higher value, light refined products, including gasoline and distillates.
We also own various storage and transportation assets, including a light products terminal, a heavy products
terminal, storage tanks, rail loading/unloading facilities and a Mississippi river dock. Approximately 70% and
83% of our gasoline and diesel volumes for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, respectively, were sold via our light products terminal to our company-operated and
franchised SuperAmerica branded convenience stores, Marathon branded convenience stores and other
resellers. We have a contract with Marathon to supply substantially all of the gasoline and diesel requirements
for 90 independently owned and operated Marathon branded convenience stores.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
141
Our refining business also includes our 17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company, which owns and
operates the Minnesota Pipeline, a 455,000 bpd crude oil pipeline system that transports crude oil (primarily
from Western Canada and North Dakota) for approximately 300 miles from the Enbridge pipeline hub at
Clearbrook, Minnesota to our refinery. The Minnesota Pipeline has historically transported the majority of the
crude oil used and processed in our refinery.
Retail Business
As of March 31, 2012, our retail business operated 166 convenience stores under the SuperAmerica brand and
also supported 67 franchised convenience stores, which are also operated under the SuperAmerica brand.
These convenience stores are located primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin and sell various grades of
gasoline and diesel, tobacco products and immediately consumable items such as non-alcoholic beverages,
beer, prepared food and a large variety of snacks and prepackaged items. Our refinery supplied substantially
all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated and franchised convenience stores for the three
months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011.
We also own and operate SuperMom’s Bakery, which prepares and distributes baked goods and other
prepared food items for sale in our company-operated and franchised convenience stores and other third
party locations.
Refining Industry Overview
Crude oil refining is the process of separating the hydrocarbons present in crude oil for the purpose of
converting them into marketable finished, or refined, petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel, jet fuel,
asphalt and other products. Refining is primarily a margin-based business where both the feedstock
(primarily crude oil) and the refined products are commodities with fluctuating prices. In order to increase
profitability, it is important for a refinery to maximize the yields of high value finished products and to
minimize the costs of feedstock and operating expenses.
According to the EIA, as of January 1, 2011, there were 137 oil refineries operating in the United States, with
the 15 smallest each having a refining capacity of 14,000 bpd or less, and the 10 largest having capacities
ranging from 330,000 bpd to 560,640 bpd.
High capital costs, historical excess capacity and environmental regulatory requirements have limited the
construction of new refineries in the United States over the past 30 years. According to the EIA, domestic
operating refining capacity has increased approximately 5% between January 1982 and January 2011 from
16.1 million bpd to 16.9 million bpd. Much of this increase in capacity is generally the result of efficiency
measures and moderate expansions at various refineries, known as “capacity creep,” but some significant
expansions at existing refineries have occurred as well. During this same time period, more than 110
generally smaller and less efficient refineries that had limited access to a wide variety of crude oils or were
unable to profitably process feedstock into a marketable product mix were closed.
According to the EIA, total demand for refined products in PADD II, which is the region in which we operate,
has represented approximately 26% of total U.S. refined products demand from 2007 to 2011. Within PADD II,
refined product production capacity is currently insufficient to meet demand. For example, according to the
EIA, due to product supply shortfalls within PADD II, net receipts of gasoline, distillate and jet fuel/kerosene
from domestic sources outside of PADD II comprised approximately 17%, 14% and 14%, respectively, of
demand for these products. Refining capacity in the PADD II region has decreased approximately 3% between
January 1982 and January 2011 from approximately
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
142
3.8 million bpd to approximately 3.6 million bpd, while more than 25 refineries in the PADD II region have
ceased operations. The refined product volumes that are necessary to satisfy the demand in excess of PADD II
production are primarily sourced from domestic refineries located outside of PADD II, specifically from the
U.S. Gulf Coast.
The following tables illustrate the balance of certain refined products in PADD II from 2005 – 2011:
PADD II Gasoline Balance (mbpd)
Production by Refineries Within PADD II
Net Receipts of Products from Domestic Sources
Outside PADD II
Ethanol
Exports to Non-U.S. Sources
Imports from Non-U.S. Sources
Other
Total
2005     2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011  
    1,816     1,796     1,769     1,713     1,778     1,807     1,837
673      691      673      594      550      482      417  
     136      138      179      243      222      231      225  
(8) 
    
    
3  
(1) 
    
    
 
    2,626     2,629     2,619     2,544     2,535     2,526     2,463
(11)    
2     
7
(19)    
1     
12
(1)    
1     
(15)
0     
2     
(1)
(2)    
1     
5
(5)    
3     
8
PADD II Distillate Balance (mbpd)
Production by Refineries Within PADD II
Net Receipts of Products from Domestic Sources
Outside PADD II
Exports to Non-U.S. Sources
Imports from Non-U.S. Sources
Other
Total
2005     2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011  
     908      914      927      987      898      963      989
(9)    
4     
2
344      332      336      249      180      195      155  
(5) 
    
2  
    
    
(3) 
    
 
    1,249     1,255     1,255     1,222     1,077     1,162     1,138
(12)    
5     
(7)
(2)    
6     
5
(6)    
6     
(8)
(6)    
4     
1
(3)    
6     
1
PADD II Jet Fuel/Kerosene Balance (mbpd)
Production by Refineries Within PADD II
Net Receipts of Products from Domestic Sources
Outside PADD II
Exports to Non-U.S. Sources
Imports from Non-U.S. Sources
Other
Total
2005     
     230
2006     
  220
2007     
  202
2008     
  209
2009     
  208
2010     
  219
2011   
  229
115   
  119   
 
(7)  
 
(4)  
 
 
0   
 
0   
 
 
 
1   
 
2
74   
 
(10)  
 
0   
 
2
49   
(5)  
0   
(4)
145   
(1)  
    
0   
    
    
(3)  
     
     371
41   
(4)  
0   
(1)
36  
(7) 
0  
(2) 
 
  256
337
311
275
248
255
Source: EIA; see “Market and Industry Data and Forecasts.”
Our Business Strategy
The primary components of our business strategy are:
Ÿ  Make Distributions Equal to the Available Cash We Generate Each Quarter.    The board of directors of our
general partner will adopt a policy under which distributions for each quarter will
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
143
equal the amount of available cash (as described in “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions”) we
generate each quarter. We do not intend to maintain excess distribution coverage in order to stabilize our
quarterly distributions or to otherwise reserve cash for future distribution rights. In addition, our general partner
has a non-economic interest and no incentive distribution rights, and accordingly, our unitholders will receive
100% of our cash distributions. See “Distribution Policy and Restrictions on Distributions.”
Ÿ  Focus on Growth Opportunities.    We intend to pursue opportunities to grow our business both organically
and through acquisitions within the refining, logistics and retail marketing industries.
•
•
Organic Growth Projects.    We plan to continue to make investments to enhance the operating
flexibility of our refinery, to improve our crude oil sourcing advantage and to grow our retail business.
We intend to pursue organic growth projects at the refinery to improve the yield of light products we
produce and the efficiency of our operations, which we believe should improve profitability. We also
plan to make investments in logistics operations, including trucking, terminal and pipeline facilities, to
enhance our crude oil sourcing flexibility and to reduce related crude oil purchasing and delivery costs.
We also intend to invest in the growth of our retail business with the ultimate objective of having a
dedicated outlet for all of our refinery’s gasoline production. We believe that this retail strategy should
allow our refinery to reduce its reliance on the wholesale market, improve the capacity utilization of our
refinery and increase our profitability.
  Evaluate Accretive Acquisition Opportunities.    We will selectively pursue accretive acquisitions within
our refining and retail business segments, both in our existing areas of operations as well as in new
geographic regions that would diversify our operating footprint. In evaluating acquisitions within the
refining industry, we will consider, among other factors, sustainable financial performance of the
targeted assets through the refining cycle, access to advantageous sources of crude oil supplies,
attractive demand and supply market fundamentals, access to distribution and logistics infrastructure,
and potential operating synergies.
Ÿ  Focus on Optimizing Crude Oil Supply.    We are focused on optimizing our crude oil purchases for our
refining operations and minimizing our crude oil feedstock costs. Our strategic location and the refinery’s
complexity allow us to receive and process a variety of light, heavy, sweet and sour crude oils from Western
Canada and the United States, many of which have historically priced at a discount to the NYMEX WTI price
benchmark.
Ÿ  Maintain Significant Liquidity in Our Business.    We benefit from a number of sources of liquidity that provide
us with financial flexibility during periods of volatile commodity prices, including cash on hand, our $300
million revolving credit facility, trade credit from our crude oil supplies and other mechanisms. For example, in
December 2010, we entered into a crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM CCC, which was
amended in March 2012, to supply our refinery’s crude oil feedstock requirements, which helps reduce the
amount of working capital required in our refinery operations. We manage our operations prudently with a
focus on maintaining sufficient liquidity to meet unforeseen capital needs. On a pro forma basis for this
offering, as of March 31, 2012, we estimate that we would have had approximately $           million of
available liquidity comprised of cash on hand and amounts available for borrowing under our $300 million
revolving credit facility. Our actual available liquidity may vary from our estimated amount depending on
several factors, including fluctuations in inventory and accounts receivable values as well as cash reserves.
Ÿ  Selectively Engage in Hedging Activities to Ensure Sufficient Cash Flows to Service Our Fixed Obligations.
We plan to systematically evaluate the merits of entering into commodity derivatives contracts to hedge our
refining margins with respect to a portion of our gasoline and diesel production. We will engage in these
activities with the purpose of ensuring that we have
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
144
sufficient cash flows to meet our fixed cost obligations, service our outstanding debt and other liabilities, and
meet our capital expenditure requirements.
Commodity derivatives contracts that we may enter into include either exchange-traded contracts in the form
of futures contracts or over-the-counter contracts in the form of commodity price swaps that reference
benchmark indices.
As of March 31, 2012, approximately 15 million barrels of our future gasoline and diesel production remained
hedged under commodity derivatives contracts, of which 10 million barrels related to 2012 production and the
remainder to 2013 production. Our hedge positions for 2011 and 2012 production were established at the time
of the Marathon Acquisition and our plan is to hedge a lesser amount of production than we hedged at the
time of the acquisition. Consequently, we plan to increase our exposure to the gross refining margins that we
would realize at our refinery on an unhedged basis over time.
During the first quarter of 2012, we settled contracts covering approximately 3 million barrels of our remaining
2012 gasoline and diesel production and recognized a loss of approximately $45 million. Our required
payment of the majority of the loss from these settled contracts has been deferred until 2013.
In addition, during the second quarter of 2012, we reset the price of our contracts for the period of July 2012
through December 2012 and recognized a loss of approximately $92 million. We plan to use a portion of the
net proceeds of this offering to settle this obligation. If this offering is not completed the loss from resetting
the price of our derivative contracts will be paid to the counterparty on the same monthly schedule as the
original contracts were scheduled to settle.
We have a number of competitive strengths that we believe will help us to successfully execute our business
strategy:
Our Competitive Strengths
Ÿ  Strategically Located Refinery with Advantageous Access to Crude Oil Supply.    Our refinery is located on
approximately 170 acres along the Mississippi River in a strategically advantageous area within the PADD II
region. The refinery has the ability to source a variety of crude oils, including heavy Canadian crude oils and
light North Dakota crude oils, primarily via the Minnesota Pipeline. Our refinery also has access to crude oils
from Cushing, Oklahoma, the U.S. Gulf Coast and other foreign markets. The ability to source and process
multiple types of crude oil enables us to capitalize on changing market conditions and, we believe, increase
our profitability. For the three months ended March 31, 2012, 39% of the crude oil processed at the refinery
was Canadian crude oil, with the remainder comprised of locally produced U.S. crude oils, mostly from the
Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Historically, we have purchased our crude oil at a discount to NYMEX WTI as
a result of our close proximity to plentiful sources of crude oil in Western Canada and North Dakota. Over the
five years ended March 31, 2012, we realized an average discount of $1.56 per barrel of crude oil purchased
for our refinery when compared to the average NYMEX WTI price per barrel over the same period. More
recently, the increase of the discount at which a barrel of NYMEX WTI traded relative to Brent has allowed
refineries, such as ours, that are capable of sourcing and utilizing crude oil that is priced more in line with
NYMEX WTI, to realize relatively lower feedstock costs and benefit from the higher refined product prices
resulting from higher Brent prices.
145
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The following chart highlights the recent trend in this discount:
Source: Bloomberg; see “Market and Industry Data and Forecasts.”
Ÿ  Attractive Regional Refined Products Supply/Demand Dynamics.    In recent years, demand for refined
products in the PADD II region has exceeded regional production, resulting in a need for imports from other
regions, specifically from the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Our inland location means that foreign and coastal
domestic refiners seeking to access our marketing area would incur additional transportation costs. Over the
five years ended March 31, 2012, our refinery has realized an average price premium of $3.45 per barrel for
its gasoline and distillates production relative to the prices used in calculating the U.S. Gulf Coast 3:2:1 crack
spread and an average price premium of $2.01 per barrel relative to the benchmark Group 3 3:2:1 crack
spread, in each case assuming a comparable rate of two barrels of gasoline and one barrel of distillate (see
footnote 4 in “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated Financial and Other
Data”).
Ÿ  Substantial Refinery Operating Flexibility.    Since 2006, approximately $226 million (including $194 million
from January 2006 through November 2010 and $32 million from our inception date of June 23, 2010 through
March 2012) has been invested in upgrades and capital projects to modernize the St. Paul Park refinery,
improve its operating flexibility, increase its complexity and meet U.S. environmental, health and safety
requirements, including revamping the gas oil hydrotreater in 2006 to allow for the production of ultra low
sulfur diesel. As a result of these capital expenditures, we believe that we will be able to comply with known
prospective fuel quality requirements without incurring significant capital costs or substantially increased
operating costs. In addition, we have significant redundancies in our refining assets, which include two crude
oil distillation and vacuum towers, two reformers, two sulfur recovery units and five hydrotreating units. These
redundancies allow us to continue to receive and process crude oil and other feedstocks in the event a unit
goes out of service and allows for increased maintenance flexibility as a redundant unit may be used without
having to shut down the entire refinery in the case of a major unit turnaround.
Our refinery has a Nelson complexity index of 11.5. Our refinery’s complexity means we can process lower
cost crude oils into higher value light refined products, including transportation fuels, such as gasoline and
distillates. Gasoline and distillates comprised approximately 83% and 79% of our total refinery production for
the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, respectively.
Ÿ  Strong Refinery Operating and Safety Track Record.    Our refinery has a strong operating and safety track
record as evidenced by our high mechanical availability and low recordable
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
146
incidents. This performance is due to, among other things, the periodic upgrades and maintenance performed
at our refinery. Our refinery recorded mechanical availability of 96.9%, 95.8% and 96.6% for the years ended
December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively, with an average annual mechanical availability of 96.9%
from 2005 through 2011, inclusive. We measure our safety track record primarily through the use of injury
frequency rates as determined by OSHA. Our refinery had an OSHA Recordable Rate of 0.75, 0.23 and 0.52
during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively, with an average annual OSHA
Recordable Rate of 0.97 during the period from 2005 through 2011, inclusive, and an OSHA Recordable Rate
of 0.88 during the three months ended March 31, 2012.
Ÿ  Integrated Refining and Retail Distribution Operations.    Our business is an integrated refining operation with
significant storage assets and a retail distribution network comprising, as of March 31, 2012, 166 company-
operated and 67 franchised convenience stores, all of which are operated under the SuperAmerica brand. For
the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, we sold 70% and 83% of
our gasoline and diesel volumes, respectively, via our eight-bay bottom-loading light products terminal located
at the refinery, primarily to our retail distribution network and, to a lesser extent, other resellers. Our refinery
supplied substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated and franchised convenience
stores during these periods. We also have a contract with Marathon to supply substantially all of the gasoline
and diesel requirements of 90 independently owned and operated Marathon branded convenience stores. In
addition, we also have (i) a seven-bay heavy products terminal located on the refinery property, (ii) rail
facilities for shipping liquefied petroleum gases and asphalt and for receiving butane, isobutane, crude oil and
ethanol and (iii) a barge dock on the Mississippi River used primarily for shipping vacuum residuals and
slurry.
Ÿ  Experienced, Proven and Incentivized Management Team.    Our management team is led by our Chief
Executive Officer, Mario E. Rodriguez, formerly a managing director in the global energy investment banking
division of Citigroup Global Markets, who has approximately 20 years of experience in the energy and finance
industries. Our President and Chief Operating Officer, Hank Kuchta, has over 30 years of industry experience
and was formerly President and Chief Operating Officer of Premcor Inc. Premcor operated four refineries in
the United States with approximately 750,000 bpd of refining capacity at the time of its sale to Valero Energy
Corporation in April 2005. Prior to Premcor, Mr. Kuchta served in various management positions at Phillips 66
Company, Tosco Corporation and Exxon Corporation. Our President of refinery operations, Greg Mullins,
previously worked at Marathon for over 30 years and has extensive experience in all aspects of refinery
operations and management as well as major project development and project management. Several
members of our management team, including our President and Chief Operating Officer; our Vice President,
Marketing; our Vice President, Supply; our Vice President, Human Resources; and our Vice President, Chief
Information Officer, have experience working together as a management team at Premcor.
Preliminary Estimate of Selected Second Quarter 2012 Financial Results
Recent Developments
While complete financial information and operating data as of and for the three months ending June 30, 2012
are not available, based on the information and data currently available, management estimates on a
preliminary basis, that Adjusted EBITDA for the three months ending June 30, 2012 is expected to be between
$220 million and $240 million compared to $103 million for the three month period ended June 30, 2011 (see
below for a reconciliation of estimated Adjusted EBITDA to estimated net earnings, the most directly
comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP). The estimates increase in Adjusted EBITDA for the
three months ending June 30, 2012 as compared to the
147
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
three months ended is based on an estimated increase in gross product margins per barrel projected to be
realized by our refining operations.
We have prepared these estimates in on a materially consistent basis with Adjusted EBITDA as presented in
“Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Consolidated Condensed Financial and Other Data” and good
faith based upon our internal reporting as of and for the three months ending June 30, 2012. These estimated
ranges are preliminary and unaudited and are thus inherently uncertain and subject to change as we complete
our financial results for the three months ending June 30, 2012. Given the timing of these estimates, we have
not completed our customary quarterly review procedures for the three months ending June 30, 2012 and
there can be no assurance that our final results for this period will not differ from these estimates. During the
course of the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes as of and for the three
months ending June 30, 2012, we may identify items that could cause our final reported results to be
materially different from the preliminary financial estimates presented herein. Important factors that could
cause actual results to differ materially from our preliminary estimates are set forth under the headings “Risk
Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
These estimates should not be viewed as a substitute for full interim financial statements prepared in
accordance with GAAP. In addition, these preliminary estimates as of and for the three months ending June
30, 2012 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be achieved for the remainder of 2012 or any future
period. Our consolidated financial statements and related notes as of and for the three months ending June
30, 2012 are not expected to be filed with the SEC until after this offering is completed.
The following table shows the reconciliation of net earnings to Adjusted EBITDA for the three months ended
June 30, 2011 along with the estimated range for the three months ending June 30, 2012. The line items in the
table for the three months ending June 30, 2012 are estimates and are subject to the qualifications set forth
above:
Net (loss) earnings
Adjustments:
Interest expense
Depreciation and amortization
EBITDA
Minnesota Pipe Line Company
proportionate EBITDA
  
Turnaround and related expenses   
Formation costs
  
Unrealized losses (gains) on
derivative activities
Contingent consideration (income)
expense
Loss on early extinguishment of
derivatives
Realized losses on derivative
activities
Three Months
Ended
June 30, 2011
$
$
(42)  
 
10   
8   
   
(24)
1   
20   
2
31
(9)
—
82   
   
103
Three Months Ending June 30, 2012
Low Estimate  
(In millions)
$
$
200    
 
11    
9    
   
220
1    
11    
—
(188)
15
92
69    
   
220
High Estimate  
 
250
$
$
10  
9  
 
269
1  
11  
—
(200)
—
92
67  
 
240
Adjusted EBITDA
Proposed Pipeline Initiatives
On June 22, 2012, consistent with our strategy to optimize our crude oil supply and sourcing advantage, we
entered into an exclusivity agreement with Saddle Butte Pipeline, LLC (“Saddle Butte”) and its wholly-owned
subsidiary, High Prairie Pipeline, LLC (“High Prairie”). This agreement
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
148
sets forth a proposed non-binding shipping commitment and equity investment by us in a 150,000 bpd
pipeline spanning from McKenzie County, North Dakota to Clearbrook, Minnesota. The pipeline will be
constructed and maintained by High Prairie. Our proposed commitment contemplates a ten-year, 50,000 bpd
shipping commitment on the High Prairie pipeline at a tariff of $2.49 per barrel (or as otherwise approved by
FERC) and an equity investment in High Prairie proportional to our throughput commitment as a percentage
of total commitments on the High Prairie pipeline. Saddle Butte and High Prairie have granted certain
exclusivity rights to us with respect to the High Prairie Pipeline project. Upon satisfaction of certain
conditions, we have agreed to grant exclusivity rights to Saddle Butte and High Prairie during the negotiation
of definitive agreements. There can be no assurance that definitive agreements with Saddle Butte and High
Prairie will be reached regarding the proposed shipping commitment and equity investment.
Our Refining Business
Our refinery occupies approximately 170 acres along the Mississippi River in the southeast of St. Paul Park,
Minnesota and was originally built in 1939. The refinery was acquired by Ashland Oil, Inc. in 1970 from
Northwestern Refining, was jointly owned by Ashland Oil, Inc. and Marathon from 1998 through 2005 and
became fully owned by Marathon in 2005. Our refinery is a 74,000 bpd (84,500 barrels per stream day) cracking
facility with operations including crude fractionation, catalytic cracking, hydrotreating, reforming, alkylation,
sulfur recovery and a hydrogen plant. A major refinery improvement and expansion project was completed in
1993 to enable the refinery to produce environmentally compatible low sulfur fuels. In 2006, the gas oil
hydrotreater was revamped, which enables us to produce ultra low sulfur diesel, at a capital cost of
approximately $24 million. The fluid catalytic cracking unit was expanded in 2007 for a total capital cost of
approximately $37 million, which improved gasoline yield and increased capacity from 27,100 bpd to 28,500
bpd. We completed a multi-year boiler replacement project, which entailed $19.9 million of capital
expenditures over the project life, $12.7 million during the period from 2008 through November 30, 2010 and
$7.2 million during the period from December 1, 2010 through December 31, 2011. We currently expect to
spend approximately $40 million in capital expenditures in 2012. Our capital expenditures in the three months
ended March 31, 2012 were $5.4 million.
A refinery’s location can have an important impact on its refining margins because location can influence
access to feedstocks and efficient distribution for refined products. There are five regions in the United States,
the PADDs, that have historically experienced varying levels of refining profitability due to regional market
conditions. Refiners located in the U.S. Gulf Coast region operate in a highly competitive market due to the
fact that this region (“PADD III”) accounts for approximately 38% of the total number of operable U.S.
refineries as of January 1, 2011 and approximately 49% of the country’s refining capacity as of January 2011.
Our refinery is located in the strategically advantageous PADD II region. In recent years, demand for refined
products in the PADD II region has exceeded regional capacity, resulting in a need for imports from other
regions, specifically from the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Our inland location means that foreign and coastal
domestic refiners seeking to access our marketing area would incur additional transportation costs. This
favorable supply/demand imbalance has allowed our refinery to generate higher refining margins, as
measured by the U.S. Gulf Coast 3:2:1 crack spread. We have realized, on average, a premium of $2.01 per
barrel of refined product relative to the benchmark Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread over the past five years through
March 31, 2012 assuming a comparable rate of two barrels of gasoline and one barrel of distillate for each of
the U.S. Gulf Coast 3:2:1 crack spread and the Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread.
The refinery is an integrated refining operation with significant storage and transportation assets. Our
transportation assets include our 17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company, an eight-bay
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
149
light product terminal located approximately two miles from the refinery, a seven-bay heavy product loading
rack located on the refinery property, rail facilities for shipping LPG and asphalt and receiving butane,
isobutane and ethanol and a barge dock on the Mississippi River used primarily for shipping vacuum residue
and slurry. As of March 31, 2012, our storage assets included 84 hydrocarbon storage tanks with a total
capacity of 3.7 million barrels (156 million gallons), 0.8 million barrels of crude oil storage and 2.9 million
barrels of feedstock and product storage.
Process Summary
Our refinery is a 74,000 bpd (84,500 barrels per stream day) cracking facility with operations including crude
fractionation, catalytic cracking, hydrotreating, reforming, alkylation, sulfur recovery and a hydrogen plant.
We have significant redundancy in our refining assets, which include two crude oil distillation and vacuum
towers, two reformers, two sulfur recovery units and five hydrotreating units. This redundancy allows us to
continue to receive and process crude oil even if one tower goes out of service and also allows for increased
maintenance flexibility as a redundant unit may be used without having to shut down the entire refinery in the
case of a major unit turnaround. During the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, the refinery processed nearly 73,245 bpd and 77,452 bpd of crude oil, respectively, and
2,759 bpd and 3,698 bpd of other charge and blendstocks, respectively. The facility processes a mix of light
sweet, synthetic and heavy sour crude oils, predominately from Canada and North Dakota, into products such
as gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, asphalt, kerosene, propane, LPG, propylene and sulfur. Our refinery utilization
rates, using standard industry methodologies for utilization measurement have been 72%, 75% and 72%,
respectively, for the period from inception to December 31, 2010, for the year ended December 31, 2011 and
for the three months ended March 31, 2012, respectively. Please see below a simplified process flow diagram
of the major refining units at our refinery.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
150
The following table summarizes our refinery’s major process unit capacities. Unit capacities are shown in
barrels per stream day.
Major Process Unit Capacities
(Barrels per stream day)
Process Unit
No. 1 Crude Oil Unit
No. 2 Crude Oil Unit
Vacuum Distillation Unit #1
Vacuum Distillation Unit #2
Catalytic Reforming Unit #1
Catalytic Reforming Unit #2
Fluid Catalytic Cracking Unit
HF Alkylation Unit
C4/C5/C6 Isom Unit
Isom Desulfurizer
Naphtha Hydrotreater #1
Capacity    
 37,000    
 47,000    
 19,000    
 22,500    
 13,000    
  6,500    
 28,500    
  5,500    
  8,500    
  8,500
% of Crude Oil
Capacity
44% 
56% 
23% 
27% 
15% 
8% 
34% 
7% 
10% 
10%
Naphtha Hydrotreater #1
Naphtha Hydrotreater #2
Kerosene Hydrotreater
Distillate Hydrotreater
Gas Oil Hydrotreater
Hydrogen Plant (MSCF/D)
Sulfur Recovery Units (Long Tons/day)
TailGas Recovery Units (Long Tons/day)
13,500    
  7,000    
  7,500    
 21,500    
 29,500    
  8,500    
100    
 
 
4
16% 
8%
9% 
26% 
35% 
—  
—  
—
The complexity of a refinery refers to the number, type and capacity of processing units at the refinery and is
measured by its Nelson complexity index. Our refinery has a Nelson complexity index of 11.5. Our refinery’s
complexity allows us to process lower cost crude oils into higher value light refined products or
transportation fuels (gasoline and distillates), which comprised approximately 83% and 79% of our total
refinery production for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011,
respectively.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Raw Material Supply
151
The primary input for our refinery is crude oil, which represented approximately 96% and 95% of our total
refinery throughput volumes for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31,
2011, respectively. We processed approximately 73,245 bpd and 77,452 bpd of crude oil for the three months
ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, respectively. The following table describes the
historical feedstocks for our refinery:
Three Months Ended
March 31,
2011     %
2012     %
2011     %
Year Ended December 31,
2010     %
(bpd)
2009     %
28,429      39%    40,489      52%    39,295      51%    41,156      56%    48,213      65% 
   44,816      61%    37,852      48%    38,157      49%    32,986      44%    26,326      35% 
   
   73,245     100%    78,341     100%    77,452     100%    74,142     100%    74,539     100%
Refinery Throughput Crude
Oil Feedstocks by Location: 
Canadian and Other
International
Domestic
Total Crude Oil
Crude Oil Feedstocks by
Type:
Light and Intermediate(1)
Heavy(2)
Total Crude Oil
58,368      80%    56,453      72%    56,722      73%    55,782      75%    59,112      79% 
   14,877      20%    21,888      28%    20,730      27%    18,360      25%    15,427      21% 
   
   73,245     100%    78,341     100%    77,452     100%    74,142     100%    74,539     100%
Other
Feedstocks/Blendstocks(2):  
   
Natural Gasoline
2%     3,628      56%     1,910      52%     3,839      64%     4,790      68% 
    2,115      77%     2,269      35%     1,236      33%     1,242      21%     1,004      14% 
Butanes
733      11% 
   
Gasoil
7% 
497     
   
Other
0%    
591      21%
0%    
552      15%
0     
536
446     
488
7%    
8%
0%    
9%
53
0
0
Total Other
Feedstocks/Blendstocks
2,759     100%     6,433     100%     3,698     100%     6,015     100%     7,024     100%
Total Inputs
76,004
84,774
81,150
80,157
81,563
(1)
Crude oil is classified as light, intermediate or heavy, according to its measured American Petroleum Institute,
or API, gravity. API gravity, which is expressed in degrees, is a scale developed for measuring the relative
density of various petroleum liquids. It also serves as an approximate measure of crude oil’s value, as the
higher the API gravity, the richer the yield in high value refined oil products, such as gasoline, diesel and jet
fuel. For purposes of categorizing our crude oil feedstocks by type, light crude oil has an API gravity of 33
degrees or more, intermediate crude oil has API gravity between 28 and 33 degrees, and heavy crude has an
API gravity of 28 degrees or less.
(2) Other Feedstocks/Blendstocks includes only feedstocks/blendstocks that are used at the refinery, and does not
include ethanol and biodiesel. Although we also purchase ethanol and biodiesel to supplement the fuels
produced at the refinery, we do not include these in the table as those items are blended at the terminal located
adjacent to the refinery or at terminals on the Magellan Pipe Line system.
Of the crude oil processed at our refinery for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, approximately 39% and 51%, respectively, was Canadian crude oil and the remainder was
comprised of mostly light sweet crude oil from North Dakota. There is an abundant supply of Canadian crude
oil, according to the EIA. Canada exported approximately 2.2 million bpd of crude oil into the United States in
2011, making it the largest exporter to the United
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
152
States and representing 25% of all U.S. imports from foreign sources. By 2030, according to CAPP, total
Canadian crude oil production is expected to grow to 6.2 million bpd from 2010 production of 2.8 million bpd.
Additionally, U.S. demand for western Canadian oil supply is expected to reach 3.7 million bpd by 2020.
Crude production from North Dakota has increased significantly from approximately 98,000 bpd in 2005 to
approximately 575,000 bpd as of March 2012, according to the EIA. The chart below shows crude oil bpd
production in North Dakota, and illustrates the rapid increase in production attributable to the Bakken Shale.
We believe production from the Bakken Shale will continue to increase due to continued growth in
unconventional production.
North Dakota Crude Oil Production (thousands of BPD)
Crude Oil Supply
Source: EIA; see “Market and Industry Data and Forecasts.”
In March 2012, we entered into an amended and restated crude oil supply and logistics agreement with JPM
CCC pursuant to which JPM CCC assists us in the purchase of the crude oil requirements of our refinery.
Once we identify cargos of crude oil and pricing terms that meet our requirements, we notify JPM CCC, which
then provides, for a fee, credit, transportation and other logistical services for delivery of the crude oil to the
Cottage Grove, Minnesota, storage tanks, which are approximately two miles from our refinery. Title to the
crude oil passes from JPM CCC to us as the crude oil exits the storage tanks located at Cottage Grove and
moves to the refinery. The Cottage Grove storage tanks are leased by JPM CCC from us for the duration of the
crude oil supply and logistics agreement. We believe our crude oil supply and logistics agreement
significantly reduces the investment that we are required to maintain in crude inventories and allows us to
take title to, and price our crude oil, at the refinery, as opposed to the crude oil origination point. We also
benefit from the reduction in the time we are exposed to market fluctuations before the finished product
output is sold.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
153
The approximately 455,000 bpd Minnesota Pipeline system is our primary supply route for crude oil to our
refinery and has transported a significant majority of our crude oil since its major expansion in 2008. The
Minnesota Pipeline extends from Clearbrook, Minnesota to the refinery and receives crude oil from Western
Canada and North Dakota through connections with various Enbridge pipelines. The Minnesota Pipeline is an
interstate crude oil pipeline regulated by FERC pursuant to the ICA. Access to capacity on the Minnesota
Pipeline is governed by the pipeline’s tariff, which is filed with FERC and must comply with the applicable
provisions of the ICA. Pursuant to the rules and regulations applicable to the Minnesota Pipeline, if
nominations are received for more crude oil than the pipeline can transport in a given month, capacity is pro-
rated based on each shipper’s relative use of the line over the preceding twelve-month period ending the
month prior to the month the excess nominations were received, with further reductions as necessary to
accommodate new shippers. For the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31,
2011, our shipments comprised approximately 25% of the total volumes shipped on the Minnesota Pipeline.
Our 17% interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company mitigates the impact of tariff rate increases on the
pipeline, as we receive a pro rata share of tariffs. See “—Pipeline Assets” for more information regarding the
Minnesota Pipeline system.
In addition to the Minnesota Pipeline, the refinery is also capable of receiving crude oil from the Wood River
Pipeline (owned and operated by affiliates of Koch Industries, Inc.). The Wood River Pipeline extends from
Wood River, Illinois to a connection with the Minnesota Pipeline near Pine Bend, Minnesota, allowing for
deliveries to the refinery and providing the refinery with access to crude supply from the Cushing, Oklahoma
area via the Ozark Pipeline and to crude supply from the U.S. Gulf Coast and foreign markets via Capline and
Capwood pipelines.
Below is a map illustrating the pipelines that provide the refinery with access to its crude oil supply:
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Other Feedstocks/Blendstocks
154
The refinery also purchases ethanol and biodiesel, as well as conventional petroleum based blendstocks such
as natural gasoline to supplement the fuels produced at the refinery. We purchase ethanol for blending with
gasoline to meet the EPA’s oxygenated fuel mandate levels. The state of Minnesota has a current mandate for
all gasoline power motor vehicles for 10% ethanol blending in gasoline or the maximum amount of ethanol
allowed under federal law, whichever is greater. The same legislation will require 20% ethanol blending in
gasoline or the maximum amount of ethanol allowed under federal law, whichever is greater, effective
August 30, 2013. Federal law currently allows a maximum of 15% ethanol for cars and light trucks
manufactured since 2001, and 10% ethanol for all other vehicles. In addition, there is a biodiesel mandate in
Minnesota requiring the blending of diesel with 5% bio-fuel. If certain preconditions are met, the minimum
biodiesel content in diesel sold in the state will increase to 10% beginning on May 1, 2012, and to 20%
beginning on May 1, 2015. The increase to 10% did not occur on May 1, 2012, because the Minnesota
Commissioners of Agriculture, Commerce and Pollution Control did not certify that all statutory pre-
conditions were satisfied by the statutory deadline, but instead jointly recommended delaying the increase to
10% by one year, to May 1, 2013. We purchase ethanol and biodiesel blendstocks pursuant to month-to-month
agreements with market related pricing provisions and receive those volumes primarily via truck. We
purchase natural gasoline blendstock from third parties that is delivered to us via third party pipeline.
Refined Products—Production, Sales and Transportation
On average over the last three fiscal years, the refinery produced approximately 81,700 bpd of refined
products, of which 51% was gasoline, 29% were distillates (including ultra low sulfur diesel and jet fuel), 11%
was asphalt and the remainder was made up of propane, heavy fuel and other specialty products. The
following table identifies the product yield of our refinery for each of the periods indicated.
Three Months
Ended March 31,
2011
Year Ended December 31,
2011
2010
Refinery product yields:
Gasoline
Distillate
Asphalt
Other
Total Production
2012
38,902    
 24,160    
  8,323    
  5,052    
  
    
 76,437
41,489    
 23,795    
  9,615    
  9,805    
  
    
 84,704
(bpd)
40,240    
24,841    
9,888    
7,110    
    
82,079
2009
41,199    
22,546    
9,495    
7,794    
    
81,034
42,674  
22,876  
7,688  
8,888  
 
82,126
For the years ended December 2009, 2010 and 2011 and the three months ended March 31, 2011 and 2012,
gasoline accounted for 52%, 51%, 54%, 53% and 53% of our total revenue for the refining business for such
periods, respectively, and distillates accounted for 28%, 28%, 33%, 33% and 36% of our total revenue for the
refining business for such periods, respectively.
Approximately 90% of the refinery business’s gasoline and diesel volumes were sold within the state of
Minnesota for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, with the
remainder being sold within Iowa, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South and North Dakota and Wisconsin. Our refinery
supplied substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated or franchised convenience
stores for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, as well as supplied
90 independently owned and operated Marathon branded stores in our marketing area.
Primary distribution for the fuels is through our light products terminal, which is equipped with an eight-bay,
bottom-loading truck rack and located adjacent to the refinery. Approximately 70% and 83%
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
155
of our gasoline and diesel volumes for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended
December 31, 2011, respectively, were transported via this light products terminal to our company-operated or
franchised SuperAmerica convenience stores, Marathon branded convenience stores and other resellers
throughout our market area. Light refined products, which include gasoline and distillates, are distributed
from the refinery through a pipeline and terminal system owned by Magellan, which has facilities throughout
the Upper Great Plains. Asphalt and heavy fuel oil are transported from the refinery via truck from our seven-
bay heavy products terminal and via rail and barge through our rail facilities and Mississippi River barge dock
and are sold to a broad customer base. See “—Refining Operations Customers” below.
Refining Operations Suppliers
The primary input for our refinery is crude oil, which represented approximately 96% of our total refinery
throughput volumes for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011. JPM
CCC assists us in the purchase of the crude oil requirements of our refinery and provides transportation and
other logistical services for delivery of the crude oil to our storage tanks at Cottage Grove, Minnesota, which
are approximately two miles from our refinery. We also purchase ethanol and biodiesel, as well as
conventional petroleum based blendstocks such as natural gasoline to supplement the fuels produced at the
refinery. For more information, see “—Crude Oil Supply” and “—Other Feedstocks/Blendstocks.
Refining Operations Customers
Our refinery supplies substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated and franchised
convenience stores, as well as substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in 90 independently owned and
operated Marathon branded stores in our marketing area. For the three months ended March 31, 2012 and the
year ended December 31, 2011, Marathon branded stores accounted for approximately 8% and 9% of our
refined product sales volumes, respectively. For more information about our contract with Marathon, see “—
Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions—Transactions with Marathon” and for information
about the risks associated with our commercial relationship with Marathon, see “Risk Factors—General
Business and Industry Risks—Our arrangements with Marathon expose us to Marathon related credit and
performance risk.”
Asphalt and heavy fuel oil are sold to a broad customer base, including asphalt paving contractors,
government entities (states, counties, cities and townships), and asphalt roofing shingle manufacturers.
Turnaround and Refinery Reliability
Periodically, we have planned maintenance turnarounds at our refinery, which require the temporary
shutdown of certain operating units. The refinery generally undergoes a major facility turnaround every five to
six years, and the last full plant turnaround was completed in 2007. The length of the turnaround is contingent
upon the scope of work to be completed. A major turnaround of either of the two main refinery units (fluid
catalytic cracking unit and Alkylation unit) generally takes two to four weeks to complete, and is planned and
accomplished in a manner that allows for reduced production during maintenance instead of a complete
shutdown. We completed a partial turnaround in April 2011, during which we replaced a catalyst in the
distillate and gas oil hydrotreaters and conducted basic maintenance on the No. 1 crude unit. At the end of
March 2012, we started a planned turnaround of the alkylation unit that was completed in early May 2012. The
next major turnaround is scheduled for 2013.
Seasonality
Our refining business experiences seasonal effects, as the demand for gasoline products is generally higher
during summer months than during winter months due to seasonal increases in
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
156
highway traffic. Demand for diesel during winter months also decreases due to declines in agricultural work.
As a result, our results of operations related to our refinery business for the first and fourth calendar quarters
are generally lower than for those for the second and third calendar quarters. In addition, unseasonably cool
weather in summer months and/or unseasonably warm weather in winter months in the markets in which we
sell our refined products can impact the demand for gasoline and diesel.
Seasonal fluctuations in traffic also affect sales of motor fuels and merchandise in our convenience stores.
Weather conditions in our operating area also have a significant effect on our retail operating results.
Customers are more likely to purchase higher profit margin items at our convenience stores, such as fast
foods, fountain drinks and other beverages and more gasoline during the spring and summer months,
thereby typically generating higher revenues and gross margins for us in these periods. Unfavorable weather
conditions during these months and a resulting lack of the expected seasonal upswings in traffic and sales
could impact the demand for such higher profit margin items in those months.
Pipeline Assets
We acquired 17% of the outstanding common interests of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and a 17%
interest in MPL Investments which owns 100% of the preferred interests of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company.
The Minnesota Pipe Line Company owns the Minnesota Pipeline, a crude oil pipeline system in Minnesota
that transports crude oil to the St. Paul area and which supplies most of our crude oil input. The remaining
interests in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company are held by a subsidiary of Koch Industries, Inc., the owner of
the only other refinery in Minnesota, with a 74.16% interest, and TROF, Inc. with an 8.84% interest. The
Minnesota Pipeline system is also operated by a subsidiary of Koch Industries, Inc. Because we do not
operate the Minnesota Pipeline or control the board of managers of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company, we do
not control how the Minnesota Pipeline tariff is applied, including the tariff provisions governing the
allocation of capacity, or control the decision-making with respect to tariff changes for the pipeline.
The Minnesota Pipeline system has multiple lines that run approximately 300 miles from Clearbrook in
Clearwater County, Minnesota to Dakota County, Minnesota, transporting crude oil received through the
Enbridge pipeline connections at Clearbrook from Western Canada and North Dakota to our refinery and Koch
Industries’s Flint Hills Resources refinery in Minnesota. The system consists of a 24” pipeline, two parallel
16” pipelines and a partial third 16” pipeline with a combined capacity of approximately 455,000 bpd with
further expansion capability to 640,000 bpd with the construction of an additional compressor station.
We also own an 8.6 mile 8” products pipeline, referred to as the Aranco Pipeline, which is leased to Magellan
and used to ship refined products. The Aranco Pipeline extends from the refinery to a pipeline operated by
Magellan as part of its products pipeline system. The pipeline is operated by Magellan as part of their
products system. The annual lease fee was originally $450,000, subject to annual adjustment. The current
annual lease amount is approximately $550,000. The term of the lease agreement is year-to-year and both
parties have the right to terminate upon notice at least 180 days prior to the expiration of the then-current
annual term. In November of 2011, we sent a letter to Magellan indicating that the lease agreement would
terminate on May 31, 2012. Prior to that date, we entered into discussions with Magellan regarding the
renegotiation of the lease and agreed to extend the lease agreement during the negotiations. In addition, we
own the Cottage Grove pipelines, which are 16” and 12” pipelines extending from the Cottage Grove tank
farm, which is used to house the Cottage Grove storage tanks, to the refinery.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
157
Our Retail Business
We have a retail-marketing network of 233 convenience stores, as of March 31, 2012, located throughout
Minnesota, Wisconsin and South Dakota, of which we operate 166 stores and support 67 franchised stores, as
set forth by location in the table below. All of our company-operated and franchised convenience stores are
operated under the SuperAmerica brand. We also own and operate SuperMom’s Bakery, which prepares and
distributes baked goods and other prepared items for sale in our retail outlets and for other third parties.
Substantially all of the fuel gallons sold at the 233 convenience stores for the three months ended March 31,
2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, was supplied by our refining business.
In December 2010, we entered into a lease arrangement with Realty Income, pursuant to which we leased 135
SuperAmerica convenience stores and one support facility over a 15-year initial term at an aggregate annual
rent fixed for five years at an annual rate of $20.3 million, with consumer price index-based rent increases
thereafter. The stores covered under the lease are located in Minnesota and Wisconsin, and average
approximately 3,500 leasable square feet on approximately 1.14 acres. In addition, the individual locations
have, on average, 6.5 multi-pump gasoline dispensers, and are seasoned stores with long-term operating
histories. Additionally, 30 of our other company-operated properties are leased pursuant to a combination of
ground leases and real property leases with third parties and one company-operated property is owned by us.
The table below sets forth our company-operated and franchised stores by state as of March 31, 2012.
Location
Minnesota
Wisconsin
South Dakota
Total
Company-
Operated     
159    
 
6    
 
 
1
Franchised    
61    
 
5    
 
 
1
Total 
 220  
  11  
 
2
Total
166
67
233
Below is a map illustrating the locations of our convenience stores as of March 31, 2012:
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
158
Of our company-operated sites, approximately 80% are open 24 hours per day and the remaining sites are
open at least 16 hours per day. Our average store size is approximately 3,400 square feet with approximately
95% of our stores being 2,400 or more square feet. Our convenience stores typically offer tobacco products
and immediately consumable items such as non-alcoholic beverages, beer and a large variety of snacks and
prepackaged items. A significant number of the sites also offer state sanctioned lottery games, ATM services,
money orders and car washes. We also provide support to 67 franchised convenience stores, selling gasoline,
merchandise, and other services through SAF. SAF has license agreements in place with each franchisee that,
among other things, cover the term of the franchise (generally 10 years), set forth the monthly royalty
payments to be paid by franchisees to SAF, authorize the use of proprietary marks and provide for
consultation services for the construction and opening of stores. Franchisees are required to pay to SAF an
initial license fee (generally, $10,000 for licensees located in Minnesota and Wisconsin and $2,000 for
licensees located in South Dakota) and a royalty fee for all products and merchandise sold at the convenience
store, including motor fuel, along with a separate diesel royalty fee. The license agreements also require that,
if a franchise store is located within our distribution area, then the franchise store must purchase a high
minimum percentage (often 85% to 100%) of its motor fuel supply, including gasoline and distillate, from us.
However, if a franchise store is not located within our distribution area, then the franchise store is not
required to purchase any portion of its motor fuel supply from us. As of March 31, 2012, 32 of the 67 existing
franchise stores are located within our distribution area and, thus, are required to purchase a high minimum
percentage of their motor fuel supply from us.
Annual sales of refined products through our 166 owned and leased convenience stores averaged 342 million
gallons over the period 2007-2011. The demand for gasoline is seasonal in nature, with higher demand during
the summer months. 22.9% of the retail segment’s revenues were generated from non-fuel sales, including
items like cigarettes, beer, milk, food and general merchandise for the three months ended March 31, 2012.
The following table summarizes the results of our retail business for the periods indicated.
Company-operated
Fuel gallons sold (in millions)
Retail fuel margin ($/gallon)(1)
Merchandise sales ($ in millions)
Merchandise margin(%)(2)
Number of outlets at year end
Franchised Stores
Fuel gallons sold (in millions)
Royalty income (in millions)
Number of outlets at year end
Three Months Ended
March 31,
2012
74.1  
$ 0.18  
$ 78.8  
  25.8% 
 
166
10.0  
$ 0.5  
 
67
2011
78.1  
$ 0.15  
$ 75.3  
  25.5% 
 
166
12.2  
0.4  
$
 
67
Year Ended December 31,
2010
2009  
 
  345.1  
   335.7  
$ 0.17  
 $ 0.14  
$336.4  
 $328.4  
  26.1%    26.8% 
 
166
51.3  
 $ 1.6  
  
68
2011
324.0  
$ 0.21  
$340.3  
  25.4% 
 
166
51.5  
$ 1.7  
 
67
166
52.4  
$ 1.6  
 
67
(1)
Retail fuel margin per gallon is calculated by dividing retail fuel gross margin by the fuel gallons sold at
company-operated stores. Retail fuel gross margin is a non-GAAP performance measure that we believe is
important to investors in evaluating our retail performance. Our calculation of retail fuel gross margin may differ
from similar calculations of other companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a comparative
measure. For a reconciliation of retail fuel gross margin to retail segment operating income, the most directly
comparable GAAP measure, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated
Financial and Other Data.”
(2) Merchandise margin is expressed as a percentage of the merchandise sales, calculated by subtracting the
costs of merchandise from the merchandise sales, and then dividing by merchandise sales. Merchandise
margin is a non-GAAP performance measure that we believe is
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
159
important to investors in evaluating our retail performance. Our calculation of merchandise margin may differ
from similar calculations of other companies in our industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a comparative
measure. For a reconciliation of merchandise margin to retail segment operating income, the most directly
comparable GAAP measure, see “Prospectus Summary—Summary Historical Condensed Consolidated
Financial and Other Data.”
Retail Operations Suppliers
Our refinery supplies substantially all of the gasoline and diesel sold in our company-operated and franchised
convenience stores. We also own and operate SuperMom’s Bakery, which prepares and distributes baked
goods and other prepared food items for sale in our SuperAmerica company-operated and franchised
convenience stores and other third party locations.
Eby-Brown has been the primary supplier of general retail merchandise, including most tobacco and grocery
items, for all our company-operated and franchised convenience stores since 1993. For the three months
ended March 31, 2012 and the year ended December 31, 2011, our retail business purchased approximately
75% of its convenience store inside merchandise requirements from Eby-Brown. Our retail business also
purchases a variety of merchandise, including soda, beer, bread, dairy products, ice cream and snack foods,
directly from a number of third-party manufacturers and their wholesalers. All merchandise is delivered
directly to our stores by Eby-Brown, other third-party vendors or our SuperMom’s Bakery business. We do not
maintain additional product inventories other than what is in our stores and at SuperMom’s Bakery. For
information about the risks associated with our commercial relationship with Eby-Brown, see “Risk Factors—
Risks Related to Our Business and Industry—Risks Primarily Related to Our Retail Business—Our retail
business depends on one principal supplier for a substantial portion of its merchandise inventory. A change
of merchandise suppliers, a disruption in merchandise supply, a significant change in our relationship with
our principal merchandise supplier or material changes in the payment terms or availability of trade credit
provided by our merchandise suppliers could have a material adverse effect on our retail business and results
of operations or liquidity.”
Retail Operations Customers
Our retail customers primarily include retail end-users, motorists and commercial drivers. We have a retail-
marketing network of 233 convenience stores, as of March 31, 2012, located throughout Minnesota, Wisconsin
and South Dakota, of which we operate 166 stores and support 67 franchised stores.
Competition
Petroleum refining and marketing is highly competitive. With respect to our wholesale gasoline and distillate
sales and marketing, we compete directly with Koch Industries’ Flint Hills Resources Refinery in Pine Bend,
Minnesota, as well as the other refiners in the PADD II region and, to a lesser extent, major U.S. and foreign
refiners. Many of our principal competitors are integrated, multinational oil companies that are substantially
larger and more recognized than we are. The principal competitive factors affecting our refining segment are
costs of crude oil and other feedstocks, refinery efficiency, refinery product mix and costs of product
distribution and transportation. We have no crude oil reserves and are not engaged in the exploration or
production of crude oil. We believe that we will be able to obtain adequate crude oil and other feedstocks at
generally competitive prices for the foreseeable future.
Our major retail competitors include Holiday and Kwik Trip. The principal competitive factors affecting our
retail segment are location of stores, product price and quality, appearance and cleanliness of stores and
brand identification. We expect to continue to face competition from large, integrated oil companies, as well
as from other convenience stores that sell motor fuels. Increasingly, grocery and dry goods retailers such as
Wal-Mart are entering the motor fuel retailing business.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
160
Insurance and Risk Management
Our operations are subject to significant hazards and risks inherent in refining operations and in transporting
and storing crude oil, intermediate products and refined products. Our property damage and business
interruption coverage at the refinery has a maximum loss limit of $1 billion combined, with no sublimit for
business interruption. Our business interruption coverage is for 24 months from the date of the loss, subject
to a deductible of 45 days with a minimum loss of $15 million. Our property damage insurance has a
deductible of $1 million. In addition, we have a full suite of insurance covering workers compensation,
general products liability, directors’ and officers’ liability, environmental liability, safety and other applicable
risk management programs. See also “Risk Factors—General Business and Industry Risks—Our insurance
policies may be inadequate or expensive.”
Refining Operations
Environmental Regulations
Our refinery operations are subject to stringent and complex federal, state and local laws and regulations
governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection.
These laws and regulations may obligate us to obtain permits to conduct regulated activities; incur significant
capital expenditures to install pollution control equipment; restrict the manner in which we may release
materials into the environment; require remedial activities to mitigate pollution from former or current
operations; apply specific health and safety criteria addressing worker protection; and impose substantial
liabilities on us for pollution resulting from our operations. Certain of these environmental laws impose joint
and several, strict liability for costs required to remediate and restore sites where petroleum hydrocarbons,
wastes or other materials have been released or disposed. Failure to comply with environmental laws and
regulations may result in the triggering of administrative, civil and criminal measures, including the
assessment of monetary penalties, the imposition of remedial obligations, and the issuance of injunctions
limiting or prohibiting some or all of our operations.
The clear trend in environmental regulation is to place more restrictions and limitations on activities that may
affect the environment and any changes in environmental laws and regulations that result in more restrictive
and costly emission limits, operational controls, fuel specifications, waste handling, disposal or remediation
requirements could have a material adverse effect on our operations and financial position. In the event of
future increases in costs, we may be unable to pass on those increases to our customers. There can be no
assurance that our future environmental compliance expenditures will not become material.
Air Emissions
Our operations are subject to the federal Clean Air Act, as amended, and comparable state and local laws.
Under the Clean Air Act, facilities that emit regulated pollutants, including volatile organic compounds,
particulates, sulfur, nitrogen oxides or hazardous air pollutants, face increasingly stringent regulations,
including requirements to install various levels of control technology on sources of pollutants. For example,
on June 1, 2012, EPA issued final amendments to the NSPS for petroleum refineries, including standards for
emissions of nitrogen oxides from process heaters and work practice standards and monitoring requirements
for flares. We are evaluating the regulation and amended standards, as may be applicable to the flare, process
heaters and operations at our refinery. We cannot currently predict the costs that we may have to incur, if any,
to comply with the amended NSPS, but costs could be material. In addition, the petroleum refining sector is
subject to stringent new regulations adopted by the EPA, that impose maximum achievable control
technology, (“MACT”) requirements on refinery equipment emitting certain listed hazardous air pollutants. Air
permits are
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
161
required for our refining operations that result in the emission of regulated air contaminants. These permits
incorporate stringent control technology requirements and are subject to extensive review and periodic
renewal.
Over the past decade, the EPA has pursued a National Petroleum Refinery Initiative, which is a coordinated,
integrated compliance and enforcement strategy to address federal Clean Air Act compliance issues at the
nation’s largest petroleum refineries. In connection with the initiative, Marathon entered into an environmental
settlement agreement with the EPA, the U.S. Department of Justice and the state of Minnesota in May 2001 (the
“2001 Consent Decree”), pursuant to which pollution control equipment was installed to significantly reduce
emissions from stacks, wastewater vents, valves and flares at the refinery, and which imposes additional, and
in some cases more stringent, standards and requirements on the refinery beyond applicable regulatory
requirements. We are currently participating in negotiations with the EPA, the Minnesota Pollution Control
Authority (“MPCA”) and Marathon concerning termination of the 2001 Consent Decree as to our refinery. The
EPA and the MPCA have proposed that the MPCA issue an amended Title V Air Permit to the refinery that
incorporates the emission limits and requirements of the 2001 Consent Decree into the permit before
terminating the 2001 Consent Decree as to the refinery. We submitted an application to the MPCA in June 2012
to make the proposed amendments to the Title V Air Permit, and the MPCA is currently evaluating our
amendment application. Once the MPCA issues an amended Title V Air Permit incorporating the 2001 Consent
Decree requirements, we anticipate that the EPA and MPCA will file a motion with the court to terminate the
2001 Consent Decree as to our Refinery. Alternatively, the EPA and MPCA may propose to first modify the
2001 Consent Decree to add our subsidiary as a named party and then move to terminate the decree as to our
refinery. Negotiations regarding termination of the 2001 Consent Decree are ongoing.
The refinery is obligated to comply with the conditions of its Title V Permit as well as emissions limitations
and other requirements imposed under the Clean Air Act and similar state laws and regulations. These
requirements are complex and stringent. Any failure to comply with such requirements may result in fines,
penalties, and corrective action orders. Such fines, penalties, and corrective action orders could reduce the
profitability of our refining operations.
Fuel Quality Requirements
Pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence and Securing Act of 2007, the EPA
has issued RFS implementing mandates to blend renewable fuels into petroleum fuels produced and sold in
the United States. We are subject to RFS. Under the RFS, the EPA establishes a volume of renewable fuels
that obligated refineries must blend into their finished petroleum fuels. The obligated volume increases
annually over time until 2022. Our refinery currently generates a surplus of RINS under the RFS for some fuel
categories, but we must purchase RINS on the open market for other fuel categories. We must also purchase
waiver credits for cellulosic biofuels from the EPA. In the future, we may be required to purchase additional
RINS on the open market and waiver credits from the EPA to comply with the RFS. We cannot currently
predict the future prices of RINS or waiver credits, but the costs to obtain the necessary number of RINS and
waiver credits could be material.
Minnesota law currently requires that all diesel sold in the state for combustion in internal combustion
engines must contain at least 5% biodiesel. Under this statute, if certain preconditions are met, the minimum
biodiesel content in diesel sold in the state will increase to 10% beginning on May 1, 2012, and to 20%
beginning on May 1, 2015. The increase to 10% did not occur on May 1, 2012, because the Minnesota
commissioners of agriculture, commerce, and pollution control did not certify that all statutory pre-conditions
were satisfied by the statutory deadlines, but instead jointly recommended delaying the increase to 10% by
one year, to May 1, 2013. We recently completed installing a new tank at our refinery to store biodiesel to
enable us to comply with this mandate at a
162
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
total cost of approximately $3.0 million dollars. Minnesota law also currently requires, with limited
exceptions, that all gasoline sold or offered for sale in the state must contain the maximum amount of ethanol
allowed under federal law for use in all gasoline powered motor vehicles. Federal law currently allows a
maximum of 15% ethanol for cars and light trucks manufactured since 2001, and 10% ethanol for all other
vehicles. Fuels produced at our refinery are currently blended with the appropriate amounts of ethanol or
biodiesel to ensure that they comply with applicable federal and state renewable fuel standards. Blending
renewable fuels into our finished petroleum fuels to comply with these requirements will displace an
increasing volume of a refinery’s product pool.
We also are required to meet the new Mobile Source Air Toxics (“MSAT II”) regulations to reduce the benzene
content of gasoline. Under the MSAT II regulations, benzene in the finished gasoline pool was required to be
reduced to an annual average of 0.62 volume percent by January 1, 2011 with or without the use of benzene
credits and compliance was required to be demonstrated by January 1, 2012. Beginning on July 1, 2012, we
must also maintain an annual average of 1.30 volume percent benzene without the use of benzene credits. A
refinery may generate benzene credits by making reductions in the benzene content of the gasoline that it
produces beyond what is required by the applicable regulations. These credits may be utilized by the refinery
that generates them for future compliance, or they may be sold to other refineries. Our refinery’s average
benzene content for 2012 may exceed the 0.62% limit. If that occurs, we anticipate using benzene credits we
have accumulated in prior years and benzene credits purchased on the open market in order to comply with
MSAT II requirements. We are also considering operational changes to lower the benzene content of the
gasoline we produce. We may be required to purchase additional benzene credits to meet our compliance
obligations in the future. The cost for purchase of credits is variable and market driven. If the market price of
credits increases in the future, the costs to obtain the necessary number of benzene credits could become
material.
We are also subject to other fuel quality requirements under federal and state law, including federal standards
governing the maximum sulfur content of gasoline and diesel fuel manufactured at the refinery. If we fail to
comply with any of these fuel quality requirements, we could be subject to fines, penalties and corrective
action orders. Moreover, fuel quality standards could change in the future requiring us to incur significant
costs to ensure that the fuels we produce continue to comply with all applicable requirements. For example,
EPA has announced that it plans to propose new “Tier 3” motor vehicle emission and fuel standards
sometime in the second half of 2012. It has been reported that these new Tier 3 regulations may, among other
things, lower the maximum average sulfur content of gasoline from 30 parts per million to 10 parts per
million. If the Tier 3 regulations are eventually implemented and lower the maximum allowable content of
sulfur or other constituents in fuels that we produce, we may at some point in the future be required to make
significant capital expenditures and/or incur materially increased operating costs to comply with the new
standards.
Climate Change
In response to certain scientific studies suggesting that emissions of GHGs including carbon dioxide and
methane, are contributing to the warming of the Earth’s atmosphere and other climatic conditions, both
houses of Congress have actively considered legislation to reduce emissions of GHGs, and almost one-half of
the states have already taken legal measures to reduce emissions of GHGs, primarily through the planned
development of GHG emission inventories and/or regional GHG cap and trade programs. Most of these cap
and trade programs work by requiring either major sources of emissions or major producers of fuels to
acquire and surrender emission allowances, with the number of allowances available for purchase reduced
each year until the overall GHG emission reduction goal is achieved. These allowances would be expected to
escalate significantly in cost over time. Although it is not possible at this time to predict if or when Congress
may pass climate change legislation, any future federal laws that may be adopted to address GHG emissions
would likely require us to incur increased operating costs and could adversely affect demand for the refined
petroleum products we produce.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
163
In addition, on December 15, 2009, the EPA published its findings that emissions of GHGs present an
endangerment to public health and the environment. These findings allow the EPA to adopt and implement
regulations that would restrict emissions of GHGs under existing provisions of the federal Clean Air Act. The
EPA has adopted two sets of regulations under the Clean Air Act. The first limits emissions of GHGs from
motor vehicles beginning with the 2012 model year. The EPA has asserted that these final motor vehicle GHG
emission standards trigger Clean Air Act construction and operating permit requirements for stationary
sources, commencing when the motor vehicle standards took effect on January 2, 2011. On June 3, 2010, the
EPA published its final rule to address the permitting of GHG emissions from stationary sources under the
Prevention of Significant Deterioration (“PSD”) and Title V permitting programs. This rule “tailors” these
permitting programs to apply to certain stationary sources of GHG emissions in a multi-step process, with the
largest sources first subject to permitting. Facilities required to obtain PSD permits for their GHG emissions
also will be required to reduce those emissions according to “best available control technology” standards
(“BACT”) for GHG that have yet to be fully developed. The EPA issued guidance in November 2010 to industry
and permitting authorities on how to determine BACT for GHG emissions from new and modified sources. In
addition, on October 30, 2009, the EPA published a final rule requiring the reporting of GHG emissions from
specified large GHG emission sources in the United States, including refineries, on an annual basis,
beginning in 2011 for emissions occurring after January 1, 2010. We have been monitoring GHG emissions,
and submitted our first annual report on these emissions to EPA in September 2011. The adoption of any
regulations that require reporting of GHGs or otherwise limits emissions of GHGs from our refinery could
require us to incur significant costs and expenses or changes in operations and such requirements also
could adversely affect demand for the refined petroleum products that we produce.
Hazardous Substances and Wastes
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended (“CERCLA”), also
known as the “Superfund” law, and comparable state laws impose liability without regard to fault or the
legality of the original conduct, on certain classes of persons who are considered to be responsible for the
release of a hazardous substance into the environment. Such classes of persons include the current and past
owners and operators of sites where a hazardous substance was released, and companies that disposed or
arranged for disposal of hazardous substances at offsite locations, such as landfills. Under CERCLA, these
“responsible persons” may be subject to joint and several, strict liability for the costs of cleaning up the
hazardous substances that have been released into the environment, for damages to natural resources, for
costs incurred by third parties and for the costs of certain environmental and health studies. It is not
uncommon for neighboring landowners and other third parties to file claims for personal injury and property
damage allegedly caused by the release of hazardous substances into the environment. In the course of our
operations, we generate wastes or handle substances that may be regulated as hazardous substances, and we
could become subject to liability under CERCLA and comparable state laws.
We also may incur liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), and comparable
state and local laws, which impose requirements related to the handling, storage, treatment and disposal of
solid and hazardous wastes. In the course of our operations, we generate petroleum product wastes and
ordinary industrial wastes, such as paint wastes, waste solvents and waste oils that may be regulated as
hazardous wastes. In addition, our operations also generate solid wastes, which are regulated under RCRA
and state law.
Our refinery site has been used for refining activities for many years. Although prior owners may have used
operating and waste disposal practices that were standard in the industry at the time, petroleum hydrocarbons
and various wastes have been released on or under our refinery site. There has been remediation of soil and
groundwater contamination beneath the refinery for many years, and
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
164
we are required to continue to monitor and perform corrective actions for this contamination until the
applicable regulatory standards have been achieved. This remediation is being overseen by the MPCA
pursuant to a compliance agreement entered into by Marathon and the agency in 2007. Based on current
investigative and remedial activities, we believe that the contamination can be controlled or remedied without
having a material adverse effect on our financial condition. However, such costs are often unpredictable, and
there can be no assurance that future costs will not become material. We currently anticipate that we will incur
costs of approximately $375,000 in 2012 and an additional $1.7 million through the year 2023 in connection
with continued monitoring and remediation of this contamination at the refinery.
Water Discharges
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, as amended, also known as the Clean Water Act, and
analogous state laws impose restrictions and stringent controls on the discharge of pollutants, including oil,
into federal and state waters. Such discharges are prohibited, except in accordance with the terms of a permit
issued by the EPA or the MPCA. Any unpermitted release of pollutants, including crude oil as well as refined
products, could result in penalties, as well as significant remedial obligations. The spill prevention, control,
and countermeasure requirements of federal and state laws require containment, such as berms or similar
structures, to help prevent the contamination of navigable waters in the event of a petroleum hydrocarbon
tank spill, rupture or leak.
The refinery’s wastewater treatment plant utilizes two lagoons. Prior to our ownership of the refinery,
Marathon reported to us and to the MPCA several instances in which concentrations of benzene in the
wastewater flowing into the first lagoon exceeded the level that could potentially subject the lagoon to
regulation as a hazardous waste unit. Since December 2010, we have experienced only three exceedances of
benzene discharges into the lagoons and none since March 2011. We have reported the three known instances
that have occurred during our period of ownership to the MPCA, and the refinery has engaged in discussions
with the MPCA regarding the implications and appropriate responses to these instances. If the benzene level
was exceeded, the refinery could be subject to fines and penalties, and if no exemption from hazardous waste
regulation applies, the refinery may be required to incur additional capital and operating costs and expenses.
The MPCA initiated enforcement against Marathon and us relating to the instances of potentially excessive
concentrations of benzene entering the lagoon that occurred during each company’s respective period of
ownership. Marathon settled with the State of Minnesota in November 2011. The MPCA enforcement against
us remains pending. There can be no assurance that any fines, penalties, costs and expenses that we may
incur will not become material. Under the agreements that we entered into with Marathon at the time of the
acquisitions, we have the ability to seek reimbursement from Marathon on certain capital costs and expenses
that we may incur in connection with any such enforcement action.
Environmental Capital and Maintenance Projects
A number of capital projects are planned for continued environmental compliance at our refinery. For
example, in April of 2010, the MPCA issued a new permit that will govern stormwater discharges at the
refinery. This new permit included a new effluent standard for total suspended solids (“TSS”). We plan to
spend approximately $0.8 million in 2012 and 2013 in order that the refinery will comply with the TSS
standard by 2013, within the time allowed by the permit. We plan to spend approximately $475,000 over the
next four years on a number of additional, smaller capital projects at the refinery related to environmental
compliance. Additionally, we are currently evaluating upgrades to the refinery’s wastewater treatment plant,
potentially including changes to the process used to treat the wastewater, construction of new tanks, closure
of one or more existing lagoons, and dredging and disposal of sludge that has accumulated in the lagoons.
Depending on the final scope of the wastewater treatment plant upgrades, which will be subject to approval
and permitting by the MPCA,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
165
we estimate that costs could be as high as $39.5 million over the next two years, beginning in 2012. Pursuant
to the agreements entered into in connection with the Marathon Acquisition, Marathon may reimburse us for a
portion of the costs and expenses incurred in these wastewater treatment plant upgrades.
Health, Safety and Maintenance
We are subject to the requirements of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (“OSHA”) and
comparable state occupational safety laws. These laws and the implementing regulations strictly govern the
protection of the health and safety of employees. In addition, OSHA’s hazard communication standard
requires that information be maintained about hazardous materials used or produced in our operations and
that this information be available to employees and contractors and, where required, to state and local
government authorities and to local residents. We provide all required information to employees and
contractors on how to avoid or protect against exposure to hazardous materials present in our operations.
Also, we maintain safety, training and maintenance programs as part of our ongoing efforts to ensure
compliance with applicable laws and regulations. We believe that the refinery is in substantial compliance
with OSHA and similar state laws, including general industry standards, recordkeeping and reporting, hazard
communication and process safety management. The refinery is currently in the process of installing Safety
Instrumented Systems to enhance its safety program, and the estimated incremental costs for these
installations are $12.4 million over the next two years. The refinery also plans to spend approximately $1.2
million in 2012, with additional costs in future years, depending on project scheduling, to replace relief valves
to improve safety. Furthermore, the refinery has budgeted approximately $3.8 million in 2012 for additional
safety and process safety management projects.
Pipelines
We own three pipelines: (1) the “Aranco Pipeline,” which connects the refinery to a pipeline owned by
Magellan, (2) a 16” pipeline connecting the refinery to the Cottage Grove tank farm and (3) a 12” pipeline
connecting the refinery to the Cottage Grove tank farm. Potential environmental liabilities associated with
pipeline operation include costs incurred for remediating spills or releases and maintaining the integrity of
the pipeline to prevent such spills and releases. Under a lease agreement, Magellan operates the Aranco
Pipeline and bears the responsibility and costs for any leaks or spills from the Aranco Pipeline, as well as for
maintenance activities.
We also own an equity interest in the Minnesota Pipe Line Company, which owns and operates the pipeline
that provides the primary supply of crude oil to the refinery. The Minnesota Pipe Line Company bears the
responsibility and costs for any leaks or spills from the pipeline, as well as for maintenance activities.
Retail Business
Our retail business operates convenience stores with fuel stations in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and South
Dakota. Each retail station has underground fuel storage tanks, which are subject to federal, state and local
regulations. Complying with these underground storage tank regulations can be costly. The operation of
underground storage tanks also poses environmental risks, including the potential for fuel releases and soil
and groundwater contamination. We are currently completing the investigation and remediation of reported
leaks from underground storage tanks at a number of our convenience stores. We currently anticipate that the
known contamination at these stores can be remediated for approximately $160,000 through the end of 2012,
and an additional cost of approximately $210,000 through the end of 2015. It is possible that we may identify
more leaks or contamination in the future that could result in fines or civil liability for us, as well as
remediation obligations and expenses. States,
Table of Contents
166
Index to Financial Statements
including Minnesota, have established funds to reimburse some expenses associated with remediating leaks
from underground storage tanks, but such state reimbursement funds may not cover all remediation costs.
Other Government Regulation
Our transportation activities are subject to regulation by multiple governmental agencies. Our projected
expenditures related to the Minnesota Pipeline reflect the recurring costs resulting from compliance with
these regulations, and these costs may increase due to future acquisitions, changes in regulation, changes in
use, ongoing expenditures to maintain reliability and efficiency or discovery of existing but unknown
compliance issues. Further, the regulatory burden on the industry increases the cost of doing business and
affects profitability. Additional proposals and proceedings that affect the oil industry are regularly considered
by Congress, the states, FERC and the courts. We cannot predict when or whether any such proposals may
become effective or what impact such proposals may have.
The ICA and its implementing regulations give FERC authority to regulate the rates and the terms and
conditions of service of interstate common carrier oil pipelines, such as the Minnesota Pipeline. The ICA and
its implementing regulations require that tariff rates and terms and conditions of service of interstate common
carrier oil pipelines be just and reasonable and not unduly discriminatory or preferential. The ICA also
requires that oil pipeline tariffs setting forth transportation rates and the rules and regulations governing
transportation services be filed with FERC.
In October 1992, Congress passed the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (“EPAct”), which, among other things,
required FERC to issue rules to establish a simplified and generally applicable ratemaking methodology for
petroleum pipelines and to streamline procedures in petroleum pipeline proceedings. FERC responded to this
mandate by establishing a methodology for petroleum pipelines to change their rates within prescribed
ceiling levels that are tied to an inflation index. Pipelines are allowed to raise their rates to the rate ceiling
level generated by application of the index. If the methodology reduces the ceiling level such that it is lower
than a pipeline’s filed rate, the pipeline must reduce its rate to conform with the lower ceiling unless doing so
would reduce a rate “grandfathered” by EPAct to below the grandfathered level. A pipeline must, as a general
rule, use the indexing methodology to change its rates. FERC, however, retained cost-of-service ratemaking,
market based rates, agreement with an unaffiliated shipper, and settlement as alternatives to the indexing
approach that may be used in certain specified circumstances. The Minnesota Pipeline currently uses the
indexing methodology to set its tariff rates. In order for the Minnesota Pipeline to increase rates beyond the
maximum allowed by the indexing methodology, it must file a cost-of-service justification, obtain approval
from an unaffiliated party that intends to ship on the pipeline (with respect to initial rates for any new service),
obtain approval from all current shippers (i.e., settlement), or obtain prior approval to file market-based rates.
We do not control the board of managers of the Minnesota Pipe Line Company and thus do not control the
decision-making with respect to tariff changes for the Minnesota Pipeline.
FERC’s indexing methodology is subject to review every five years. In an order issued in December 2010,
FERC announced that, effective July 1, 2011, the index would equal the change in the producer price index for
finished goods plus 2.65% (previously, the index was equal to the change in the producer price index for
finished goods plus 1.3%). This index is to be in effect through July 2016. The current or any revised indexing
formula could hamper our ability to recover our costs because: (1) the indexing methodology is tied to an
inflation index; (2) it is not based on pipeline-specific costs; and (3) it could be reduced in comparison to the
current formula. Further, shippers may protest rate increases made within the ceiling levels, but such protests
must show that the portion of the rate increase resulting from application of the index is substantially in
excess of the pipeline’s increase in costs from the previous year and that the pipeline is substantially over-
recovering its cost of
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
167
service. Shippers may also file complaints against index-based rates, but such complaints must show that the
pipeline is substantially over-recovering its cost of service and that application of the index substantially
exacerbates that over-recovery. In addition, due to the common carrier regulatory obligation applicable to
interstate oil pipelines, capacity must be prorated among shippers in an equitable manner in accordance with
the tariff then in effect in the event there are nominations in excess of capacity. Therefore, nominations by
new shippers or increased nominations by existing shippers may reduce the capacity available to us.
EPAct deemed petroleum pipeline rates in effect for the 365-day period ending on the date of enactment of
EPAct that had not been subject to complaint, protest or investigation during that 365-day period to be just
and reasonable under the ICA (“grandfathered”). There are grandfathered rates underlying Minnesota
Pipeline’s current rates. Absent a successful challenge against the grandfathered rates, these rates act as a
floor below which the pipeline’s rates cannot be lowered. Generally, shippers challenging grandfathered rates
must show that a substantial change has occurred since the enactment of EPAct in either the economic
circumstances of the oil pipeline, or in the nature of the services provided, that were a basis for the rate.
EPAct places no such limit on challenges to a provision of an oil pipeline tariff as unduly discriminatory or
preferential. If a shipper were to successfully challenge the grandfathered portion of the Minnesota Pipeline’s
rates, the Minnesota Pipeline would no longer benefit from the floor provided by these grandfathered rates
and could adversely affect the Minnesota Pipe Line Company’s financial position, cash flows and results of
operations.
Under certain circumstances, including a change in FERC’s ratemaking methodology for oil pipelines or a
protest or complaint filed by a shipper, FERC could limit the Minnesota Pipe Line Company’s ability to set
rates based on its costs, could order it to reduce its rates, and/or could require the payment of refunds and/or
reparations to shippers. Rate regulation or a successful challenge to the rates the Minnesota Pipeline charges
could adversely affect its financial position, cash flows, or results of operations. Conversely, reduced rates on
the Minnesota Pipeline will reduce the rates we are charged as a shipper for transportation of crude oil on the
Minnesota Pipeline into our refinery. If FERC found the Minnesota Pipeline’s terms of service to be contrary to
statutory requirements, FERC could impose conditions it considers appropriate and/or impose penalties.
Further, FERC could declare non-jurisdictional facilities to be common carrier facilities and require that
common carrier access be provided or otherwise alter the terms of service and/or rates of such facilities, to
the extent applicable.
The Aranco Pipeline, currently leased to and operated by Magellan, is part of Magellan’s interstate pipeline
system and, as a result, we are not required to maintain a tariff with respect to the Aranco Pipeline. If this
lease were to be terminated and the pipeline were used to transport crude oil or petroleum products in
interstate commerce, the Aranco Pipeline would be subject to the interstate common carrier regulatory regime
discussed above in the context of the Minnesota Pipeline and we would be required to comply with such
regulation in order to operate the Aranco Pipeline. In addition, if the 16” and/or 12” pipeline connecting the
refinery to the Cottage Grove tank farm were to provide interstate crude oil or petroleum product
transportation service, they would be subject to the same interstate common carrier regulatory regime
discussed above.
The Federal Trade Commission, FERC and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission hold statutory
authority to monitor certain segments of the physical and futures energy commodities markets. These
agencies have imposed broad regulations prohibiting fraud and manipulation of such markets. With regard to
our physical sales of oil or other energy commodities, and any related hedging activities that we undertake,
we are required to observe the market-related regulations enforced by these agencies, which hold substantial
enforcement authority. Failure to comply with such regulations, as interpreted and enforced, could have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
168
Our petroleum pipeline facilities are also subject to regulation by the U.S. Department of Transportation with
respect to their design, installation, testing, construction, operation, replacement and management. We are
also subject to the requirements of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act and other comparable
federal and state statutes that address employee health and safety. Compliance costs associated with these
regulations can potentially be significant, particularly if higher industry and regulatory safety standards are
imposed in the future.
Legal Proceedings
We are not currently a party to any legal proceedings that, if determined adversely against us, individually or
in the aggregate, would have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash
flows. Marathon, however, is a named defendant in certain lawsuits, investigations and claims arising in the
ordinary course of conducting the business relating to the assets we acquired from Marathon, including
certain environmental claims and employee-related matters. For a discussion of certain environmental
settlements and consent decrees relating to the assets we acquired from Marathon, see “—Environmental
Regulations.” While the outcome of these lawsuits, investigations and claims against Marathon cannot be
predicted with certainty, we do not expect these matters to have a material adverse impact on our business,
results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. We have not assumed any liabilities arising out of
these lawsuits, investigations and claims against Marathon. Marathon also has indemnification obligations to
us pursuant to the agreements entered into in connection with the Marathon Acquisition. Marathon’s
indemnification obligation resulting from any breach of representations and warranties generally are limited
by an indemnification deductible of $25 million and an indemnification ceiling of $100 million and are
guaranteed by Marathon Petroleum. In addition, from time to time, we are involved in lawsuits, investigations
and claims arising out of our operations in the ordinary course of business.
Intellectual Property
We hold and use certain trade secret and confidential information related specifically to our refining
operations. In addition, we are party to various process license agreements that allow us to use certain
intellectual property rights of third parties in our refining operations pursuant to fully-paid up licenses. We do
not own any patents relating to the refining business but license a limited number of patents from Marathon
based on the previous use of such patents in our refining operations.
Employees
As of March 31, 2012, we employed 2,667 people, including 419 employees associated with the operations of
our refining business and 2,198 employees associated with the operations of our retail business. Our future
success will depend partially on our ability to attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. We are party to
collective bargaining agreements covering approximately 179 of our 419 employees associated with the
operations of our refining business and 20 of our 2,196 employees associated with the operations of our retail
business. The collective bargaining agreements covering the employees associated with our refining and
retail businesses expire in December 2013 and August 2012, respectively. We consider our relations with our
employees to be satisfactory.
Properties
Our principal executive offices are located at 38C Grove Street, Suite 100, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877. The
location and general character of our principal refineries, retail locations and other important physical
properties have been described by segment under “—Our Refining Business” and “—Our Retail Business.”
We believe that our properties and facilities are generally adequate for our operations and that our facilities
are maintained in a good state of repair. We are the lessee under a number of cancelable and non-cancelable
leases for certain properties. Our leases are discussed more fully in Note 17 to our audited consolidated
financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
169
MANAGEMENT
Our Management
Our general partner manages our operations and activities subject to the terms and conditions specified in
our partnership agreement. Our general partner will be indirectly owned by ACON Refining, TPG Refining and
certain members of our management team. The operations of our general partner in its capacity as general
partner are managed by its board of directors. Actions by our general partner that are made in its individual
capacity will be made by its owners, and not by the board of directors of our general partner. Our general
partner is not elected by our unitholders and will not be subject to re-election on a regular basis in the future.
The executive officers of our general partner will manage our day-to-day activities consistent with the policies
and procedures adopted by the board of directors of our general partner.
Limited partners will not be entitled to elect the directors of our general partner or directly or indirectly
participate in our management or operation. Northern Tier Holdings will appoint all of the directors of our
general partner. Pursuant to the limited liability company agreement of our general partner, Northern Tier
Holdings will appoint two directors designated by ACON Refining (referred to as the “ACON directors”), two
directors designated by TPG Refining (referred to as the “TPG directors” and collectively with the ACON
directors, the “Sponsor Directors”), up to two members of management and at least three other directors
(including independent directors) mutually designated by ACON Refining and TPG Refining. Each member of
the board, other than the Sponsor Directors, will have one vote, and each Sponsor Director will have three
votes for purposes of calculating whether a majority of the board has voted in favor of or against any action.
All actions of the board, other than any matters delegated to a committee, will require approval by majority
vote of the directors, which must include votes cast in favor by at least one ACON director and one TPG
director. Our partnership agreement contains various provisions which replace default fiduciary duties under
applicable law with contractual corporate governance standards. See “The Partnership Agreement.” Our
general partner will be liable, as a general partner, for all of our debts (to the extent not paid from our assets),
except for indebtedness or other obligations that are made expressly non-recourse to it. Our general partner
therefore may cause us to incur indebtedness or other obligations that are non-recourse to it.
Whenever our general partner makes a determination or takes or declines to take an action in its individual,
rather than representative, capacity, it is entitled to make such determination or to take or decline to take such
other action free of any fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever to us, any limited partner or assignee, and it is
not required to act in good faith or pursuant to any other standard imposed by our partnership agreement or
under Delaware law or any other law. Examples include the exercise of its call right, its voting rights and its
determination whether or not to consent to any merger or consolidation of the partnership.
As a publicly traded partnership, we qualify for, and intend to rely on, certain exemptions from the NYSE’s
corporate governance requirements, including the requirement that a majority of the board of directors of our
general partner consist of independent directors and the requirement that the board of directors of our general
partner have a nominating/corporate governance committee that is composed entirely of independent
directors. As a result of these exemptions, our general partner’s board of directors will not be comprised of a
majority of independent directors, our general partner’s compensation committee may not be comprised
entirely of independent directors and our general partner’s board of directors does not currently intend to
establish a nominating/corporate governance committee. Accordingly, unitholders will not have the same
protections afforded to equityholders of companies that are subject to all of the corporate governance
requirements of the NYSE.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
170
Board Committees
The board of directors of our general partner may establish a conflicts committee consisting entirely of
independent directors. Pursuant to our partnership agreement, our general partner may, but is not required
to, seek the approval of the conflicts committee whenever a conflict arises between our general partner or its
affiliates, on the one hand, and us or any public unitholder, on the other. The conflicts committee may then
determine whether the resolution of the conflict of interest is in the best interests of the Partnership. The
members of the conflicts committee may not be officers or employees of our general partner or directors,
officers or employees of its affiliates, and must meet the independence standard established by the NYSE and
the Exchange Act to serve on an audit committee of a board of directors. See “Conflicts of Interest and
Fiduciary Duties.”
In addition, as required by the Exchange Act and the listing standards of the NYSE, the board of directors of
our general partner will maintain an audit committee comprised of at least three independent directors. The
board of directors of our general partner currently has an audit committee comprised of four directors,
Messrs. Hofmann, Ginns, Liaw and Smith. Mr. Hofmann meets the independence standards established by the
NYSE and the Exchange Act. Within 90 days of the effectiveness of the registration statement of which this
prospectus forms a part (the “effective date”), the audit committee will consist of at least a majority of
independent members. Within one year of the effective date, all members of the audit committee will be
independent.
The audit committee will oversee, review, act on and report to the board of directors of our general partner on
various auditing and accounting matters, including: the selection of our independent accountants, the scope
of our audits, fees to be paid to the independent accountants, the performance of our independent
accountants and our accounting practices. In addition, the audit committee will oversee our compliance
programs relating to the legal and regulatory requirements as they relate to financial reporting.
The board of directors of our general partner has a compensation committee comprised of Messrs. Aronson,
Josey, Liaw and Smith. This committee will establish salaries, incentives and other forms of compensation
for officers and certain other employees of our general partner.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
171
Executive Officers and Directors
We are managed and operated by the board of directors and executive officers of our general partner. In this
prospectus, we refer to the executive officers of our general partner as “our executive officers.” The following
table sets forth the names, positions and ages of our executive officers and directors:
Name
Dan F. Smith
Mario E. Rodriguez
Hank Kuchta
Bernard W. Aronson
Jonathan Ginns
Michael MacDougall
Eric Liaw
Thomas Hofmann
Scott D. Josey
David Bonczek
Greg Mullins
Age
(as of December 31, 2011)    
 
65    
44    
 
 
55
65    
47    
40    
31    
60    
54    
42    
59
Title
Chairman of the Board of Directors
Chief Executive Officer and Director
President, Chief Operating Officer and
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
President, St. Paul Park Refining Company
Set forth below is a description of the backgrounds of our directors and executive officers.
Dan F. Smith has served as Chairman of the board of directors of our general partner since June 2012 and
Northern Tier Energy LLC since November 2011 and as a director of Northern Tier Energy LLC since May 2011.
Mr. Smith is the former chairman, president and chief executive officer of Lyondell Chemical Company. He
began his career with ARCO (Atlantic Richfield Company) in 1968 as an engineer. He was elected president of
Lyondell Chemical Company in August 1994, chief executive officer in December 1996 and chairman of the
board of directors in May 2007. Mr. Smith retired in December 2007 from Lyondell Chemical Company
following the acquisition of Lyondell by Basell Polyolefins. Mr. Smith also served as chief executive officer of
Equistar Chemicals, LP from December 1997 through December 2007 and as chief executive officer of
Millennium Chemicals Inc. from November 2004 until December 2007. Equistar and Millennium are wholly
owned subsidiaries of Lyondell. Since retiring from Lyondell in December 2007, Mr. Smith has served as a
director of a number of companies. Mr. Smith has been a director of Cooper Industries, PLC since 1998,
chairman and a director of Kraton Performance Polymers, Inc. since 2008, chairman and a director of Valerus
Compression Services, L.P. since 2010, and chairman and a director of Nexeo Solutions, LLC since 2011. He
also serves as a member of the College of Engineering Advisory Council at Lamar University. Mr. Smith is a
graduate of Lamar University with a B.S. degree in chemical engineering.
Mr. Smith brings valuable expertise to the board due to his extensive executive experience at the highest
levels, including more than ten years of experience as the chief executive officer of a major chemical
company.
Mario E. Rodriguez has served as Chief Executive Officer and a director of our general partner since
June 2012 and of Northern Tier Energy LLC since December 2010. Mr. Rodriguez founded NTR Partners LLC,
an investment partnership focused on the petroleum refining sector, in 2006. Mr. Rodriguez served as
president and chief executive officer of NTR Partners LLC from 2006 to 2010 and was chief executive officer of
NTR Acquisition Co., an AMEX-hosted company formed for the acquisition of refining assets, from 2006 to
2009. Prior to founding NTR Partners LLC, Mr. Rodriguez was a managing director in the Global Energy
Investment Banking Division of Citigroup Global Markets
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
172
from 2000 to 2006. Prior to Citigroup, he was a Vice President in the Natural Resources & Power Group of J.P.
Morgan & Co. and a Consultant in the Energy Directorate of Arthur D. Little, Inc. He received a B.S. in
mechanical engineering from Universidad Simon Bolivar, Caracas, Venezuela and an M.B.A. from Harvard
Business School.
These experiences, combined with Mr. Rodriguez’s talent for leadership and his long-term strategic
perspective, offer significant benefits to Northern Tier Energy LP as a large and complex company.
Hank Kuchta has served as President and Chief Operating Officer and a director of our general partner since
June 2012 and of Northern Tier Energy LLC since December 2010. Since January 2010, Mr. Kuchta has been
an independent director of the general partner of TransMontaigne G.P., LLC. Since 2006, Mr. Kuchta has been
a member of NTR Partners LLC. Mr. Kuchta served as a director as well as president and chief operating
officer of NTR Acquisition Co. from 2006 to 2009. Prior to NTR Partners LLC, Mr. Kuchta served as president of
Premcor, Inc. from 2003 until 2005 and as chief operating officer of Premcor, Inc. from 2002 until 2005. In
2002, Mr. Kuchta served as executive vice president-refining of Premcor. Premcor operated four refineries in
the United States and had approximately 750,000 bpd of refining capacity at the time of its sale to Valero
Energy Corporation in April 2005. From 2001 until 2002, Mr. Kuchta served as business development manager
for Phillips 66 Company following Phillips’ 2001 acquisition of Tosco Corporation. Prior to Phillips,
Mr. Kuchta served in various corporate, commercial and refining positions at Tosco Corporation from 1993 to
2001. Before joining Tosco, Mr. Kuchta spent 12 years at Exxon Corporation in various refining, engineering
and financial positions, including assignments overseas. He holds a B.S. in chemical engineering from
Wayne State University.
Mr. Kuchta’s extensive operational experience in the refining industry gives him an appreciation for the
business practices that are critical to the success of a growing business such as ours.
Bernard W. Aronson has served as a director of our general partner since June 2012 and of Northern Tier
Energy LLC since December 2010. Mr. Aronson co-founded ACON Investments LLC in 1996 and has served as
managing partner of ACON Investments, L.L.C. since 1996. He has previously served as international advisor
to Goldman, Sachs & Co., executive speechwriter and special assistant to the Vice President of the United
States and Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. Following his State Department service from
1989 to 1993, he was presented the Distinguished Service Award by the Secretary of State, the State
Department’s highest honor. Mr. Aronson has served on the board of directors of Hyatt Hotels Corp since
2004, Liz Claiborne Inc. since 1998, Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines since 1993, and Chroma Oil & Gas since
2008. He chairs the governance committee of Hyatt. He served as director and chair of the governance
committee of Mariner Energy Inc. until November 2010 when Mariner Energy merged with Apache Oil and
Gas. Mr. Aronson also serves on the board of directors of The National Democratic Institute for International
Affairs and the Maryland/D.C. chapter of the Nature Conservancy. He is a member of the Council on Foreign
Relations and the Inter-American Dialogue. Mr. Aronson graduated with honors from the University of
Chicago.
Mr. Aronson has significant corporate governance experience as a result of having served on a number of
public company boards of directors and board committees. He also brings valuable knowledge of the energy
industry as a result of his services on the board of directors of Mariner Energy.
Jonathan Ginns has served as a director of our general partner since June 2012 and of Northern Tier Energy
LLC since December 2010. Mr. Ginns co-founded ACON Investments LLC in 1996 and has served as managing
partner of ACON Investments, L.L.C since 1996. Mr. Ginns has served on a number of public and private
boards of directors. He has served on the board of directors of Signal
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
173
International Inc. since 2003, Milagro Exploration since 2007 and Chroma Oil & Gas Corp since 2008.
Mr. Ginns received an M.B.A. from the Harvard Business School, and a B.A. from Brandeis University.
Mr. Ginns’ background as a member of multiple public company boards of directors and familiarity with the
energy industry are both assets to the board.
Michael MacDougall has served as a director of our general partner since June 2012 and of Northern Tier
Energy LLC since December 2010. Mr. MacDougall is a TPG Partner. Mr. MacDougall leads TPG’s global
energy and natural resources investing efforts. Prior to joining TPG in 2002, Mr. MacDougall was a vice
president in the Principal Investment Area of the Merchant Banking Division of Goldman, Sachs & Co., where
he focused on private equity and mezzanine investments. He is a director of Amber Holdings (successor to
certain assets of Alinta Energy), Copano Energy, L.L.C., Energy Future Holdings Corp. (formally TXU Corp.),
Graphic Packaging Holding Company, Harvester Holdings, L.L.C., Nexeo Solutions, LLC and Maverick
American Natural Gas, LLC, and the general partner of Valerus Compression Services, L.P. He is also a
member of the board of directors of the Dwight School Foundation, Islesboro Affordable Property, The
Opportunity Network and The University of Texas Development Board. Mr. MacDougall received his B.B.A.,
with highest honors, from The University of Texas at Austin and received his M.B.A., with distinction, from
Harvard Business School.
Mr. MacDougall’s extensive transactional and investment banking experience, his experience as a private
equity investor and his experience as a director of other public companies enable Mr. MacDougall to provide
valuable insight regarding complex financial and strategic issues in our industry.
Eric Liaw has served as a director of our general partner since June 2012 and of Northern Tier Energy LLC
since December 2010. Mr. Liaw is a TPG Vice President. Mr. Liaw is focused on TPG’s global energy and
natural resources investing efforts. Prior to joining TPG in 2008, Mr. Liaw attended Harvard Business School
from 2006 to 2008. Prior to attending Harvard Business School, Mr. Liaw was an associate at Bain Capital from
2004 to 2006, where he focused on private equity investments. He is a director of Harvester Holdings, L.L.C.
and the general partner of Valerus Compression Services, L.P. Mr. Liaw received his B.A., with highest
honors, and B.B.A., with highest honors, from the University of Texas at Austin and received his M.B.A., with
distinction, from Harvard Business School.
Mr. Liaw’s knowledge of the energy and natural resources industry, his transactional experience as a private
equity investor, and his experience on the boards of Harvester Holdings, L.L.C. and the general partner of
Valerus Compression Services, L.P. make him a valuable asset to the board.
Thomas Hofmann has served as a director of our general partner since June 2012 and of Northern Tier Energy
LLC since May 2011. Since December 2008, Mr. Hofmann has been retired. Mr. Hofmann served as senior vice
president and chief financial officer of Sunoco, Inc., an oil refining and marketing company, from January
2002 to December 2008. Mr. Hofmann also serves as a director of West Pharmaceuticals Services, Inc. and a
director of the general partner of Penn Virginia Resource Partners, L.P. In the last five years, he has also
served on the board of directors of the general partner of Sunoco Logistics Partners, L.P. and VIASYS
Healthcare Inc. Mr. Hofmann received a B.S. degree from the University of Delaware and a master’s degree
from Villanova University.
As the former chief financial officer of Sunoco, Inc., Mr. Hofmann has substantial experience and knowledge
regarding financial issues related to energy companies and the energy industry. His extensive financial,
management and strategic experiences allow him to provide critical insights to the board.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
174
Scott D. Josey has served as a director of our general partner since June 2012 and of Northern Tier Energy
LLC since May 2011. Since October 2011, Mr. Josey has been the chief executive officer of Sequitur Energy
Management LLC, which performs management oversight services for exploration and production companies.
Mr. Josey has owned Chromatic Industries since May 2011, which provides engineered valves to the energy
industry. Mr. Josey is the former chairman, president and chief executive officer of Mariner Energy, Inc. He
served as the chairman of the board of Mariner Energy, Inc. from August 2001 until November 2010, when
Mariner merged with Apache Corporation. He was appointed chief executive officer of Mariner in October 2002
and president in February 2005. From 2000 to 2002, he served as vice president of Enron North America Corp.
and co-managed its Energy Capital Resources group. From 1995 to 2000, Mr. Josey provided investment
banking services to the oil and gas industry and portfolio management services to institutional investors as a
co-founder of Sagestone Capital Partners. From 1993 to 1995, he was a director with Enron Capital & Trade
Resources Corp. in its energy investment group. From 1982 to 1993, he worked in all phases of drilling,
production, pipeline, corporate planning and commercial activities at Texas Oil and Gas Corp. Since February
2011, Mr. Josey has served as a director of Apache Corporation and currently serves on the executive
committee. He is a member of the board and chairman of the compensation committee of the Association of
Former Students of Texas A&M University and is also a member of the Society of Petroleum Engineers and
the Independent Petroleum Association of America. Mr. Josey obtained a B.S. degree in mechanical
engineering from Texas A&M University, his M.B.A. from the University of Texas at Austin and his M.S. in
petroleum engineering from the University of Houston.
Mr. Josey has spent his entire 30-year career in the oil and gas industry and as the former chief executive
officer of Mariner Energy, Inc., he gained extensive management, financial and technical expertise in the
energy field, which brings valuable experience to the board.
David Bonczek has served as Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of our general partner since June
2012 and of Northern Tier Energy LLC since August 2011. Mr. Bonczek previously served as the chief
accounting officer for Northern Tier Energy LLC from March to August 2011. Prior to joining Northern Tier
Energy LLC, Mr. Bonczek was assistant corporate controller at Chemtura Corporation, a NYSE-listed
company, from April 2008 through March 2011. From September 1998 through March 2008, Mr. Bonczek held
finance management positions within Eastman Kodak including corporate controller of their Kodak
Polychrome Graphics joint venture. Mr. Bonczek began his career with KPMG where his last position was
senior manager in their audit practice. Mr. Bonczek received a B.S. degree in accounting from Binghamton
University, and he is a Certified Public Accountant.
Greg Mullins has served as President, St. Paul Park Refining Company, since December 2010. Mr. Mullins has
a B.S. in chemical engineering from Wayne State University and worked for Marathon Petroleum from 1978
until January 2008. From January 2008 until August 2010, Mr. Mullins was retired. From August 2010 until
joining St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC in December 2010, Mr. Mullins performed consulting work for NTR
Partners LLC. During his career with Marathon, Mr. Mullins worked at several of Marathon’s refineries as well
as the Findlay, Ohio corporate offices. He has extensive experience in all aspects of refinery operations and
management as well as major project development and project management. He has developed and managed
refining capital and expense budgets, worked in business development, and led Marathon’s due diligence
team for the prospective purchase of BP’s Lima refinery. He developed and sponsored the Detroit refinery
expansion while incorporating the requirements for ultra low sulfur fuels while staging the refinery to include
significantly larger volumes of heavy, sour Canadian crudes. Mr. Mullins is currently a member of the
American Institute of Chemical Engineers, served as an expert panel member for the 2007 National Petroleum
Refiners Association Q & A, a former member of the American Petroleum Institute Operating Practices
Committee and chaired the Wayne State University Industrial Advisory Board for the Chemical and
Metallurgical Engineering Department from 2002 to 2007.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
175
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
The following discussion and analysis of compensation arrangements (“CD&A”) of our named executive
officers for 2011 (as set forth in the Summary Compensation Table below) should be read together with the
compensation tables and related disclosures set forth below. This discussion contains forward-looking
statements that are based on our current plans, considerations, expectations and determinations regarding
future compensation programs. Actual compensation programs that we adopt may differ materially from the
currently planned programs summarized in this discussion.
Summary of Our Executive Compensation Program
Our executive compensation program has generally been overseen by our board of directors or an informal
subcommittee of our board of directors, along with significant input from our senior management team. The
ultimate responsibility for making decisions relating to the compensation of our named executive officers
differs depending on the compensation element at issue. As of December 31, 2011, our board of directors
generally made all decisions regarding salary, a subcommittee of our board of directors addressed overall
compensation for Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta (our chief executive officer and our president and chief
operating officer, respectively), and our senior management team made recommendations to the board of
directors regarding all elements of compensation.
We determined that for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2011, the following individuals met the standards
of a “named executive officer” for the 2011 fiscal year:
Ÿ  Mario Rodriguez—Chief Executive Officer;
Ÿ  Hank Kuchta—President and Chief Operating Officer;
Ÿ  David Bonczek—Vice President and Chief Financial Officer;
Ÿ  Neal Murphy—Former Chief Financial Officer; and
Ÿ  Greg Mullins—President, St. Paul Park Refining Company.
Mr. Murphy left our company on August 22, 2011 and was succeeded in the role of Chief Financial Officer by
Mr. Dave Bonczek. We have determined that as of December 31, 2011, no other individual met the standards
necessary to classify him or her as a “named executive officer.”
Objectives of Our Executive Compensation Program
We have, and will continue to design, an executive compensation program with the following objectives:
Ÿ  The recruitment and retention of talented individuals for key leadership positions;
Ÿ  The linking of compensation to an executive’s individual performance and our financial performance; and
Ÿ  The alignment of our executives’ compensation opportunities with our short-term and long-term financial
objectives.
Key Components of Our Compensation Policy
In furtherance of our objectives for our executive compensation program, we have created both fixed and
variable compensation elements for our compensation program. We desire to provide a
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
176
certain level of fixed elements, such as salary and health and welfare benefits, in order to provide stability and
reliability to our executives. These fixed compensation elements are important because they allow our
executives to keep their main focus on our business objectives. However, we believe that variable
compensation elements, such as annual cash bonuses and equity incentive awards, allow us to incentivize
and reward our executives in years where they have provided us with superior services, and this “pay for
performance” concept aligns the executive’s goals with those of our unitholders. In connection with our
commencement of operations following the consummation of the Marathon Acquisition, our named executive
officers received compensation in the following forms during the 2011 fiscal year:
Ÿ  Base salary;
Ÿ  Annual bonus awards;
Ÿ  Long-term equity incentive awards in the form of profits interests in NTI Management Company, L.P (“NTI
Management”), one of our affiliates that is owned by certain members of our management team;
Ÿ  Severance and change in control provisions;
Ÿ  Participation in a cash balance retirement plan; and
Ÿ  Participation in broad-based retirement, health and welfare benefits.
Mr. Bonczek was the only named executive officer to receive NTI Management profits interest awards during
the 2011 year. The remaining named executive officers received NTI Management profits interest awards
during the 2010 year in connection with the close of the Marathon Acquisition (see “—Long-Term Equity-
Based Incentives” below for more details).
The design of our long-term equity incentive awards will likely be modified on a going forward basis, as we
intend to implement a new equity-based incentive compensation plan during the 2012 year. See “—2012 Long
Term Incentive Plan” below for more details. We have not historically benchmarked any compensation
elements against a particular peer group, but we anticipate that an analysis of our peers’ executive
compensation packages will occur after the completion of this offering in order to more closely gauge our
competitiveness to that of our peer companies. In January 2012 our board of directors engaged Pearl Meyer &
Partners (“PMP”), an independent compensation consulting firm, to review our current compensation
programs and to assist us in identifying our peer group. PMP completed its review in May 2012, but as of the
date of this filing our board of directors is still reviewing the results and has not made any material
compensation decisions for the 2012 year based upon the findings of the PMP report.
The structure of each of the compensation elements provided to our named executive officers during the 2011
fiscal year and the current 2012 fiscal year, where applicable, is described in detail below
Components of Executive Compensation Program
Base Salary
Each named executive officer’s base salary is a fixed component of compensation and does not vary
depending on the level of performance achieved. Base salaries are determined for each named executive
based on his or her position and responsibility. Our board of directors generally reviews the base salaries for
each named executive annually as well as at the time of any promotion or significant change in job
responsibilities, and in connection with each review it considers individual and company performance over
the course of that year. Our board of directors and our named executive officers worked together to determine
appropriate levels of base salary compensation for our named executive
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
177
officers at our operations following the Marathon Acquisition. They utilized our internal human resources staff
to look at publicly available information regarding salaries at various companies within our industry,
although a formal peer group or market median was not targeted in making these determinations.
With respect to Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta, their base salaries are set forth in formal employment
agreements that we entered into on December 1, 2010. Mr. Rodriguez has a base salary of $500,000 per year,
while Mr. Kuchta has a base salary of $450,000 per year. Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta’s employment
agreements provide that our board of directors will set and review their base salaries, and that our board of
directors may increase, but not decrease, their base salaries at any time.
Mr. Murphy’s base salary was set forth in the offer letter that we provided to him at the time of his
employment, in the amount of $350,000. Messrs. Bonczek and Mullins also received offer letters prior to
beginning their employment with us. Mr. Bonczek originally received his offer letter on February 7, 2011,
when he was hired as our Chief Accounting Officer and Corporate Controller. We increased the annual base
salary set forth in Mr. Bonczek’s offer letter from $235,000 to $270,000 as of August 29, 2011, in order to reflect
the change in his position to Chief Financial Officer. Our offer letter to Mr. Mullins was dated December 1,
2010, and provides him with an annual base salary of $275,000.
The base salary earned by each named executive officer for the 2011 fiscal year is set forth in the Summary
Compensation Table below. Following our annual review of each named executive officer’s base salary, we
increased the annual base salaries of Messrs. Bonczek and Mullins to $300,000 and $295,000, respectively,
effective February 27, 2012.
Bonuses
Each of the named executive officers will be eligible to receive annual bonus payments pursuant to an
incentive compensation plan (the “Bonus Plan”), which is designed to encourage our employees to achieve
our business objectives and to attract and retain key employees through the opportunity for substantial
performance-related incentive compensation. For the 2011 calendar year, the Bonus Plan was designed to
fully align employee interests with those of our unitholders through primary focus on financial performance,
namely earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”). While the financial drivers
of the 2011 Bonus Plan, such as EBITDA, represented our primary performance measurement, our
compensation committee retained the right to exercise full discretion to apply other financial or performance
measures in determining the payment amount of any individual’s bonus award following its review of our
performance during the 2011 year.
The 2011 Bonus Plan set a target bonus award for each participant based upon a percentage of that
individual’s base salary: the percentage of salary for the 2011 target Bonus Plan awards was 100% with
respect to Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta, 70% for Mr. Bonczek, 65% for Mr. Mullins, and would have been
70% for Mr. Murphy had he been employed at the end of the 2011 year. Senior management team participants
will generally earn 0% to 200% of their target bonus amount under the Bonus Plan subject to any
discretionary adjustments made by our compensation committee. Once a performance metric for the plan is
chosen, the compensation committee will assign threshold, target and maximum levels applicable to the
performance metric to act as guidelines at the end of the performance period, which will be each full calendar
year. If applicable performance targets are earned at a threshold level, the general payout for senior
management team participants will be 40% of the target bonus; if performance targets are earned at target,
100% of the target bonus will typically be paid; and if performance targets are earned at maximum levels, up
to 200% of the target bonus may be paid.
When making decisions regarding the 2011 amounts to be paid to each named executive officer, our
compensation committee reviewed our EBITDA results for the 2011 year, the general target bonus amounts
that had been previously set for each executive, and our overall performance during the 2011
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
178
year. With respect to the bonus award for Mr. Bonczek, his target bonus amount was prorated for the fact that
he served in his position for approximately 80% of the applicable calendar year. The compensation committee
recognized that our refinery team members put forth exceptional efforts during the 2011 year, and as Mr.
Mullins is the head of our refinery team, the compensation committee determined to provide Mr. Mullins with
a bonus percentage of approximately 150% of his original target bonus amount for the year. The
compensation committee then determined that the payments received by Messrs. Rodriguez and Kutcha
should be consistent with the general base salary percentages that were paid in bonuses to many of our vice
president level employees, so they awarded 2011 bonus payments to Messrs. Rodriguez and Kutcha that were
approximately 60% of their respective base salaries. Actual amounts paid during the first quarter of 2012 are
set forth in our Summary Compensation Table below.
No participant will be entitled to any payments under the Bonus Plan until the individual’s award is approved
by our compensation committee. We expect that our compensation committee will approve all awards to be
granted within the first fifteen business days after our outside auditors approve our year-end earnings release
for the applicable year. A participant should also by and large be employed on the date that the awards are
paid to employees generally in order to receive an award payment, although our compensation committee has
the discretion to award a pro-rata payment in the event of a participant’s death, disability, or retirement.
Long-Term Equity-Based Incentives
During the 2010 fiscal year, the named executive officers (other than Mr. Bonczek, who received his grant
during the 2011 calendar year) received units in NTI Management, which is a limited partner of Northern Tier
Investors, LP (“NTI LP”). See “Prospectus Summary—Organizational Structure” for a description of our
relationship to NTI LP. The incentive units were granted to the members of our then-current senior
management team on December 1, 2010 following the close of the Marathon Acquisition. The NTI Management
units granted were Class C units, which are designed as profits interests rather than capital interests. Class C
units are further divided into series, from Class C1 to Class C5 units, which correspond to Class C1 to Class
C5 units in NTI LP that NTI Management received from NTI LP. Profits interests in NTI LP have no value for tax
purposes on the date of grant, but instead are designed to gain value only after NTI LP has realized a certain
level of returns for the holders of other classes of NTI LP’s equity. Under the NTI LP partnership agreement,
distributions with respect to NTI LP units are made first to Class A common unit holders, until such holders
have received a full return of their capital contributions to NTI LP. Distributions are next made to Class A unit
holders, Class C1 unit holders and Class D unit holders in accordance with their sharing percentages, until
the Class C2 unit threshold is met. Once the Class C2 unit threshold is met, the holders of Class C2 units
become eligible to receive distributions alongside the Class A unit holders, the Class C1 unit holders and the
Class D unit holders. This process of adding an additional Class C level to the distribution chain continues
until Class C5 unit holders are included. Notwithstanding the preceding, once distributions to Class A unit
holders from NTI LP equal an aggregate sum of $3.5 million plus 200% of their capital contributions, then
distributions will be made solely to holders of Class D units until the Class D unit holders receive $3.5
million. Following the satisfaction of the distribution thresholds described in the preceding sentence, holders
of NTI Management units receive distributions from NTI Management that correspond to the distributions
made to NTI Management by NTI LP. All Class C units in NTI Management are subject to a five-year vesting
schedule, which will lapse in equal 20% installments on each anniversary of the grant date of the units. The
vesting schedule may be accelerated in certain situations, which is described in more detail within the
“Potential Payments Upon Termination or a Change in Control” section below.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
179
Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta each received a grant of Class C2, Class C3, Class C4 and Class C5 units in
NTI Management in December 2010 upon the closing of the Marathon Acquisition. Messrs. Murphy and
Mullins received grants of Class C1, Class C2 and Class C3 units in NTI Management in 2010. Messrs.
Rodriguez and Kuchta chose to reserve the grant of Class C1 units for other executive officers due to the fact
that the Class C1 units will receive a payout, if at all, at an earlier date than the remaining classes of units.
Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta agreed to receive the Class C4 and Class C5 units, which will pay out at a later
date, in order to show their commitment to our company and their intent to remain employed for a significant
period of time. Mr. Bonczek received grants of Class C1, Class C2 and Class C3 units in NTI Management on
March 14, 2011 in connection with his entry into employment with us. The actual number of units and the
value associated with a potential payment of Mr. Bonczek’s units is described in greater detail in the “Grants
of Plan-Based Awards for the 2011 Fiscal Year” table below.
We believe that overall business success creates meaningful value to both our unitholders and, through their
equity holdings, our executives. During the 2012 year, our board of directors determined that the Class C NTI
Management units were satisfying our goal of aligning executive and unitholder interests, and granted
Messrs. Bonczek and Mullins additional Class C NTI Management units. Dave Bonczek received 113, 906
Class C1 units, and 190,008 each of Class C2 and C3 units. Greg Mullins received 57,759 Class C1 units, and
96,320 each of Class C2 and C3 units. The NTI Management Class C units that were granted to our named
executive officers from 2010 to 2012 were intended to provide an immediate and significant alignment between
our executives and the success of our business. The information provided with respect to these NTI
Management Class C units is provided in order to comply with the disclosure rules of the SEC regarding
historical and current material compensation items, but we do not expect that additional grants of NTI
Management Class C units or other NTI Management units will comprise a part of our executive compensation
program following this offering. We intend to adopt a new equity-based incentive compensation plan during
2012 for our employees and non-employee directors. We intend to design the new equity-based incentive
compensation plan in a manner that will allow us to align the interests of our employees and directors with
those of our unitholders as well as present incentives to our employees and directors to provide superior
service to us. See “—2012 Long Term Incentive Plan” below for more details.
Severance and Change in Control Benefits
We maintained certain agreements with our named executive officers during the 2011 fiscal year that provided
for severance and/or change in control protections. We believe that severance protection provisions create
important retention tools for us, as post-termination payments allow employees to leave our employment with
value in the event of certain terminations of employment that were beyond their control. Post-termination
payments allow management to focus their attention and energy on making the best objective business
decisions that are in our interest without allowing personal considerations to cloud the decision-making
process. Further, we believe that change in control protections maximize unitholder value by encouraging the
named executive officers to review objectively any proposed transaction in determining whether such
proposal or termination is in the best interest of our unitholders, whether or not the executive will continue to
be employed. Executive officers at other companies in our industry and the general market against which we
compete for executive talent commonly have post-termination payments, and we have provided this benefit to
the named executive officers in order to remain competitive in attracting and retaining skilled professionals in
our industry.
A more detailed description of the severance and change in control provisions that we provide to our named
executive officers can be found in the “Potential Payments Upon Termination or a Change in Control” section
below.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Other Benefits
180
We provide our employees, including our named executive officers, with health and welfare benefits, as well
as certain retirement plans. We currently maintain a plan intended to qualify under section 401(k) of the Code,
where employees are allowed to contribute portions of their base compensation into a retirement account. We
provide a matching contribution in amounts up to 7.0% of the employees’ eligible compensation, and an
additional 2.0% non-elective annual contribution that will not vest until the end of a three-year period of
service. The amounts that we contributed to each named executive officer’s account for the 2011 year are
reflected in the Summary Compensation Table below.
We adopted a cash balance retirement plan for our employees in November 2011, which is a defined benefit
pension plan. Plan benefits are 5% of eligible annual compensation, plus a specified interest credit.
Participant account balances are subject to a three-year cliff vesting schedule. The first contribution to the
cash balance plan trust was made in December 2011, and we intend to make required contributions during or
before the third quarter in 2012. Named executive officer account balances at the end of 2011 are listed in the
Pension Benefits table.
We believe that our named executive officers should operate under substantially similar conditions as our
employees generally, thus we do not generally provide perquisites to our named executive officers.
Other Compensation Items
Unit Ownership Guidelines and Hedging Policies.    We do not currently have any unit ownership guidelines
or hedging policies in place at this time, although we expect that our compensation committee will consider
this issue in the near future.
Clawback Policies.    If required by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and/or by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, any incentive or equity-based award provided to one of our
employees shall be conditioned on repayment or forfeiture in accordance with applicable law, any company
policy, and any relevant provisions in the applicable award agreement.
2012 Long-Term Incentive Plan
In order to incentivize our management following the completion of this offering to continue to grow our
business, our general partner intends to adopt a new long-term incentive plan, the Northern Tier Energy LP
2012 Long Term Incentive Plan (the “2012 LTIP”), prior to the effective date of this public offering, for the
benefit of employees and directors of us, our general partner and each of the affiliates of us and our general
partner, who perform services for us. Each of the named executive officers will be eligible to participate in the
2012 LTIP. The 2012 LTIP will provide us with the flexibility to grant unit options, restricted units, unit awards
phantom units, unit appreciation rights, cash awards, distribution equivalent rights, substitute awards, and
other unit-based awards, or any combination of the foregoing. These awards are intended to align the
interests of plan participants (including the named executive officers) with those of our unitholders and to
give plan participants the opportunity to share in our long-term performance. At the time of this filing we have
not granted any awards under the 2012 LTIP or made any decisions about specific grants to our named
executive officers.
Units Reserved Under the Plan
The 2012 LTIP will initially limit the number of common units that may be delivered pursuant to vested
awards to          common units. Units cancelled, forfeited settled in cash, exercised or otherwise terminated or
expired without actual delivery of units (the grant of restricted units it not delivery under the 2012 LTIP) will be
available for delivery pursuant to other awards (including units not delivered in
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
181
connection with the exercise of options or unit appreciation rights). Units withheld to satisfy exercise prices
or tax withholding obligations will be considered to be units delivered under the 2012 LTIP. There is no
limitation on the number of awards under the 2012 LTIP that may be granted and paid in cash. The common
units delivered pursuant to such awards may be common units acquired in the open market or acquired from
any affiliate or other person, or any combination of the foregoing, as determined in the discretion of the
committee (as defined below).
Administration of the Plan
The 2012 LTIP will be administered by the board of directors of our general partner or an alternative
committee appointed by the board of directors of our general partner, which we refer to together as the
committee. The committee may also delegate its duties as appropriate. The general partner’s board of
directors or the committee may terminate or amend the 2012 LTIP or any part of the 2012 LTIP at any time with
respect to any common units for which a grant has not yet been made, including increasing the number of
common units that may be granted, subject to the requirements of the exchange upon which the units are
listed at that time or other applicable law. However, no change other than changes pursuant to a subdivision
or consolidation of units, a recapitalization, or a change in control or other “corporate event”, may be made
that would materially reduce the rights or benefits of a participant without the consent of the participant. The
2012 LTIP will expire upon the earlier of (i) its termination by the board of directors of our general partner,
(ii) the date common units are no longer available under the 2012 LTIP for grants, or (iii) the tenth anniversary
of the date the 2012 LTIP is adopted by the board of directors of our general partner.
Awards
In General.    The committee may make grants of unit options, restricted units, unit awards, phantom units,
unit appreciation rights, distribution equivalent rights, substitute awards, cash awards and other unit-based
awards, or any combination of the foregoing, which grants shall contain such terms as the committee shall
determine, including terms governing the service period and/or performance conditions pursuant to which
any such awards will vest and/or be settled, as applicable. The number of common units subject to awards
will be determined by the committee. When considering the type and number of awards to make under the
2012 LTIP, the committee will consider its general compensation policies and philosophies.
Unit Options.    Unit options are options to acquire common units at a specified price. The exercise price of
each option granted under the 2012 LTIP will be stated in the option agreement and may vary; provided,
however, that, the exercise price for an option must not be less than 100% of the fair market value per
common unit as of the date of grant of the option unless that option award is intended to otherwise comply
with the requirements of Section 409A of the Code. Options may be exercised in the manner and at such times
as the committee determines for each option, unless that option award is determined to be subject to
Section 409A of the Code, where the option award will be subject to any necessary timing restrictions
imposed by the Code or federal regulations. The committee will determine the methods and form of payment
for the exercise price of an option and the methods and forms in which common units will be delivered to a
participant.
Restricted Units.    A restricted unit is a common unit that vests over a period of time and during that time is
subject to forfeiture. The committee will be able to make grants of restricted units containing such terms as it
shall determine, including the period over which restricted units will vest, or whether the restricted unit will
entitle the holder to receive cash distribution rights during the vesting period for the award. A restricted unit
will also provide a participant with the right to receive distributions made with respect to the underlying
common units (a unit distribution right, or “UDR”), which will generally be subject to the same forfeiture and
other restrictions as the restricted unit award.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
182
If restricted, UDRs will be held, without interest, until the restricted unit vests or is forfeited, with the UDR
being paid or forfeited at the same time, as the case may be.
Unit Awards.    Unit awards are grants of common units that are not subject to a restricted period and are not
subject to an exercise price or settlement features. The committee may grant unit awards to any eligible
person in such amounts as the committee, in its sole discretion, may select.
Phantom Units.    A phantom unit entitles the grantee to receive a common unit upon or within the fifteen day
period following the phantom unit’s vesting date or, in the discretion of the committee, a cash payment
equivalent to the fair market value of a common unit calculated on the day the phantom units vest. The
committee will be able to make grants of phantom units containing such terms as it shall determine,
including the period over which phantom units vest.
Unit Appreciation Rights (“UAR”).    A UAR is the right to receive, in cash or in common units, as determined
by the committee, an amount equal to the excess of the fair market value of one common unit on the date of
exercise over the grant price of the UAR. The committee will be able to make grants of UARs and will
determine the time or times at which a UAR may be exercised in whole or in part. The exercise price of each
UAR granted under the 2012 LTIP will be stated in the UAR agreement and may vary; provided, however, that,
the exercise price must not be less than 100% of the fair market value per common unit as of the date of grant
of the UAR unless that UAR award is intended to otherwise comply with the requirements of Section 409A of
the Code.
Distribution Equivalent Rights (“DER”).    The committee will be able to grant DERs in tandem with awards
under the 2012 LTIP (other than an award of restricted units or a unit award). DERs entitle the participant to
receive cash equal to the amount of any cash distributions made by us during the period the DER is
outstanding. Payment of a DER issued in connection with another award may be subject to the same vesting
terms as the award to which it relates or different vesting terms, in the discretion of the committee.
Substitute Awards.    The 2012 LTIP will permit the grant of awards in substitution for similar awards held by
individuals who become employees or directors as a result of a merger, consolidation or acquisition by us,
an affiliate of another entity or the assets of another entity. Such substitute awards that are unit options or
UARs may have exercise prices less than 100% of the fair market value per common unit on the date of the
substitution if such substitution complies with Section 409A of the Code and its regulations, and other
applicable laws and exchange rules.
Cash Awards and Other Unit-Based Awards.    The 2012 LTIP will permit the grant of cash awards or other
unit-based awards, which are awards that may be based, in whole or in part, on the value or performance of a
common unit or are denominated or payable in common units. Upon settlement, the unit-based award may be
paid in common units, cash or a combination thereof, as provided in the award agreement.
Performance Awards.    The committee may condition the right to exercise or receive an award under the 2012
LTIP, or may increase or decrease the amount payable with respect to an award, based on the attainment of
one or more performance conditions deemed appropriate by the committee.
Other Provisions
Tax Withholding.    Unless other arrangements are made, the committee will be authorized to withhold from
any award, from any payment due under any award, or from any compensation or other amount owing to a
participant the amount (in cash, units, units that would otherwise be issued pursuant to such award, or other
property) of any applicable taxes payable with respect to the grant of an award,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
183
its settlement, its exercise, the lapse of restrictions applicable to an award or in connection with any payment
relating to an award or the transfer of an award and to take such other actions as may be necessary to satisfy
the withholding obligations with respect to an award.
Anti-Dilution Adjustments.    If any “equity restructuring” event occurs that could result in an additional
compensation expense under Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification
Topic 718 (“FASB ASC Topic 718”) if adjustments to awards with respect to such event were discretionary, the
committee will equitably adjust the number and type of units covered by each outstanding award and the
terms and conditions of such award to equitably reflect the restructuring event, and the committee will adjust
the number and type of units with respect to which future awards may be granted. With respect to a similar
event that would not result in a FASB ASC Topic 718 accounting charge if adjustment to awards were
discretionary, the committee shall have complete discretion to adjust awards in the manner it deems
appropriate. In the event the committee makes any adjustment in accordance with the foregoing provisions, a
corresponding and proportionate adjustment shall be made with respect to the maximum number of units
available under the 2012 LTIP and the kind of units or other securities available for grant under the 2012 LTIP.
Furthermore, in the case of (i) a subdivision or consolidation of the common units (by reclassification, split or
reverse split or otherwise), (ii) a recapitalization, reclassification or other change in our capital structure or
(iii) any other reorganization, merger, combination, exchange or other relevant change in capitalization of our
equity, then a corresponding and proportionate adjustment shall be made in accordance with the terms of the
2012 LTIP, as appropriate, with respect to the maximum number of units available under the 2012 LTIP, the
number of units that may be acquired with respect to an award, and, if applicable, the exercise price of an
award in order to prevent dilution or enlargement of awards as a result of such events.
Change of Control.    Upon a “change of control” (as defined in the 2012 LTIP and as summarized below), the
committee may, in its discretion, (i) remove any forfeiture restrictions applicable to an award, (ii) accelerate
the time of exercisability or vesting of an award, (iii) require awards to be surrendered in exchange for a cash
payment, (iv) cancel unvested awards without payment or (v) make adjustments to awards as the committee
deems appropriate to reflect the change of control. For purposes of the 2012 LTIP, a “change of control”
occurs (a) when any person or group, other than us, our general partner or an affiliate of either us or of our
general partner, becomes the beneficial owner of 50% or more of the voting power of the voting securities of
us or our general partner, (b) upon the approval of a plan of complete liquidation of us or our general partner,
(c) upon the sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of our general partner’s assets or our assets,
(d) when our current general partner or an affiliate of our current general partner ceases to be our general
partner, or (e) upon any other event described as a “change of control” in an award agreement with respect to
an award under the 2012 LTIP. Further, if an award granted under the 2012 LTIP constitutes a “deferral of
compensation” under Section 409A of the Code, a “change of control” will not be deemed to occur unless
that event also constitutes a “change in the ownership of a corporation”, a “change in the effective control of
a corporation”, or a “change in the ownership of a substantial portion of a corporation’s assets”, in each case
within the meaning of Section 1.409A-3(i)(5) of the Treasury Regulations promulgated under Section 409A of
the Code, as applied to non-corporate entities.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
184
Summary Compensation Table
The table below sets forth the annual compensation earned during the 2011 fiscal year (and for those
individuals that were also considered named executive officers during the 2010 year, the 2010 fiscal year) by
our “named executive officers.” When the year “2010” is used in the table below, the reference reflects only
amounts that were paid between the period of December 1, 2010 (the date that we commenced operations in
connection with the Marathon Acquisition) and December 31, 2010 (the “Short Year”).
Name and Principal Position
Mario Rodriguez
Chief Executive Officer
Neal Murphy(5)
Chief Financial Officer
Hank Kuchta
President and
Chief Operating Officer
David Bonczek(5)
Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer
Greg Mullins
President, St. Paul Park
Refining Company
Salary
($)(1)
Bonus
($)(2)
Year    
   
   2011     500,000     300,000     
   2010      41,667
Option
Awards
($)(3)
Change in
Pension
Value
—      12,250    
—
—     2,307,504
2011     249,038     
   2010      29,167
—     
—     
—      731,722
—    
—
2011     450,000     270,000     
 2010
37,500
—
—      12,250    
—
1,887,958
All Other
Compensation(4)
25,846
Total ($)
838,096  
 2,349,171
89,250
338,288  
  760,889
21,749
753,999  
 1,925,458
2011     192,211     150,000      121,488      6,312
7,572
477,583
2011     275,000     290,000
—      11,421
13,327
589,748
(1)
(2)
(3)
Amounts in this column for the 2010 year reflect the salary earned by each of the executive officers during the
Short Year. Annual base salaries for the 2010 year were $500,000, $350,000 and $450,000 for Messrs.
Rodriguez, Murphy and Kuchta respectively.
The amounts reported in this column for the 2011 year reflect the amount of the 2011 Bonus Plan awards that
we paid out during the first quarter of 2012. In addition to the bonuses paid pursuant to the 2011 Bonus Plan,
Mr. Mullins received a one-time sign-on bonus of $25,000.
Despite the fact that profits interests such as the NTI Management Class C units do not require the payment of
an exercise price, we believe that these awards are economically similar to stock options due to the fact that
they have no value for tax purposes at grant and will obtain value only as the price of the underlying security
rises, and as such, are required to be reported in this title under the “Option Awards” column. No “options” in the
traditional sense have been granted to our named executive officers during the Short Year or the 2011 fiscal
year. Amounts included reflect the grant date fair value of the NTI Management Class C units granted to the
named executive officers on December 1, 2010, or with respect to Mr. Bonczek, March 14, 2011, computed in
accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718. As each 2010 NTI Management Class C unit was granted during the
Short Year, the amount shown in the table above for the 2010 year is the full grant date fair value rather than
any proportionate share of the awards. The assumptions used to calculate these values for 2010 and 2011
grants were as follows: (a) the expected term was 6.5 years; (b) current price of the underlying unit was $1.00;
(c) the expected volatility was 40.6%; (d) the expected dividend yield was 0.0%; and (e) the risk-free investment
rate was 2.7%.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
185
(4) Other than with respect to Mr. Murphy, amounts included here reflect the contribution that each named
executive officer received from us in the form of matching contributions into their 401(k) plan accounts for the
2011 year. In addition, we paid a life insurance premium on behalf of Mr. Rodriguez to Banner Life in the amount
of $9,346, and on behalf of Mr. Kuchta to MetLife in the amount of $4,599. The amount disclosed for
Mr. Murphy consists of the first installment of his separation payment that was paid to him on November 22,
2011 under a separation agreement that he entered in to with us following his resignation (described in greater
detail below).
(5) Mr. Murphy is no longer an employee, and has been succeeded by Mr. Dave Bonczek. Mr. Bonczek was
previously our Chief Accounting Officer before he became our Chief Financial Officer on August 22, 2011.
Amounts reflected in Mr. Bonczek’s “salary” column reflect payments with respect to his previous salary
($235,000) from February 7, 2011 to August 29, 2011, and payments with respect to his current salary
($270,000) from August 29, 2011 to December 31, 2011.
Grants of Plan-Based Awards for the 2011 Fiscal Year
Name
David Bonczek
Class C1 Units
Class C2 Units
Class C3 Units
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Options
(#)(1)
60,000    
  145,000    
  145,000
Grant Date     
  
 3/14/2011    
 3/14/2011    
 3/14/2011
Exercise or
Base Price
of Option
Awards
($/Sh)
N/A    
N/A    
N/A
Grant Date
Fair Value of
Stock and
Option
Awards
($)(2)
26,897  
52,528  
42,063
(1)
(2)
As explained in Footnote 3 to the Summary Compensation Table above, awards reflected in this column
represent the number of NTI Management Class C units granted to Mr. Bonczek (the only named executive
officer that received such awards during the 2011 fiscal year), rather than actual “option” awards.
Amounts reflected in this column reflect the grant date fair value of the NTI Management Class C units in
accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718.
Narrative Description to the Summary Compensation Table and the Grant of Plan-Based Awards Table for the
2011 Fiscal Year
We entered into formal employment agreements with Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta on December 1, 2010.
Both employment agreements have a term of employment of one year, with automatic one-year renewals,
absent notice by either the executive or us of the intention not to renew the agreement. Mr. Rodriguez has an
annual base salary of $500,000, Mr. Kuchta has an annual base salary of $450,000, and each executive has an
annual cash incentive bonus target of 100% of their respective annual base salary. The employment
agreements for each executive set forth their December grant of NTI Management Class C units, described in
greater detail above. Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta are eligible to participate in our employee benefit
programs, plans and practices in accordance with the terms and conditions of the individual plans, and we
provide a life insurance benefit to each of the executives in an amount that will equal no less than 200% of
their respective base salaries. The employment agreements contain severance protections, standard
confidentiality, non-solicitation and non-compete provisions, each of which is described in greater detail in
the “Potential Payments Upon a Termination or Change in Control” section below.
We sent an offer letter to Mr. Murphy on November 22, 2010 that generally set forth the terms and conditions
that governed his employment relationship with us, although his offer letter estimated that December 1, 2010
would be the effective employment date applicable to him. Mr. Murphy had an
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
186
annual base salary of $350,000. The offer letter set forth the number of NTI Management Class C units that
Mr. Murphy received on December 1, 2010, although the material terms and conditions of the NTI Management
Class C units are set forth in individual award agreements and the NTI Management partnership agreement.
The offer letter stated that Mr. Murphy would be eligible to participate in all applicable employee benefit plans
that we maintain, subject to the terms and conditions of the individual plans. Mr. Murphy was also eligible to
receive certain relocation benefits in connection with his move to Ridgefield, Connecticut, up to $100,000,
which included temporary living assistance and moving costs that occurred during the first twenty-four
months of his employment with us. Upon Mr. Murphy’s resignation in August, we entered into a new
separation agreement with him that governs his severance arrangements; please see the “Potential Payments
Upon Termination or a Change in Control” section below for more details.
The offer letters provided to Messrs. Bonczek and Mullins contained substantially similar provisions
regarding compensation and benefits to the offer letter for Mr. Murphy described above. Mr. Bonczek’s offer
letter originally provided him with a salary of $235,000, which was increased to $270,000 by our board of
directors in August of 2011 in order to reflect his new position as Chief Financial Officer. The potential
severance benefits for Mr. Bonczek are further described in the “Potential Payments Upon a Termination or
Change in Control” below. Mr. Mullins offer letter was provided to him on December 1, 2010, and set forth his
base salary of $275,000.
Each of the named executive officers hold NTI Management Class C units that are subject to a five year, equal
installment vesting schedule. The potential acceleration or forfeiture events relating to these units are
described in greater detail within the “Potential Payments Upon a Termination or Change in Control” section
below.
Percentage of Salary and Bonus in Comparison to Total Compensation
Name
Mario Rodriguez
Hank Kuchta
David Bonczek
Greg Mullins(*)
Salary
Percentage
of Total
Compensation
95% 
95% 
72% 
92%
(*) Mr. Mullins’ bonus taken into account for this calculation did not include his one-time signing bonus that was
paid during the 2011 year.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
187
Outstanding Equity Awards at 2011 Fiscal Year-End
The following table provides information on the current NTI Management Class C units held by the named
executive officers. This table includes unvested NTI Management Class C units. The vesting dates for each
award are shown in the accompanying footnotes.
Name
Mario Rodriguez
Class C2 Units(2)
Class C3 Units(2)
Class C4 Units(2)
Class C5 Units(2)
Hank Kuchta
Class C2 Units(2)
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Unexercisable    
  
  1,210,000    
  1,210,000    
  2,145,000    
  2,145,000
Option Award(1)
Option Exercise
Price ($)
N/A    
N/A    
N/A    
N/A
Option
Expiration Date
N/A  
N/A  
N/A  
N/A
Class C2 Units(2)
Class C3 Units(2)
Class C4 Units(2)
Class C5 Units(2)
David Bonczek
Class C1 Units(3)
Class C2 Units(3)
Class C3 Units(3)
Greg Mullins
Class C1 Units(2)
Class C2 Units(2)
Class C3 Units(2)
990,000    
990,000    
  1,755,000    
  1,755,000
60,000    
145,000    
145,000
160,000    
240,000    
240,000
N/A    
N/A    
N/A    
N/A
N/A    
N/A    
N/A
N/A    
N/A    
N/A
N/A  
N/A
N/A  
N/A
N/A  
N/A  
N/A
N/A  
N/A  
N/A
As explained above, the applicable equity awards that are disclosed in these tables are NTI Management Class
C units rather than traditional “option” awards.
Each unexercisable unit reflected in this row has the same vesting schedule, which will vest in equal
installments on December 1, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
Each unexercisable unit reflected in this row has the same vesting schedule, which will vest in equal
installments on March 14, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016.
Option Exercises and Stock Vested in the 2011 Fiscal Year
(1)
(2)
(3)
Name
Mario Rodriguez
Hank Kuchta
Greg Mullins
Number of Units
Acquired on
Exercise (#)(1)     
1,677,550    
 
877,500    
 
 
160,000
Option Awards(1)
Value Realized
on Exercise
($)(2)
0  
0  
0
(1)
As explained above, the applicable equity awards that are disclosed in these tables are NTI Management Class
C units rather than traditional “option” awards. The numbers shown here reflect only the number of NTI
Management units that became vested during the 2011 year. The NTI Management Units were not designed
with exercise features, therefore there was no settlement associated with the vesting of the units.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
188
(2)
Amounts shown in this column reflect our best estimate of the value of the NTI Management Class C units that
each named executive officer received upon the vesting of the awards.
Each of the named executive officers is eligible to participate in the cash balance pension plan that we
adopted during November 2011.
Pension Benefits
Name
Mario Rodriguez
Neal Murphy
Hank Kuchta
David Bonczek
Plan Name
Northern Tier Energy Retirement Plan   
Northern Tier Energy Retirement Plan   
Northern Tier Energy Retirement Plan
Number of
Years
Credited
Service (#)    
1.08    
 
 
.72    
1.08
Present
Value of
Accumulated
Benefit ($)
12,250    
0    
12,250
Payments
During 2011
Fiscal Year ($) 
—  
 
 
—  
—
David Bonczek
Greg Mullins
Northern Tier Energy Retirement Plan   
Northern Tier Energy Retirement Plan
.80    
1.08
6,447    
11,635
—  
—
The Northern Tier Energy Retirement Plan (the “Plan”) is a funded, tax-qualified, noncontributory defined
benefit pension plan that covers certain employees. Eligible employees under the Plan include all employees
with benefit classifications of refinery, corporate or terminal who have attained age 21 and completed three
months of service. Excluded employees include all those with other benefit classification codes, temporary
employees, independent contractors and collectively bargained employees under an agreement that does not
provide for participation in the Plan. The Plan is designed as a cash balance plan wherein a participant’s
account is credited each year with a pay credit and an interest credit such that increases and decreases in the
value of the Plan’s investments do not directly affect the benefit amounts promised to participants.
As of the end of the Plan year, the Plan provides for a pay credit equal to 5% of Compensation (as defined
below) for each participant who has completed an hour of service during the Plan year. If a participant’s
employment is terminated during the Plan year, he is entitled to the pay credit as of the date of termination.
Compensation under the Plan includes wages under Section 3401(a) of the Code excluding severance pay,
sign-on bonuses, or any signing bonuses paid to collectively bargained employees.
In addition, each calendar month, the Plan also provides for an interest credit equal to the participant’s
account balance times the one plus the applicable interest rate to the 1/12th power minus 1. Participants are
not entitled to interest credits beginning on or after the annuity starting date unless the benefit is paid solely
to satisfy Section 401(a)(9) of the Code or during the Plan year of termination. The applicable interest rate is
the average annual yield on 30-year U.S. Treasury bonds for September of the immediately preceding calendar
year. For 2012, the interest crediting rate will be 3.65%.
A participant is 100% vested in his or her account upon completion of three years of vesting service (includes
service with Marathon Oil Company based on the most recent date of hire). If a participant terminates for a
reason other than death or disability before completion of this time period, he or she forfeits all benefits
under the Plan. If a participant attains normal retirement age, dies or becomes disabled, then he or she is
entitled to 100% vesting. A participant attains normal retirement age at age 65. A participant is deemed to be
disabled if he or she qualifies for benefits under the long-term disability plan or qualifies for Federal Social
Security disability benefits.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
189
The amount of benefit payable with respect to a participant will be his or her vested account balance if
payable in lump sum or the actuarially equivalent of such balance if paid in another form; however, where a
participant terminated after attaining his or her normal retirement date, the benefit is the greater of the vested
account balance or the actuarial increase in such balance as of the end of the preceding Plan year (or, of later,
his or her normal retirement date). The normal form of distribution is a qualified joint and survivor annuity if
the participant is married on his or her annuity starting date or a single life annuity if he or she is unmarried
on that date. Optional forms of distribution include as follows: (1) lump sum, (2) single life annuity,
(3) qualified joint and survivor annuity, or (4) the optional joint and survivor annuity.
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation
We do not currently maintain a plan or arrangement that provides for nonqualified deferred compensation
benefits.
Potential Payments Upon Termination or a Change in Control
We provide our named executive officers with certain severance and change in control benefits. The rationale
for providing these benefits to our executives is described in detail in the CD&A above.
Employment Agreements and Offer Letters
On termination of Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta employment by us or the executive due to a notice of non-
renewal, the executive will receive any earned but yet unpaid base salary, any earned but yet unpaid bonus for
the year that precedes the year in which his termination occurs, reimbursement of any business expenses
incurred and all employee benefits he may be entitled to receive under our employee benefit plans (the
“Accrued Rights”), and a pro-rata portion of any annual performance bonus that the executive would have
been entitled to receive for the year in which the termination occurs (the “Pro-rata Bonus”). If we deliver the
notice of non-renewal to the executive, he will also receive continued base salary payments for a period of
twenty-four months.
In the event that Messrs. Rodriguez or Kuchta is terminated by us without Cause or by the executive with
Good Reason (each term defined below), the executive will be entitled to the Accrued Rights, his Pro-rata
Bonus, his annual base salary for the twenty-four month period following the date of his termination of
employment and certain health care continuation benefits for the eighteen-month period following the date of
termination of his employment (the “Medical Benefits”). If the executive incurs Disability (as defined below)
during their employment with us, he will receive the Accrued Rights, the Medical Benefits, any amounts that
may be payable to them pursuant to any long-term disability plan that we may maintain at the time of their
termination from service due to that Disability (that will be paid through insurance policies rather than by the
company directly), and continued payments of their base salary for the period of time, if any, that our short-
term disability policy covering the executive is in effect before the long-term disability policy becomes
effective. A termination of employment for Cause or due to death will result solely in the payment of any
Accrued Rights. “Cause” is generally defined for Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta as (1) the executive’s failure
to comply with any reasonable instruction from our board of directors; (2) the executive’s misconduct,
resulting from willful or grossly negligent conduct, which is materially injurious to us or our affiliates; (3) the
executive’s intentional or knowingly fraudulent act against us, our customers, clients or employees; (4) the
executive’s material breach of his employment agreement; or (5) the executive being charged with, convicted
of, or pleading guilty or no contest to a felony or a crime involving fraud, dishonesty or moral turpitude.
“Good Reason” is defined in the employment agreements as: (1) our failure to continue the executive in his
current position, or to reelect or reappoint the executive to our board of directors,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
190
(2) our material breach of the employment agreement, (3) a substantial adverse reduction in the executive’s
duties or responsibilities, or (4) our relocation of our business offices more than twenty miles away from its
present location. Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta may be considered to have incurred a “Disability” if they
meet the definition for such term in our long-term disability plan in effect at such time.
Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta will only receive the severance benefits described above upon the executive’s
execution of a general release in our favor, and subject to his continued compliance with the restrictive
covenants in his employment agreement. Each of the executives will be subject to restrictive covenants
following his termination of employment, including non-compete, non-disclosure of confidential information
and non-solicitation provisions, in the case of the non-compete provision, for a one year period and in the
case of the non-solicitation provision, for a two year period.
If an executive is a “specified employee” under Section 409A of the Code at the time of his termination of
employment, there are certain severance payments that could create an excise tax for the executive officer if
the timing of that payment occurs immediately following his termination of employment. In the event that
Messrs. Rodriguez or Kuchta is deemed to be a “specified employee” and the severance or any portion of the
severance payment due to them would create excise taxes under Section 409A of the Code, their employment
agreements state that we will defer the payment of that amount until the date that is six months following the
executive’s termination of employment.
The offer letter we provided to Mr. Bonczek states that if his employment is terminated in connection with a
change in control, he will receive severance in an amount equal to six (6) months of his then-current annual
base salary, and he would become immediately vested in any outstanding equity awards held at the time of
the termination, if any (other than the NTI Management Class C units). In the event that Mr. Bonczek’s
employment is terminated for any other reason (other than for Cause), or resigns for Good Reason (each term
defined as follows), he would receive severance in the amount of six (6) months of his then-current annual
base salary. The offer letter defines “Cause” as Mr. Bonczek’s willful and continuous failure to substantially
perform his duties (other than in connection with a physical or mental incapacity), his gross misconduct or
gross negligence, or his conviction of, or entrance of a plea of, guilty or nolo contendere to a felony. A “Good
Reason” termination means: (1) a material diminution of Mr. Bonczek’s position, duties or responsibilities, in
the title or office that he holds, or our failure to see him reelected to that position; (2) a reduction in his base
salary or target incentive opportunity; (3) a material reduction in his employee benefits; (4) without his express
consent, our relocation of the place at which he provides services to us by more than 40 miles from
Ridgefield, Connecticut; or (5) a material breach of the provisions of the his offer letter.
Mr. Mullins’ offer letter did not contain severance or change in control provisions or protections during the
2011 year.
Mr. Murphy resigned his employment with us on August 22, 2011. We entered into a Separation Agreement
and Release of Claims agreement (the “Separation Agreement”) with Mr. Murphy on November 2, 2011 that
provided Mr. Murphy with a cash separation payment in the amount of $357,000, provided that he continues to
comply with certain confidentiality clauses regarding our business or propriety information. The separation
payment will be divided into four separate and equal payments, the first, second and third of which occurred
on November 22, 2011, February 22, 2012 and May 22, 2012, respectively. The remaining installment shall be
paid on August 22, 2012. The severance payment represents the full and final settlement of any amounts that
may be due to Mr. Murphy in relation to his employment with us.
During the 2012 year our board of directors reviewed the offer letters that we provided to Messrs. Bonczek and
Mullins upon the beginning of their employment, and made certain modifications to the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
191
severance benefits that were contained within Mr. Bonczek’s letter, as well as added severance benefits to Mr.
Mullins’ letter. Both Messrs. Bonczek and Mullins will receive a severance payment equal to one (1) year of
their respective then-current annual base salaries, and the acceleration of vesting for any outstanding equity
awards, in the event that the executive is terminated in connection with a change in control. In the event that
the executive’s employment is terminated for any other reason (other than for Cause), or he resigns for Good
Reason, he would receive a severance payment equal to one (1) year of his then-current annual base salary.
These benefits were not in effect as of December 31, 2011, thus the numbers in the table below reflect the
amounts that each executive would have been entitled to receive as of December 31, 2011 under their original
offer letters.
NTI Management Class C Unit Agreements
Class C unit agreements and the NTI Management partnership agreement set forth the treatment of the NTI
Management Class C units upon a termination of employment or a change in control.
The normal five-year NTI Management Class C unit vesting schedule will be accelerated upon the occurrence
of an MoM Event (defined below) prior to the termination of an executive’s employment by us, NTI LP or any
of our subsidiaries or the subsidiaries of NTI LP. Full acceleration would also occur in the event that the
holder is terminated without Cause or terminates for Good Reason (each term as defined below) in the two-
year period following a Change in Control (as defined below). The NTI Management Class C units would also
receive partial accelerated vesting upon the holder’s death or Disability (as defined below), as the holder
would be credited with one additional year of service. All other terminations of employment would result in
forfeiture of unvested units. Once a NTI Management Class C unit becomes vested, it will remain outstanding
unless and until it is repurchased by NTI Management in accordance with the procedures set forth in the NTI
Management partnership agreement. NTI Management’s partnership agreement generally states that NTI
Management will have the right, but not the obligation, to repurchase the Class C units upon a termination of
the holder’s employment for any reason. Any such repurchase would use the fair market value of the Class C
unit on the date that NTI Management exercises its right to repurchase that unit, except in the case of a
termination for Cause or in the event that the holder joins a competitor within a twelve-month period, in which
case the purchase price would be the lower of the fair market value or any purchase or strike price assigned
to the unit. “Fair market value” is determined by the general partner of NTI Management in good faith based
upon the liquidation value of the Class C units at the time of repurchase.
The NTI Management partnership agreement defines an “MoM Event” as the distribution of an amount that,
when distributed pursuant to the normal distribution process set forth in the NTI LP partnership agreement
(described above in the CD&A), results in the holders of the Class A common units receiving total
distributions in an amount equal to 200% of their capital contributions. We do not expect that this offering will
trigger an MoM Event for the NTI Management Class C units. The term “Cause” is defined in the NTI
Management partnership agreement in substantially the same terms as that found in Messrs. Rodriguez and
Kuchta’s employment agreements described above. A “Good Reason” termination will generally occur if there
is a material reduction to the executive’s base salary, authority, duties or responsibilities, a material change
to the executive’s primary work location, or we take any other action that constitutes a material breach of our
employment relationship with that executive. A “Change in Control” will be deemed to occur upon (1) a
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of us, Northern Tier Holdings or NTI LP; (2) a transfer by NTI LP or its
subsidiaries of all or substantially all of the consolidated assets of NTI LP and its subsidiaries; or (3) a
business combination or reorganization of NTI LP or its subsidiaries with any other person where more than
fifty percent of the combined voting power of the surviving entity’s stock outstanding prior to the transaction
is not owned, directly or indirectly, by NTI LP.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
192
The table below shows our best estimate of the amount of payments and benefits that each of the named
executive officers would receive upon a termination of employment or a change in control if that event had
occurred on December 31, 2011. Amounts payable upon any event will not be determinable until the actual
occurrence of any particular event. Estimates below do not include the value of any Accrued Rights, vacation,
sick or holiday pay, as all such amounts have been assumed to be paid current at the time of the event in
question.
Executive
Mario Rodriguez
Base Salary and
Bonus(1)
Continued
Medical(2)
Accelerated
Equity(3)
Total
Hank Kuchta
Base Salary and
Bonus(1)
Continued
Medical(2)
Accelerated
Equity(3)
Total
David Bonczek
Base Salary(4)
Accelerated
Termination of
Employment
due to Our
Non-Renewal of
Employment
Agreement ($)
Termination of
Employment
for Cause ($)
Termination of
Employment
without Cause
or for Good
Reason ($)
Termination of
Employment
for Disability
($)(5)
Termination of
employment
without Cause
or Good
Reason within
a Two Year
Period of a
Change in
Control (7)($)
MoM
Event ($)
Termination of
Employment
for Death
($)(6)
1,300,000
N/A
N/A   
1,300,000
1,170,000
N/A
N/A   
1,170,000
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1,300,000
15,716
1,315,716
1,170,000
0
1,170,000
135,000
250,000
15,716
265,716
225,000
0
225,000
135,000
1,300,000
N/A
1,300,000
900,000
N/A
900,000
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1,300,000
15,716
1,315,716
1,170,000
0
1,170,000
135,000
N/A
Accelerated
Equity(3)
Total
Greg Mullins
Base Salary
Accelerated
Equity(3)
Total
N/A
N/A
N/A   
0
0
N/A
0
135,000
N/A
0
135,000
137,500
137,500
0
N/A
0
135,000
N/A
0
N/A
0
(1) Amounts in this row reflect a continuation of the executive’s base salary for a period of twenty-four months, assuming that the executive has
signed a proper release form in our favor. While Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta would receive a Pro-Rata Bonus in the event of a termination of
employment during the year, a termination occurring on December 31, 2011 would have resulted in a payment equal to the full amount of the
bonus that they received for the 2011 year ($300,000 and $270,000 respectively).
(2) Continued medical payments were calculated for Mr. Rodriguez by multiplying our cost for his medical benefits as of December 31, 2011. Our
costs for Mr. Rodriguez and his family are currently $604.45 per two-week pay period. Mr. Kuchta would not have been eligible to receive any
continued medical benefits from us as of December 31, 2011, as he was still being covered by a previous employer’s medical plans. Our
obligation to cover him and his family may change in future years.
(3) Amounts reflect the accelerated value of NTI Management Class C units that would have accelerated on December 31, 2012 based upon the
assumed initial public offering price of $ per share (the mid-point of the estimated price range set forth on the cover page of this prospectus,
and our best estimate of the value of the NTI Management Class C units at this time).
(4) Amounts in this row reflect a payment equal to six months of Mr. Bonczek’s salary as of December 31, 2011.
(5) Our company’s long-term disability benefit plan (“LTD Plan”) will provide benefits to employees following a 180 day period of short-term disability.
The LTD Plan will provide up to 60% of base pay up to a maximum of $20,000 per month, which will not be paid by us but by an insurance
company. Amounts shown here reflect only the continuation of base salary payments that we will provide to the executives during their 180
days of short term disability.
(6) While we would not provide any further base salary or bonus amounts to the estates of Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta upon their termination of
employment due to a death, their estates would receive the payout of the life insurance policy that we maintain on behalf of each of the
executives. We pay the premiums on these policies, but the payment of the policy proceeds to the executive’s estate would come directly from
the insurance company rather than us. We have assumed that the policy is worth exactly two times the amount of each executive’s annual base
salary as of December 31, 2011.
(7) Amounts reflected in the “Base Salary and Bonus” row, as well as the “Continued Medical” row, are the same amounts as those reflected in the
“Termination of Employment without Cause or for Good Reason” column, as these amounts will be paid upon these termination events with or
without change in control under their employment agreements; however, amounts would only be paid once.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
193
Director Compensation
During the 2011 fiscal year each of our non-employee directors received a pro-rata portion of a $60,000 annual
cash retainer. The annual cash retainer was paid in quarterly installments for each period that the non-
employee director provided services to us. Each non-employee director also received a grant of Class B
profits interest awards in NTI LP, which were designed with a vesting schedule that will lapse in equal
installments on the first and second anniversaries of the grant date.
We have adopted a director compensation program that will generally cover each of our non-employee
directors during the 2012 fiscal year. During each period that such a director serves on our board of directors,
he or she will receive an annual cash retainer fee of $60,000 which will be paid in quarterly installments. Each
non-employee director will also receive an annual award of equity-based awards under the 2012 LTIP.
Directors will also be reimbursed for certain reasonable expenses in connection with their services to us. We
have not determined or set any additional fees for participation on committees at this time. Dan F. Smith, as
chairman of our Board, will receive an annual cash retainer of $100,000, effective as of May 9, 2012. Also on
May 9, 2012 Mr. Smith received a one-time grant of 300,000 Class B profits interest awards in NTI LP.
Name
Dan F. Smith
Thomas Hofmann
Scott D. Josey
Fees Earned
or Paid in
Cash ($)(1)     
45,000    
45,000    
30,000
Option
Awards
($)(2)
72,668    
 72,668    
 72,668
Total ($)  
 117,668  
 117,668  
 102,668
(1)
(2)
Amounts in this row reflect the actual amount received by each director during the 2011 year, which consists of
three retainer fee installments for Messrs. Smith and Hofmann, and two retainer fee installments for Mr. Josey.
Each of the directors received their grant of Class B profits interests in NTI LP on May 27, 2011. Despite the
fact that profits interests such as the Class B profits interest awards in NTI LP do not require the payment of an
exercise price, we believe that these awards are economically similar to stock options due to the fact that they
have no value for tax purposes at grant and will obtain value only as the price of the underlying security rises,
and as such, are required to be reported in this title under the “Option Awards” column. Please note that no
“options” in the traditional sense have been granted to our directors during 2011 fiscal year. Amounts included
reflect the grant date fair value of the units computed in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718. The
assumptions used to calculate these values for were as follows: (a) the expected term was 5.8 years;
(b) current price of the underlying unit was $1.99; (c) the expected volatility was 49.6%; (d) the expected
dividend yield was 0.0%; and (e) the risk-free investment rate was 2.5%. The number of outstanding Class B
profits interest awards in NTI LP held as of December 31, 2011 are as follows: Mr. Smith, 75,000; Mr. Hofmann,
75,000; and Mr. Josey, 75,000.
Risk Assessment
Our board of directors has reviewed our compensation policies as generally applicable to our employees and
believes that our policies do not encourage excessive and unnecessary risk-taking, and that the level of risk
that they do encourage is not reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on us. Our board of directors
has reviewed and discussed the design features, characteristics, and performance metrics utilized at our
company and our approval mechanisms of total compensation for all employees, including salaries, incentive
plans, and equity-based compensation awards, to determine whether any of these policies or programs could
create risks that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on us.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
194
Our compensation philosophy and culture support the use of base salary, performance-based compensation,
and retirement plans that are generally uniform in design and operation throughout our organization and with
all levels of employees. These compensation policies and practices are centrally designed and administered.
In addition, the following specific factors, in particular, reduce the likelihood of excessive risk-taking:
Ÿ  Our overall compensation levels are competitive with the market.
Ÿ  Our compensation mix is balanced among (i) fixed components like salary and benefits, and (ii) annual and
long-term incentives that will only reward our executives upon our overall financial performance, business unit
financial performance, operational measures and individual performance.
Ÿ  The compensation committee has discretion to reduce annual or performance-based awards when it
determines that such adjustments would be appropriate based on our interests and the interests of our
unitholders.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
195
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS
After this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own an aggregate             of common units and              PIK
units, representing approximately             % of the total outstanding units (approximately             % if the
underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional common units in full). Our general partner will be
indirectly owned by ACON Refining, TPG Refining and certain members of our management team.
The terms of the transactions and agreements disclosed in this section were determined by and among
affiliated entities and, consequently, are not the result of arm’s length negotiations. These terms are not
necessarily as favorable to us as the terms that could have been obtained from unaffiliated third parties.
Distributions and Payments to Our General Partner and its Affiliates
The following table summarizes the distributions and payments made or to be made by us to our general
partner and its affiliates in connection with the formation, ongoing operation and any liquidation of Northern
Tier Energy LP.
Formation Stage
The consideration received by our
general partner and its affiliates in
connection with the contribution of
Northern Tier Energy LLC by Northern
Tier Holdings to Northern Tier Energy
LP
•    The non-economic general partner interest to be issued to our general
partner;
•                common units to be issued to Northern Tier Holdings (assuming
the underwriters do not exercise their option to purchase additional common
units);
•             PIK units to be issued to Northern Tier Holdings;
•    $         million of net proceeds from this offering. Any net proceeds
received from the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional
common units will be distributed to Northern Tier Holdings. See “Use of
Proceeds;” and
•    A success fee in the aggregate amount of $7.5 million. See “—
Agreements with Affiliates of Our Central Partner—Management Services
Agreement.”
We expect to make distributions each quarter to our unitholders, including
Northern Tier Holdings. Distributions on our units will be in cash, but during
the PIK period, the board of directors of our general partner will make
distributions on the PIK units in the form of additional PIK units. See “How
We Make Distributions.”
Neither our general partner nor its affiliates will receive any management fee
in connection with the management of our business, but we will reimburse
our general partner and its affiliates for all expenses they incur and
payments they make on our behalf. Our partnership agreement provides that
our general partner will determine in good faith the expenses that are
allocable to us.
Upon our liquidation, the partners, including our general partner, will be
entitled to receive liquidating distributions.
196
Operational Stage
Distributions to affiliates of our
general partner
Payments to our general partner and
its affiliates
Liquidation Stage
Liquidation
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Agreements with Affiliates of Our General Partner
In connection with our formation, we will enter into several agreements with affiliates of our general partner
that govern the business relations among us, our general partner and such affiliates. In connection with the
transactions that we will enter into to effect this offering, we intend to enter into new agreements with affiliates
of our general partner. The agreements being amended include our partnership agreement, the terms of which
are more fully described under “The Partnership Agreement” and elsewhere in this prospectus.
Transaction Agreement
In connection with the IPO Transactions, we intend to enter into a contribution, conveyance and assumption
agreement with various affiliates of our general partner in order to facilitate the consummation of the IPO
Transactions. Pursuant to this agreement, (1) Northern Tier Holdings and our general partner will execute an
amended and restated partnership agreement; (2) Northern Tier Holdings and our general partner will
contribute all of the membership interests in Northern Tier Energy LLC to us; and (3) we will issue common
units and PIK units and distribute a portion of the net proceeds from this offering to Northern Tier Holdings.
Registration Rights Agreement
In connection with this offering, we will enter into an amended and restated registration rights agreement with
Northern Tier Investors, LLC, Northern Tier Holdings, ACON Refining, TPG Refining, NTR Partners LLC, NTR
Partners II LLC and NTI Management. Under the registration rights agreement, Northern Tier Holdings, ACON
Refining and TPG Refining can cause, and after ACON Refining and TPG Refining and their transferees no
longer hold registrable securities, NTR Partners LLC and NTR Partners II LLC can cause, Northern Tier Energy
LP to register their common units and PIK units under the Securities Act and to maintain a shelf registration
statement effective with respect to such units. In addition, under the agreement, Northern Tier Holdings,
ACON Refining, TPG Refining, NTR Partners LLC, NTR Partners II LLC and NTI Management are entitled to
participate in certain other registration statements and offerings conducted on behalf of Northern Tier Energy
LP or third parties. See “Common Units Eligible for Future Sale”. We have no current intentions to register
the PIK units for resale; however, we may be required to do so under the registration rights agreement
described above.
Management Services Agreement
In 2010, Northern Tier Energy LLC entered into a management services agreement with ACON Management
and TPG Management pursuant to which they provided Northern Tier Energy LLC with ongoing management,
advisory and consulting services, which agreement was amended and restated in January 2012. In connection
with the entry into the management services agreement, ACON Management and TPG Management received a
one-time aggregate transaction fee of $12.5 million, as well as reimbursements of out-of-pocket expenses
incurred by them in connection with the Marathon Acquisition. Pursuant to the amended and restated
management services agreement, ACON Management and TPG Management also received quarterly
management fees equal to 1% of our “Adjusted EBITDA” (as defined in the agreement) for the previous
quarter (subject to a minimum quarterly fee of $500,000), as well as reimbursements for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by them in connection with providing such management services. ACON Management and
TPG Management were also entitled to specified success fees in connection with advice they provided in
relation with certain corporate transactions. ACON Management and TPG Management will receive a success
fee in the aggregate amount of $7.5 million upon the closing of this offering. This management services
agreement will terminate in connection with the closing of this offering.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
197
Historical Transactions
ACON Refining and TPG Refining are equal owners of 97.5% of the partnership interests in Northern Tier
Investors LP. An entity owned by certain members of our management team holds the remaining 2.5%
partnership interests in Northern Tier Investors LP. ACON Refining and TPG Refining made capital
contributions to Northern Tier Investors LP totaling an aggregate of $195 million and an entity owned by
certain members of our management team made capital contributions of $5 million.
Transactions with Marathon
From time to time, we may enter into related person transactions in the ordinary course of business.
During the Predecessor period, our related persons included:
Ÿ  Marathon, which refines, markets and transports crude oil and petroleum products, primarily in the Midwest,
Upper Great Plains, U.S. Gulf Coast and southeastern regions of the United States.
Ÿ  Marathon Oil Company, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon Oil. It purchases or produces crude
oil in the United States that is used at Marathon’s refineries.
Ÿ  Marathon Petroleum Company Canada, Ltd., which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon. It purchases
crude oil in Canada to be used at Marathon’s refineries.
Ÿ  Marathon Petroleum Trading Canada LLC, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon. It purchases
crude oil in Canada to be used at Marathon’s refineries.
Ÿ  Minnesota Pipe Line Company, in which we own a 17% interest. Minnesota Pipe Line Company owns and
operates the Minnesota Pipeline.
Ÿ  Pilot Travel Centers LLC (“PTC”), in which Marathon sold its 50% interest in October 2008. PTC owns and
operates travel centers in the United States.
Ÿ  Speedway SuperAmerica LLC (“SSA”), which changed its name to Speedway LLC, and is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Marathon Petroleum. Under the Predecessor, SSA was the owner of SuperAmerica branded
convenience stores that were sold to us as part of the Marathon Acquisition.
We have historically sold refined products to Marathon. Refined product sales to Marathon were recorded at
intercompany transfer prices that were market-based prices. There were no related party sales for periods
subsequent to the Marathon Acquisition. Revenues from sales to related parties totaled $210.1 million for the
eleven months ended November 30, 2010, which represented 6.6% of total revenues for that period. For more
information on these related party sales, see Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
During the Predecessor period, we made purchases from our related parties, including:
Ÿ  purchases from Marathon Oil Company, Marathon Petroleum Company Canada, Ltd. and Marathon Petroleum
Trading Canada LLC consisting primarily of crude oil. Purchases from Marathon Oil Company are recorded at
contracted prices that are market-based. Purchases from Marathon Petroleum Company Canada, Ltd. and
Marathon Petroleum Trading Canada LLC are recorded at contracted prices based on their acquisition cost,
plus an administrative fee;
Ÿ  purchases from Marathon consisting primarily of refined products and refinery feedstocks, certain general and
administrative costs and costs associated with employees associated with
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
198
our refining segment participating in Marathon’s multi-employer benefit plans. Refined product and refinery
feedstock purchases from Marathon are recorded at intercompany transfer prices that are market-based
prices;
Ÿ  purchases from Minnesota Pipe Line Company consisting primarily of crude oil transportation services, which
are based on published tariffs; and
Ÿ  purchases from SSA consisting of certain overhead costs and costs associated with employees associated
with our retail segment participating in SSA’s multi-employer benefit plans.
There were no related party purchases for periods subsequent to the Marathon Acquisition. Purchases from
related parties totaled $1,378.3 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. For more information
on these related party purchases, see Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Marathon has provided certain services to us such as marketing, crude acquisition, engineering, human
resources, insurance, treasury, accounting, tax, legal, procurement and information technology services.
Charges for these services were allocated based on usage or other methods, such as headcount, capital
employed or store count, which management believes to be reasonable. There were no related party
purchases for periods subsequent to the Marathon Acquisition. Related party purchases reflect charges for
these services of $26.5 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010.
Until November 30, 2010, we participated in Marathon’s centralized cash management programs under which
cash receipts were remitted to and cash disbursements were funded by Marathon or SSA. All intercompany
activity associated with the transfer of cash was included in the net investment value.
For the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, we were considered to have participated in multi-employer
benefit plans of Marathon. Our allocated share of Marathon’s employee benefit plan expenses, including costs
related to stock-based compensation plans, was included in related party purchases and was $21.5 million for
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. There were no related party purchases for periods subsequent
to the Marathon Acquisition. Expenses for employee benefit plans other than stock-based compensation plans
were allocated to us primarily as a percentage of salary and wage expense. For the stock-based compensation
plans, we were charged with the expenses directly attributed to our employees, which were $0.3 million for
the eleven months ended November 30, 2010. For more information on these related party transactions, see
Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Transactions with Marathon
Our refinery supplies the gasoline and diesel sold in 90 independently owned and operated Marathon branded
convenience stores in our marketing area. In connection with the Marathon Acquisition, we entered into an
agreement with Marathon to supply substantially all of the gasoline and diesel requirements for the 90
independently owned and operated Marathon branded convenience stores in our marketing area. For the year
ended December 31, 2011, Marathon purchased $275 million of gasoline and diesel pursuant to this
agreement. In addition, Marathon was issued $80 million of noncontrolling preferred interests in Northern Tier
Holdings in connection with the Marathon Acquisition. Under the terms of the settlement agreement with
Marathon, Marathon will receive approximately $40 million of the net proceeds from this offering and Northern
Tier Holdings will redeem Marathon’s existing preferred interest with a portion of the net proceeds from this
offering and issue Marathon a new $45 million noncontrolling preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings.
The settlement is contingent upon the consummation of this offering.
Table of Contents
199
Index to Financial Statements
Other Related Person Transactions
Chet Kuchta is our Vice President, Supply and has served in that position since August 2011. He is the
brother of Hank Kuchta, our President and Chief Operating Officer and a member of our board of directors.
During 2011, Mr. Chet Kuchta received aggregate compensation in the amount of $180,000.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
200
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
The following sets forth certain information with respect to the beneficial ownership of our common units and
PIK units that will be issued and outstanding immediately after the closing of this offering and the IPO
Transactions and held by:
Ÿ  each unitholder known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our common units;
Ÿ  our general partner;
Ÿ  each of the directors and named executive officers of our general partner; and
Ÿ  all of the executive officers and directors of our general partner as a group.
Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC. These rules generally attribute
beneficial ownership of securities to persons who possess sole or shared voting power or investments power
with respect to such securities. Except as otherwise indicated, we believe that all persons listed below have
sole voting and investment power with respect to the units beneficially owned by them, except to the extent
this power may be shared with a spouse, based on information provided to us by such persons.
The following table assumes the underwriters do not exercise their option to purchase                  additional
common units and such units are therefore distributed to Northern Tier Holdings. Unless otherwise indicated
by us, the address of each person or entity named in the table is 38C Grove Street, Suite 100, Ridgefield,
Connecticut 06877.
Name of Beneficial Owner and
Management
Northern Tier Holdings LLC(1)
Northern Tier Energy GP LLC(2)
ACON Refining Partners, L.L.C.(3)
TPG Refining, L.P.(4)
Mario E. Rodriguez(5)
Hank Kuchta(5)
Dave Bonczek
Greg Mullins
Bernard W. Aronson
Jonathan Ginns(2)
Michael MacDougall(6)
Eric Liaw(7)
Percentage of
Common and
PIK Units
Beneficially
Owned
Common
Units
Beneficially
Owned
Percentage
of Common
Units
Beneficially
Owned
PIK Units
Beneficially
Owned
Percentage of
PIK Units
Beneficially
Owned
Eric Liaw(7)
Scott D. Josey
Thomas Hofmann
Dan F. Smith
Neal Murphy(8)
All directors and executive officers
as a group (11 persons)
* 
(1)
Represents less than 1%.
All of the common interests in Northern Tier Holdings are owned by Northern Tier Investors, LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company, the sole member of which is Northern Tier Investors LP, a Delaware limited
partnership. All of the limited partnership interests in Northern Tier Investors LP are held by ACON Refining
(48.75%), TPG Refining (48.75%) and certain members of our management team (2.5%). All of the limited
liability company interests in the general partner of Northern Tier Investors LP, NTI GenPar LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company, are held equally by ACON Refining and TPG Refining. Marathon will hold a $45 million
preferred interest in Northern Tier Holdings.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
201
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Northern Tier Energy GP LLC, which is owned by Northern Tier Holdings, is our general partner and manages
and operates our business and has a non-economic general partner interest in us.
ACON Management is the managing member of AIP V GenPar, L.L.C., which in turn is the managing member
of ACON Refining. ACON Management may be deemed, pursuant to Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, to
beneficially own the securities held by Northern Tier Holdings. Jonathan Ginns, Ken Brotman, Bernard Aronson,
Daniel Jinich and Guillermo Bron are managing members and sole equity holders of ACON Management, and
therefore, Messrs. Ginns, Brotman, Aronson, Jinich and Bron may be deemed to be the beneficial owners of,
with indirect voting and dispositive authority over, the equity securities held by ACON Refining. Messrs. Ginns,
Brotman, Aronson, Jinich and Bron disclaim beneficial ownership of the securities of ARP except to the extent
of their pecuniary interest therein. The address of ACON Management and Messrs. Ginns, Brotman, Aronson,
Jinich and Bron is c/o ACON Funds Management, L.L.C., 1133 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 700,
Washington, D.C. 20036.
The general partner of TPG Refining is TPG VI AIV SLP SD, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, whose
general partner is TPG VI AIV SLP SD Advisors, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, whose general
partner is TPG Holdings II, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, whose general partner is TPG Holdings II-A,
LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, whose sole member is TPG Group Holdings (SBS), L.P., a Delaware
limited partnership, whose general partner is TPG Group Holdings (SBS) Advisors, Inc. (“Group Advisors”), a
Delaware corporation. David Bonderman and James G. Coulter are officers, directors and sole shareholders of
Group Advisors and may therefore be deemed to be the beneficial owners of the common units and PIK units
held by Northern Tier Holdings. Messrs. Bonderman and Coulter disclaim beneficial ownership of such units
except to the extent of their pecuniary interest therein. The address of Group Advisors and Messrs. Bonderman
and Coulter is c/o TPG Global, LLC, 301 Commerce Street, Suite 3300, Fort Worth, TX 76102.
Entities controlled by Messrs. Rodriguez and Kuchta may be deemed to share beneficial ownership of the
common units and PIK units held by Northern Tier Holdings.
(6) Mr. MacDougall, who is one of our directors, is a TPG Partner. Mr. MacDougall has no voting or investment
power over and disclaims beneficial ownership of the common units and PIK units held by Northern Tier
Holdings. The address of Mr. MacDougall is c/o TPG Global, LLC, 301 Commerce Street, Suite 3300, Fort
Worth, TX 76102.
(7) Mr. Liaw, who is one of our directors, is a TPG Vice President. Mr. Liaw has no voting or investment power over
and disclaims beneficial ownership of the common units and PIK units held by Northern Tier Holdings. The
address of Mr. Liaw is c/o TPG Global, LLC, 301 Commerce Street, Suite 3300, Fort Worth, TX 76102.
(8) Mr. Murphy departed our company on August 22, 2011.
202
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND FIDUCIARY DUTIES
Conflicts of Interest
Conflicts of interest exist and may arise in the future as a result of the relationships between our general
partner and its owners, on the one hand, and us and our public unitholders, on the other hand. Conflicts may
arise as a result of the duties of our general partner to act for the benefit of its owners, which may conflict
with our interests and the interests of our public unitholders. The directors and officers of our general partner
have fiduciary duties to manage our general partner in a manner beneficial to its owners. At the same time,
our general partner has a duty to manage us in a manner that it believes is in our best interests. Our
partnership agreement specifically defines the remedies available to unitholders for actions taken that,
without these defined liability standards, might constitute breaches of fiduciary duty under applicable
Delaware law. The Delaware Act provides that Delaware limited partnerships may, in their partnership
agreements, expand, restrict or eliminate the fiduciary duties otherwise owed by the general partner to the
limited partners and the partnership.
Whenever a conflict arises between our general partner and its owners, on the one hand, and us and our
public unitholders, on the other, the resolution or course of action in respect of such conflict of interest shall
be permitted and deemed approved by all our limited partners and shall not constitute a breach of our
partnership agreement, of any agreement contemplated thereby or of any duty, if the resolution or course of
action in respect of such conflict of interest is:
Ÿ  approved by the conflicts committee of our general partner, although our general partner is not obligated to
seek such approval; or
Ÿ  approved by the holders of a majority of the outstanding units, excluding any units owned by the general
partner or any of its affiliates.
Our general partner may, but is not required to, seek the approval of such resolutions or courses of action
from the conflicts committee of the board of our general partner or from the holders of a majority of the
outstanding units as described above. If our general partner does not seek approval from the conflicts
committee or from holders of units as described above and the board of directors of our general partner
approves the resolution or course of action taken with respect to the conflict of interest, then it will be
presumed that, in making its decision, the board of directors of our general partner acted in good faith, and in
any proceeding brought by or on behalf of us or any of our unitholders, the person bringing or prosecuting
such proceeding will have the burden of overcoming such presumption. Unless the resolution of a conflict is
specifically provided for in our partnership agreement, the board of directors of our general partner or the
conflicts committee of our general partner may consider any factors they determine in good faith to consider
when resolving a conflict. An independent third party is not required to evaluate the resolution. Under our
partnership agreement, a determination, other action or failure to act by our general partner, the board of
directors of our general partner or any committee thereof (including the conflicts committee) will be deemed
to be “in good faith” unless our general partner, the board of directors of our general partner or any
committee thereof (including the conflicts committee) believed such determination, other action or failure to
act was adverse to the interests of the partnership. See “Management—Board Committees” for information
about the conflicts committee of our general partner’s board of directors.
Conflicts of interest could arise in the situations described below, among others.
Our general partner’s affiliates may compete with us, and neither our general partner nor its affiliates have any
obligation to present business opportunities to us.
Our partnership agreement provides that our general partner is restricted from engaging in any business
activities other than those in connection with or incidental to its ownership of interests in us. However,
affiliates of our general partner (which include our sponsors) are not prohibited from
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
203
engaging in other businesses or activities, including those that might be in direct competition with us. Our
general partner or its affiliates may acquire, construct or dispose of assets in the future without any obligation
to offer us the opportunity to acquire those assets. In addition, under our partnership agreement, the doctrine
of corporate opportunity, or any analogous doctrine, will not apply to our general partner and its affiliates. As
a result, neither our general partner nor any of its affiliates have any obligation to present business
opportunities to us.
Our general partner is allowed to take into account the interests of parties other than us (such as our
sponsors) in exercising certain rights under our partnership agreement.
Our partnership agreement contains provisions that permissibly reduce the standards to which our general
partner would otherwise be held by state fiduciary duty law. For example, our partnership agreement permits
our general partner to make a number of decisions in its individual capacity, as opposed to in its capacity as
our general partner. This entitles our general partner to consider only the interests and factors that it desires,
and it has no duty or obligation to give any consideration to any interest of, or factors affecting, us, our
affiliates or any limited partner. Examples include the exercise of its call right, its voting rights with respect to
any units it owns and its determination whether or not to consent to any merger or consolidation.
Our general partner may, at any time, take action that would result in the termination of the PIK period, and
may cause us to repurchase PIK units at any time with the approval of the conflicts committee.
Our general partner may, at any time in its sole discretion and on terms determined in its sole discretion,
redeem, repurchase or refinance the PIK units, resulting in the termination of the PIK period. Under our
partnership agreement, such decision will explicitly be deemed not a violation of fiduciary duties that might
otherwise be owed by our general partner to the limited partners. At any time, our general partner may also
amend the Indenture in a manner that terminates the PIK period.
Additionally, our general partner may cause us or our subsidiaries to purchase PIK units at any time during
the PIK period, so long as such purchase is approved by the conflicts committee of the board of directors of
our general partner. Our public unitholders will not be entitled to vote on any such purchase of PIK units from
affiliates of our general partner or otherwise.
Our partnership agreement limits the liability of, and replaces the duties owed by, our general partner and
also restricts the remedies available to our unitholders for actions that, without the limitations, might
constitute breaches of fiduciary duty.
In addition to the provisions described above, our partnership agreement contains provisions that restrict the
remedies available to our unitholders for actions that might otherwise constitute breaches of fiduciary duty.
For example, our partnership agreement provides that:
Ÿ  our general partner will not have any liability to us or our unitholders for decisions made in its capacity as
general partner so long as it acted in good faith, meaning it believed that the decision was not adverse to the
interests of the partnership;
Ÿ  our general partner and its officers and directors will not be liable for monetary damages to us or our limited
partners for any acts or omissions unless there has been a final and non-appealable judgment entered by a
court of competent jurisdiction determining that our general partner or its officers or directors acted in bad
faith or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with knowledge that its conduct was unlawful; and
Ÿ  in resolving conflicts of interest, it will be presumed that in making its decision our general partner, the board
of directors of our general partner or the conflicts committee of the board of
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
204
directors of our general partner acted in good faith, and in any proceeding brought by or on behalf of any
limited partner or us, the person bringing or prosecuting such proceeding will have the burden of overcoming
such presumption.
By purchasing a common unit, a common unitholder will agree to become bound by the provisions in our
partnership agreement, including the provisions discussed above. See “—Fiduciary Duties.”
Actions taken by our general partner may affect the amount of cash available to pay distributions to
unitholders.
The amount of cash that is available for distribution to unitholders is affected by decisions of the board of
directors of our general partner regarding such matters as:
Ÿ  amount and timing of asset purchases and sales;
Ÿ  cash expenditures;
Ÿ  borrowings;
Ÿ  entry into and repayment of current and future indebtedness, including the redemption or defeasance of the
senior secured notes;
Ÿ  issuance of additional units; and
Ÿ  creation, reduction or increase of cash reserves in any quarter.
Our partnership agreement permits us to borrow funds to make a distribution on all outstanding units, and
further provides that we and our subsidiaries may borrow funds from our general partner and its affiliates.
Our general partner and its affiliates are not required to own any of our common units. If Northern Tier
Holdings were to sell all or substantially all of its common units and PIK units, this would heighten the risk
that our general partner would act in ways that are more beneficial to itself and its owners than to our
common unitholders.
Upon the closing of this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own a majority of our outstanding units, but
there is no requirement that it continue to do so. Northern Tier Holdings is permitted to sell all of its common
units and PIK units. In addition, Northern Tier Holdings may cause our general partner to sell its general
partner interest to an unrelated third party. If neither our general partner nor its affiliates owned any common
units or PIK units, this would heighten the risk that our general partner would act in ways that are more
beneficial to itself and its owners than to our common unitholders.
Common units and PIK units are subject to our general partner’s call right.
If at any time our general partner and its affiliates own more than 80% of the common units and PIK units, our
general partner will have the right, which it may assign to any of its affiliates or to us, but not the obligation,
to acquire all, but not less than all, of units held by unaffiliated persons at the market price calculated in
accordance with the terms of our partnership agreement. As a result, you may be required to sell your
common units at an undesirable time or price and may not receive any return on your investment. You may
also incur a tax liability upon a sale of your common units. Our general partner is not obligated to obtain a
fairness opinion regarding the value of the units to be repurchased by it upon exercise of the call right. There
is no restriction in our partnership agreement that prevents our general partner from issuing additional units
and exercising its call right. Our general partner may use its own discretion, free of fiduciary duty restrictions,
in determining whether to exercise this right.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
205
As a result, a common unitholder may have his common units purchased from him at an undesirable time or
place. See “The Partnership Agreement—Call Right.”
Contracts between us, on the one hand, and our general partner and its affiliates, on the other, will not be the
result of arm’s-length negotiations.
Neither our partnership agreement nor any of the other agreements, contracts and arrangements between us
and our general partner and its affiliates are or will be the result of arm’s length negotiations. Our general
partner will determine, in good faith, the terms of any such future transactions.
Common unitholders will have no right to enforce obligations of our general partner and its affiliates under
agreements with us.
Any agreements between us, on the one hand, and our general partner and its affiliates, on the other, will not
grant to the unitholders, separate and apart from us, the right to enforce the obligations of our general partner
and its affiliates in our favor.
We may choose not to retain separate counsel for ourselves or for the holders of common units.
Attorneys, independent accountants and others who perform services for us are selected by our general
partner or the conflicts committee of our general partner and may perform services for our general partner
and its affiliates. We may retain separate counsel for ourselves or the conflicts committee in the event of a
conflict of interest between our general partner and its affiliates, on the one hand, and us or the holders of
common units, on the other, depending on the nature of the conflict. We do not intend to do so in most
cases.
Except in limited circumstances, our general partner has the power and authority to conduct our business
without unitholder approval.
Under our partnership agreement, our general partner has full power and authority to do all things, other than
those items that require unitholder approval or on such terms as it determines to be necessary or appropriate
to conduct our business including, but not limited to, the following:
Ÿ  expending, lending or borrowing money, assuming or guaranteeing or otherwise contracting for, indebtedness
and other liabilities, issuing evidences of indebtedness, including indebtedness that is convertible into our
securities, and incurring any other obligations;
Ÿ  preparing and transmitting tax, regulatory and other filings, periodic or other reports to governmental or other
agencies having jurisdiction over our business or assets;
Ÿ  acquiring, disposing, mortgaging, pledging, encumbering, hypothecating or exchanging our assets or merging
or otherwise combining us with or into another person;
Ÿ  negotiating, executing and performing contracts, conveyances or other instruments;
Ÿ
distributing cash;
distributing cash;
Ÿ  selecting and dismissing employees and agents, outside attorneys, accountants, consultants and contractors
and determining their compensation and other terms of employment or hiring;
Ÿ  maintaining insurance for our benefit;
Ÿ  forming, acquiring an interest in, and contributing property and lending money to any further limited
partnerships, joint ventures, corporations, limited liability companies or other entities;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
206
Ÿ  controlling all matters affecting our rights and obligations, including bringing and defending actions at law or in
equity or otherwise litigating, arbitrating or mediating and incurring legal expense and settling claims and
litigation;
Ÿ  indemnifying any person against liabilities and contingencies to the extent permitted by law;
Ÿ  purchasing, selling or otherwise acquiring or disposing of our partnership interests, or the issuing additional
options, rights, warrants, appreciation rights, phantom or tracking interests relating to our partnership
interests; and
Ÿ  entering into agreements with any of its affiliates to render services to us or to itself in the discharge of its
duties as our general partner.
See “The Partnership Agreement” for information regarding the voting rights of unitholders.
Fiduciary Duties
Duties owed to unitholders by our general partner are prescribed by law and in our partnership agreement.
The Delaware Act provides that Delaware limited partnerships may, in their partnership agreements, expand,
restrict or eliminate the fiduciary duties otherwise owed by the general partner to limited partners and the
partnership.
Our partnership agreement contains various provisions modifying and restricting the fiduciary duties that
might otherwise be owed by our general partner. We have adopted these provisions to allow our general
partner or its affiliates to engage in transactions with us that otherwise might be prohibited by state law
fiduciary standards and to take into account the interests of other parties in addition to our interests when
resolving conflicts of interest. We believe this is appropriate and necessary because the board of directors of
our general partner has a duty to manage our partnership in good faith and a duty to manage our general
partner in a manner beneficial to its owners. Without these modifications, our general partner’s ability to
make decisions involving conflicts of interest would be restricted. The modifications to the fiduciary
standards benefit our general partner by enabling it to take into consideration all parties involved in the
proposed action. These modifications also strengthen the ability of our general partner to attract and retain
experienced and capable directors. These modifications represent a detriment to our public unitholders
because they restrict the remedies available to our public unitholders for actions that, without those
limitations, might constitute breaches of fiduciary duty, as described below, and permit our general partner to
take into account the interests of third parties in addition to our interests when resolving conflicts of interests.
The following is a summary of the material restrictions of the fiduciary duties owed by our general partner to
the limited partners:
State law fiduciary duty standards
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Fiduciary duties are generally considered to include an obligation to act in
good faith and with due care and loyalty. The duty of care, in the
absence of a provision in a partnership agreement providing otherwise,
would generally require a general partner to act for the partnership in the
same manner as a prudent person would act on his own behalf. The duty
of loyalty, in the absence of a provision in a partnership agreement
providing otherwise, would generally require that any action taken or
transaction engaged in be entirely fair to the partnership.
207
Partnership agreement modified standards Our partnership agreement contains provisions that waive or consent to
conduct by our general partner and its affiliates that might otherwise raise
issues as to compliance with fiduciary duties or applicable law. For
example, our partnership agreement provides that when our general
partner is acting in its capacity as our general partner, as opposed to in
its individual capacity, it must act in “good faith” and will not be subject
to any other standard under applicable law. In addition, when our general
partner is acting in its individual capacity, as opposed to in its capacity
as our general partner, it may act without any fiduciary obligation to us or
the unitholders whatsoever. These contractual standards reduce the
obligations to which our general partner would otherwise be held.
If our general partner does not seek approval from the conflicts
committee of its board of directors or the unitholders, excluding any units
owned by our general partner or its affiliates, and its board of directors
approves the resolution or course of action taken with respect to the
conflict of interest, then it will be presumed that, in making its decision,
the board of directors, which may include board members affected by the
conflict of interest, acted in good faith, and in any proceeding brought by
or on behalf of any limited partner or the partnership, the person bringing
or prosecuting such proceeding will have the burden of overcoming such
presumption. These standards reduce the obligations to which our
general partner would otherwise be held.
The Delaware Act generally provides that a limited partner may institute
legal action on behalf of the partnership to recover damages from a third
party where a general partner has refused to institute the action or where
an effort to cause a general partner to do so is not likely to succeed.
These actions include actions against a general partner for breach of its
duties or of our partnership agreement. In addition, the statutory or case
law of some jurisdictions may permit a limited partner to institute legal
action on behalf of itself and all other similarly situated limited partners to
recover damages from a general partner for violations of its fiduciary
duties to the limited partners.
208
Rights and remedies of limited partners
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Partnership agreement modified standards The Delaware Act provides that, unless otherwise provided in a
partnership agreement, a partner or other person shall not be liable to a
limited partnership or to another partner or to another person that is a
party to or is otherwise bound by a partnership agreement for breach of
fiduciary duty for the partner’s or other person’s good faith reliance on the
provisions of the partnership agreement. Under our partnership
agreement, to the extent that, at law or in equity an indemnitee has
duties (including fiduciary duties) and liabilities relating thereto to us or to
our partners, our general partner and any other indemnitee acting in
connection with our business or affairs shall not be liable to us or to any
partner for its good faith reliance on the provisions of our partnership
agreement.
By purchasing our common units, each common unitholder automatically agrees to be bound by the
provisions in our partnership agreement, including the provisions discussed above. This is in accordance
with the policy of the Delaware Act favoring the principle of freedom of contract and the enforceability of
partnership agreements. The failure of a limited partner to sign a partnership agreement does not render our
partnership agreement unenforceable against that person.
Under our partnership agreement, we must indemnify our general partner and its officers, directors, managers
and certain other specified persons, to the fullest extent permitted by law, against liabilities, costs and
expenses incurred by our general partner or these other persons. We must provide this indemnification
unless there has been a final and non-appealable judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction determining
that these persons acted in bad faith. We also must provide this indemnification for criminal proceedings
unless our general partner or these other persons acted with knowledge that their conduct was unlawful.
Thus, our general partner could be indemnified for its negligent acts if it meets the requirements set forth
above. To the extent that these provisions purport to include indemnification for liabilities arising under the
Securities Act, in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is contrary to public policy and therefore
unenforceable. See “The Partnership Agreement—Indemnification.”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
209
DESCRIPTION OF OUR COMMON UNITS
Our Common Units
The common units offered hereby represent limited partner interests in us. The holders of common units are
entitled to participate in partnership distributions and exercise the rights and privileges provided to limited
partners under our partnership agreement. For a description of the rights and privileges of holders of our
common units to partnership distributions, see “How We Make Distributions” and “Distribution Policy and
Restrictions on Distributions.” For a description of the rights and privileges of limited partners under our
partnership agreement, including voting rights, see “The Partnership Agreement.”
Transfer Agent and Registrar
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company will serve as registrar and transfer agent for the common units. We
pay all fees charged by the transfer agent for transfers of common units, except the following, which must be
paid by unitholders:
Ÿ  surety bond premiums to replace lost or stolen certificates, taxes and other governmental charges;
Ÿ  special charges for services requested by a holder of a common unit; and
other similar fees or charges.
Ÿ  other similar fees or charges.
There is no charge to unitholders for disbursements of our quarterly cash distributions. We will indemnify the
transfer agent, its agents and each of their shareholders, directors, officers and employees against all claims
and losses that may arise out of acts performed or omitted for its activities in that capacity, except for any
liability due to any gross negligence or intentional misconduct of the indemnified person or entity.
The transfer agent may resign, by notice to us, or be removed by us. The resignation or removal of the
transfer agent will become effective upon our appointment of a successor transfer agent and registrar and its
acceptance of the appointment. If a successor has not been appointed or has not accepted its appointment
within 30 days after notice of the resignation or removal, our general partner may act as the transfer agent and
registrar until a successor is appointed.
Transfer of Common Units
By transfer of common units in accordance with our partnership agreement, each transferee of common units
shall be admitted as a limited partner with respect to the common units transferred when such transfer and
admission is reflected in our books and records. Each transferee:
Ÿ  represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to become bound by our partnership
agreement;
Ÿ  automatically agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of, and is deemed to have executed, our
partnership agreement; and
Ÿ  gives the consents and approvals contained in our partnership agreement, such as the approval of all
transactions and agreements entered into in connection with our formation and this offering.
A transferee will become a substituted limited partner of our partnership for the transferred common units
automatically upon the recording of the transfer on our books and records. Our general partner will cause any
transfers to be recorded on our books and records from time to time as necessary to accurately reflect the
transfers.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
210
We may, at our discretion, treat the nominee holder of a common unit as the absolute owner. In that case, the
beneficial holder’s rights are limited solely to those that it has against the nominee holder as a result of any
agreement between the beneficial owner and the nominee holder.
Common units are securities and are transferable according to the laws governing transfer of securities. In
addition to other rights acquired upon transfer, the transferor gives the transferee the right to become a
limited partner in our partnership for the transferred common units.
Until a common unit has been transferred on our books, we and the transfer agent may treat the record holder
of the common unit as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise required by law or stock
exchange regulations.
Our common units have been approved for listing on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “NTI.”
Listing
211
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
THE PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
The following is a summary of the material provisions of our partnership agreement. The form of our
partnership agreement is included in this prospectus as Appendix A. We will provide prospective investors
with a copy of our partnership agreement upon request at no charge.
We summarize the following provisions of our partnership agreement elsewhere in this prospectus:
Ÿ  with regard to distributions of cash, see “How We Make Distributions”;
Ÿ  with regard to the fiduciary duties of, and standard of care applicable to, our general partner, see “Conflicts of
Interest and Fiduciary Duties”;
Ÿ  with regard to the authority of our general partner to manage our business and activities, see “Management—
Our Management”;
Ÿ  with regard to the transfer of common units, see “Description of Our Common Units—Transfer of Common
Units”; and
Ÿ  with regard to allocations of taxable income and taxable loss, see “Material Federal Income Tax
Consequences.”
Organization and Duration
Northern Tier Energy, Inc., was incorporated in October 2011. Northern Tier Energy, Inc. was converted into
Northern Tier Energy LP in June 2012. We will have a perpetual existence unless terminated pursuant to the
terms of our partnership agreement.
Purpose
Our purpose, as set forth in our partnership agreement, is limited to engaging in any business activity that is
approved by our general partner and that lawfully may be conducted by a limited partnership organized under
Delaware law; provided that our general partner shall not cause us to take any action that the general partner
determines would be reasonably likely to cause us to be treated as an association taxable as a corporation or
otherwise taxable as an entity for federal income tax purposes.
Although our general partner has the ability to cause us and our subsidiaries to engage in activities other
than those related to the refining or retail business and activities now or hereafter customarily conducted in
conjunction with this business, our general partner may decline to do so free of any fiduciary duty or
obligation whatsoever to us or the limited partners, including any duty to act in good faith or in the best
interests of us or our limited partners. In general, our general partner is authorized to perform all acts it
determines to be necessary or appropriate to carry out our purposes and to conduct our business.
Distributions
Our partnership agreement specifies the manner in which we will make distributions to holders of our
common and PIK units. For a description of these distributions, please read “How We Make Distributions.”
Capital Contributions
Unitholders are not obligated to make additional capital contributions, except as described below under “—
Limited Liability.”
212
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Voting Rights
The following is a summary of the unitholder vote required for the matters specified below. Matters requiring
the approval of a “unit majority” require the approval of a majority of the common units and PIK units, voting
as a single class.
At the closing of this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will have the ability to ensure the passage of, as well as
the ability to ensure the defeat of, any amendment which requires a unit majority by virtue of its     %
ownership of our common units and PIK units.
In voting their units, our general partner and its affiliates will have no fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever
to us or the limited partners, including any duty to act in good faith or in the best interests of us or the limited
partners.
The following is a summary of the vote requirements specified for certain matters under our partnership
agreement:
Issuance of additional partnership interests
Amendment of our partnership agreement
Merger of our partnership or the sale of all or substantially
all of our assets
No approval right. See “—Issuance of Additional
Partnership Interests.”
Certain amendments may be made by our general
partner without the approval of the unitholders. Other
amendments generally require the approval of a unit
majority. See “—Amendment of Our Partnership
Agreement.”
Unit majority in certain circumstances. See”—Merger,
Consolidation, Conversion, Sale or Other Disposition of
Assets.”
Dissolution of our partnership
Unit majority. See “—Dissolution.”
Continuation of our partnership upon dissolution
Unit majority. See “—Dissolution.”
Withdrawal of our general partner
Removal of our general partner
Transfer of the general partner interest
Transfer of ownership interests in our general partner
Table of Contents
Under most circumstances, the approval of a majority
of the common units and PIK units, voting as a single
class, excluding units held by our general partner and
its affiliates, is required for the withdrawal of our
general partner prior to September 30, 2022 in a
manner that would cause a dissolution of our
partnership. See “—Withdrawal or Removal of Our
General Partner.”
Not less than two-thirds of the outstanding common
units and PIK units, voting as a single class, including
units held by our general partner and its affiliates. See
“—Withdrawal or Removal of Our General Partner.”
No approval right. See “—Transfer of General Partner
Interest.”
No approval right. See “—Transfer of Ownership
Interests in Our General Partner.”
213
Index to Financial Statements
If any person or group other than our general partner and its affiliates acquires beneficial ownership of 20% or
more of any class of units then outstanding, that person or group will lose voting rights on all of such units.
This loss of voting rights does not apply to any person or group that acquires the units from our general
partner or its affiliates and any transferees of that person or group approved by our general partner or to any
person or group who acquires the units with the specific approval of our general partner.
Applicable Law; Forum, Venue and Jurisdiction
Our partnership agreement is governed by Delaware law. Our partnership agreement requires that any claims,
suits, actions or proceedings:
Ÿ  arising out of or relating in any way to the partnership agreement (including any claims, suits or actions to
interpret, apply or enforce the provisions of the partnership agreement or the duties, obligations or liabilities
among limited partners or of limited partners to us, or the rights or powers of, or restrictions on, the limited
partners or us);
Ÿ  brought in a derivative manner on our behalf;
Ÿ  asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any director, officer or other employee of us or our
general partner, or owed by our general partner, to us or the limited partners;
Ÿ  asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the Delaware Act; or
Ÿ  asserting a claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine,
shall be exclusively brought in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, regardless of whether such
claims, suits, actions or proceedings sound in contract, tort, fraud or otherwise, are based on common law,
statutory, equitable, legal or other grounds, or are derivative or direct claims. The enforceability of similar
choice of forum provisions in the certificate of incorporation of Delaware corporations has been challenged in
legal proceedings, and it is possible that a court could find these types of analogous provisions in a
partnership agreement to be inapplicable or unenforceable.
By purchasing a common unit, a limited partner is irrevocably consenting to these limitations and provisions
regarding claims, suits, actions or proceedings and submitting to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of
Chancery of the State of Delaware in connection with any such claims, suits, actions or proceedings.
Limited Liability
Assuming that a limited partner does not participate in the control of our business within the meaning of the
Delaware Act and that it otherwise acts in conformity with the provisions of our partnership agreement, its
liability under the Delaware Act will be limited, subject to possible exceptions, to the amount of capital it is
obligated to contribute to us for its common units plus its share of any undistributed profits and assets. If it
were determined, however, that the right, or exercise of the right, by the limited partners as a group:
Ÿ  to remove or replace our general partner;
Ÿ  to approve some amendments to our partnership agreement; or
Ÿ  to take other action under our partnership agreement
constituted “participation in the control” of our business for the purposes of the Delaware Act, then the
limited partners could be held personally liable for our obligations under the laws of Delaware to the same
extent as our general partner. This liability would extend to persons who transact business with
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
214
us under the reasonable belief that the limited partner is a general partner. Neither our partnership agreement
nor the Delaware Act specifically provides for legal recourse against our general partner if a limited partner
were to lose limited liability through any fault of our general partner. While this does not mean that a limited
partner could not seek legal recourse, we know of no precedent for this type of a claim in Delaware case law.
Under the Delaware Act, a limited partnership may not make a distribution to a partner if, after the distribution,
all liabilities of the limited partnership, other than liabilities to partners on account of their partnership
interests and liabilities for which the recourse of creditors is limited to specific property of the partnership,
would exceed the fair value of the assets of the limited partnership. For the purpose of determining the fair
value of the assets of a limited partnership, the Delaware Act provides that the fair value of property subject to
liability for which recourse of creditors is limited shall be included in the assets of the limited partnership
only to the extent that the fair value of that property exceeds the nonrecourse liability. The Delaware Act
provides that a limited partner who receives a distribution and knew at the time of the distribution that the
distribution was in violation of the Delaware Act shall be liable to the limited partnership for the amount of the
distribution for three years.
Our subsidiaries conduct business in several states and we and our subsidiaries may conduct business in
other states or countries in the future. Maintenance of our limited liability as owner of our operating
subsidiaries may require compliance with legal requirements in the jurisdictions in which the operating
subsidiaries conduct business, including qualifying our subsidiaries to do business there.
Limitations on the liability of members or limited partners for the obligations of a limited liability company or
limited partnership have not been clearly established in many jurisdictions. If, by virtue of our ownership
interest in our operating subsidiaries or otherwise, it were determined that we were conducting business in
any jurisdiction without compliance with the applicable limited partnership or limited liability company
statute, or that the right, or exercise of the right by the limited partners as a group, to remove or replace our
general partner, to approve some amendments to our partnership agreement, or to take other action under our
partnership agreement constituted “participation in the control” of our business for purposes of the statutes
of any relevant jurisdiction, then the limited partners could be held personally liable for our obligations under
the law of that jurisdiction to the same extent as our general partner under the circumstances. We will operate
in a manner that our general partner considers reasonable and necessary or appropriate to preserve the
limited liability of the limited partners.
Issuance of Additional Partnership Interests
Our partnership agreement authorizes us to issue an unlimited number of additional partnership interests for
the consideration and on the terms and conditions determined by our general partner without the approval of
the unitholders.
It is possible that we will fund acquisitions through the issuance of additional common units or other
partnership interests. Holders of any additional common units we issue will be entitled to share equally with
the then-existing holders of common units in our distributions. In addition, the issuance of additional
common units or other partnership interests may dilute the value of the interests of the then-existing holders
of common units in our net assets.
In accordance with Delaware law and the provisions of our partnership agreement, we may also issue
additional partnership interests that, as determined by our general partner, may have rights to distributions or
special voting rights to which the common units are not entitled or are senior in right of distribution to the
common units. In addition, our partnership agreement does not prohibit our subsidiaries from issuing equity
interests, which may effectively rank senior to the common units.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
215
Our general partner will have the right, which it may from time to time assign in whole or in part to any of its
affiliates, to purchase common units or other partnership units, whenever, and on the same terms that, we
issue those interests to persons other than our general partner and its affiliates (other than the issuance of
common units upon exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional common units), to the
extent necessary to maintain the percentage interest of our general partner and its affiliates, including such
interest represented by common units and PIK units, that existed immediately prior to each issuance. The
holders of common units will not have preemptive rights under our partnership agreement to acquire
additional common units or other partnership interests.
Amendment of Our Partnership Agreement
General
Amendments to our partnership agreement may be proposed only by our general partner. However, our
general partner will have no duty or obligation to propose any amendment and may decline to do so free of
any fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever to us or the limited partners, including any duty to act in good
faith or in the best interests of us or the limited partners. In order to adopt a proposed amendment, other than
the amendments discussed below under “—No Unitholder Approval,” our general partner is required to seek
written approval of the holders of the number of units required to approve the amendment or to call a meeting
of the limited partners to consider and vote upon the proposed amendment. Except as described below, an
amendment must be approved by a unit majority.
Prohibited Amendments
No amendment may be made that would:
Ÿ  enlarge the obligations of any limited partner without its consent, unless approved by at least a majority of the
type or class of limited partner interests so affected; or
Ÿ  enlarge the obligations of, restrict in any way any action by or rights of, or reduce in any way the amounts
distributable, reimbursable or otherwise payable by us to our general partner or any of its affiliates without the
consent of our general partner, which consent may be given or withheld in its sole discretion.
The provision of our partnership agreement preventing the amendments having the effects described in any of
the clauses above can be amended upon the approval of the holders of at least 90% of the outstanding units,
voting as a single class (including units owned by our general partner and its affiliates). Upon completion of
this offering, Northern Tier Holdings will own approximately       % of the outstanding units.
No Unitholder Approval
Our general partner may generally make amendments to our partnership agreement without the approval of
any limited partner to reflect:
Ÿ  a change in our name, the location of our principal place of business, our registered agent or our registered
office;
Ÿ  the admission, substitution, withdrawal or removal of partners in accordance with our partnership agreement;
Ÿ  a change that our general partner determines to be necessary or appropriate to qualify or continue our
qualification as a limited partnership or other entity in which the limited partners
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
216
have limited liability under the laws of any state or to ensure that neither we nor any of our subsidiaries will be
treated as an association taxable as a corporation or otherwise taxed as an entity for federal income tax
purposes (to the extent not already so treated or taxed);
Ÿ  an amendment that is necessary, in the opinion of our counsel, to prevent us or our general partner or its
directors, officers, agents, or trustees from in any manner being subjected to the provisions of the Investment
Company Act of 1940, the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, or “plan asset” regulations adopted under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or ERISA, whether or not substantially similar to plan
asset regulations currently applied or proposed;
Ÿ  an amendment that our general partner determines to be necessary or appropriate in connection with the
creation, authorization or issuance of additional partnership interests or rights to acquire partnership interests;
Ÿ  any amendment expressly permitted in our partnership agreement to be made by our general partner acting
alone;
Ÿ  an amendment effected, necessitated or contemplated by a merger agreement that has been approved under
the terms of our partnership agreement;
Ÿ  any amendment that our general partner determines to be necessary or appropriate to reflect and account for
the formation by us of, or our investment in, any corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability
company or other entity, as otherwise permitted by our partnership agreement;
Ÿ  a change in our fiscal year or taxable year and related changes;
Ÿ  conversions into, mergers with or conveyances to another limited liability entity that is newly formed and has
no assets, liabilities or operations at the time of the conversion, merger or conveyance other than those it
receives by way of the conversion, merger or conveyance; or
Ÿ  any other amendments substantially similar to any of the matters described in the clauses above.
In addition, our general partner may make amendments to our partnership agreement without the approval of
any limited partner if our general partner determines that those amendments:
Ÿ  do not adversely affect in any material respect the limited partners considered as a whole or any particular
class of limited partners;
Ÿ  are necessary or appropriate to satisfy any requirements, conditions, or guidelines contained in any opinion,
directive, order, ruling, or regulation of any federal or state agency or judicial authority or contained in any
federal or state statute;
Ÿ  are necessary or appropriate to facilitate the trading of limited partner interests or to comply with any rule,
regulation, guideline, or requirement of any securities exchange on which the limited partner interests are or
will be listed for trading;
Ÿ  are necessary or appropriate for any action taken by our general partner relating to splits or combinations of
common units under the provisions of our partnership agreement; or
Ÿ  are required to effect the intent expressed in this prospectus or the intent of the provisions of our partnership
agreement or are otherwise contemplated by our partnership agreement.
217
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Opinion of Counsel and Unitholder Approval
Any amendment that our general partner determines adversely affects in any material respect one or more
particular classes of limited partners will require the approval of at least a majority of the class or classes so
affected, but no vote will be required by any class or classes of limited partners that our general partner
determines are not adversely affected in any material respect. Any amendment that would have a material
adverse effect on the rights or preferences of any type or class of outstanding units in relation to other classes
of units will require the approval of at least a majority of the type or class of units so affected. Any
amendment that would reduce the voting percentage required to take any action, other than to remove the
general partner or call a meeting of unitholders is required to be approved by the affirmative vote of limited
partners whose aggregate outstanding units constitute not less than the voting requirement sought to be
reduced. Any amendment that would increase the percentage of units required to remove the general partner
or call a meeting of unitholders must be approved by the affirmative vote of limited partners whose aggregate
outstanding units constitute not less than the percentage sought to be increased.
For amendments of the type not requiring unitholder approval, our general partner will not be required to
obtain an opinion of counsel that an amendment will not result in a loss of limited liability to the limited
partners or result in our being treated as a taxable entity for federal income tax purposes in connection with
any of the amendments. No other amendments to our partnership agreement will become effective without the
approval of holders of at least 90% of the outstanding units voting as a single class unless we first obtain an
opinion of counsel to the effect that the amendment will not affect the limited liability under Delaware law of
any of our limited partners.
Merger, Consolidation, Conversion, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets
A merger, consolidation or conversion of us requires the prior consent of our general partner. However, our
general partner will have no duty or obligation to consent to any merger, consolidation or conversion and
may decline to do so free of any fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever to us or the limited partners,
including any duty to act in good faith or in the best interest of us or the limited partners.
In addition, our partnership agreement generally prohibits our general partner, without the prior approval of
the holders of a unit majority, from causing us to sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or substantially
all of our assets in a single transaction or a series of related transactions, including by way of merger,
consolidation or other combination. Our general partner may, however, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or
grant a security interest in all or substantially all of our assets without such approval. Our general partner
may also sell all or substantially all of our assets under a foreclosure or other realization upon those
encumbrances without such approval.
Finally, our general partner may consummate any merger without the prior approval of our unitholders if we
are the surviving entity in the transaction, our general partner has received an opinion of counsel regarding
limited liability and tax matters, the transaction would not result in an amendment to the partnership
agreement (other than an amendment that the general partner could adopt without the consent of other
partners), each of our units will be an identical unit of our partnership following the transaction and the
partnership securities to be issued do not exceed 20% of our outstanding partnership interests immediately
prior to the transaction.
If the conditions specified in our partnership agreement are satisfied, our general partner may convert us or
any of our subsidiaries into a new limited liability entity or merge us or any of our subsidiaries into, or
convey all of our assets to, a newly formed entity, if the sole purpose of that conversion, merger or
conveyance is to effect a mere change in our legal form into another limited
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
218
liability entity, we have received an opinion of counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters and our
general partner determines that the governing instruments of the new entity provide the limited partners and
our general partner with substantially the same rights and obligations as contained in our partnership
agreement. Our unitholders are not entitled to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under our partnership agreement
or applicable Delaware law in the event of a conversion, merger or consolidation, a sale of substantially all of
our assets or any other similar transaction or event.
We will continue as a limited partnership until dissolved under our partnership agreement. We will dissolve
upon:
Dissolution
Ÿ  the election of our general partner to dissolve us, if approved by the holders of units representing a unit
majority;
Ÿ  there being no limited partners, unless we are continued without dissolution in accordance with applicable
Delaware law;
Ÿ  the entry of a decree of judicial dissolution of our partnership; or
Ÿ  the withdrawal or removal of our general partner or any other event that results in its ceasing to be our general
partner other than by reason of a transfer of its general partner interest in accordance with our partnership
agreement or withdrawal or removal following approval and admission of a successor.
Upon a dissolution under the last clause above, the holders of a unit majority may also elect, within specific
time limitations, to continue our business on the same terms and conditions described in our partnership
agreement by appointing as a successor general partner an entity approved by the holders of units
representing a unit majority, subject to our receipt of an opinion of counsel to the effect that:
Ÿ  the action would not result in the loss of limited liability under Delaware law of any limited partner; and
Ÿ  neither our partnership nor any of our subsidiaries would be treated as an association taxable as a corporation
or otherwise be taxable as an entity for federal income tax purposes upon the exercise of that right to
continue (to the extent not already so treated or taxed).
Liquidation and Distribution of Proceeds
Upon our dissolution, unless our business is continued, the liquidator authorized to wind up our affairs will,
acting with all of the powers of our general partner that are necessary or appropriate, liquidate our assets and
apply the proceeds of the liquidation as described in “How We Make Distributions.” The liquidator may defer
liquidation or distribution of our assets for a reasonable period of time or distribute assets to partners in kind
if it determines that a sale would be impractical or would cause undue loss to our partners.
Withdrawal or Removal of Our General Partner
Except as described below, our general partner has agreed not to withdraw voluntarily as our general partner
prior to September 30, 2022 without obtaining the approval of the holders of at least a majority of the
outstanding units excluding units held by our general partner and its affiliates and furnishing an opinion of
counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters. On or after September 30,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
219
2022, our general partner may withdraw as general partner without first obtaining approval of any unitholder
by giving 90 days’ written notice, and that withdrawal will not constitute a violation of our partnership
agreement. Notwithstanding the information above, our general partner may withdraw without unitholder
approval upon 90 days’ notice to the limited partners if at least 50% of the outstanding units are held or
controlled by one person and its affiliates other than our general partner and its affiliates. In addition, our
partnership agreement permits our general partner to sell or otherwise transfer all of its general partner
interest in us without the approval of the unitholders. See “—Transfer of General Partner Interest.”
Upon withdrawal of our general partner under any circumstances, other than as a result of a transfer by our
general partner of all or a part of its general partner interest in us, the holders of a unit majority may select a
successor to that withdrawing general partner. If a successor is not elected, or is elected but an opinion of
counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters cannot be obtained, we will be dissolved, wound up and
liquidated, unless within a specified period of time after that withdrawal, the holders of a unit majority agree
in writing to continue our business and to appoint a successor general partner. See “—Dissolution.”
Our general partner may not be removed unless that removal is approved by the vote of the holders of not
less than 66 2/3% of the outstanding units, voting together as a single class, including units held by our
general partner and its affiliates, and we receive an opinion of counsel regarding limited liability and tax
matters. Any removal of our general partner is also subject to the approval of a successor general partner by
the vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding units, voting together as a single class. The ownership
of more than 33 1/3% of the outstanding units by our general partner and its affiliates gives them the ability to
prevent our general partner’s removal. At the closing of this offering, our general partner and its affiliates will
own approximately             % of the outstanding common units and PIK units (and approximately             % if
the underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional common units in full).
In the event the general partner withdraws or is removed, upon the admission of a successor general partner,
the general partner interest of the departing general partner shall be cancelled.
Notwithstanding any provision of the partnership agreement, if the general partner is removed as our general
partner under circumstances where cause does not exist, the PIK units held by any person will immediately
and automatically convert into common units on a one-for-one basis, provided (i) neither such person nor any
of its affiliates voted any of its units in favor of the removal and (ii) such person is not an affiliate of the
successor general partner.
Transfer of General Partner Interest
At any time, our general partner may transfer all or any of its general partner interest to another person
without the approval of our unitholders. As a condition of this transfer, the transferee must, among other
things, assume the rights and duties of our general partner, agree to be bound by the provisions of our
partnership agreement and furnish an opinion of counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters.
Transfer of Ownership Interests in Our General Partner
At any time, the owners of our general partner may sell or transfer all or part of their ownership interests in
our general partner to an affiliate or a third party without the approval of our unitholders.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
220
Transfer of PIK Units
By transfer of PIK units in accordance with our partnership agreement, each transferee of PIK units will be
admitted as a limited partner with respect to such interest transferred when such transfer and admission is
reflected in our books and records. Each transferee:
Ÿ  represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to become bound by our partnership
agreement;
Ÿ  automatically becomes bound by the terms and conditions of our partnership agreement; and
Ÿ  gives the consents, waivers and approvals contained in our partnership agreement, such as the approval of
all transactions and agreements we are entering into in connection with our formation and this offering.
Our general partner will cause any transfers to be recorded on our books and records no less frequently than
quarterly.
We may, at our discretion, treat the nominee holder of PIK units as the absolute owner. In that case, the
beneficial holder’s rights are limited solely to those that it has against the nominee holder as a result of any
agreement between the beneficial owner and the nominee holder.
PIK units are securities and any transfers are subject to the laws governing transfer of securities. In addition
to other rights acquired upon transfer, the transferor gives the transferee the right to become a limited partner
for the transferred PIK units.
Until a PIK unit has been transferred on our books, we and the transfer agent may be treated as the record
holder of the unit or right as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise required by law or stock
exchange regulations.
Change of Management Provisions
Our partnership agreement contains specific provisions that are intended to discourage a person or group
from attempting to remove Northern Tier Energy GP LLC as our general partner or from otherwise changing
our management. See “—Withdrawal or Removal of Our General Partner” for a discussion of certain
consequences of the removal of our general partner. If any person or group other than our general partner
and its affiliates acquires beneficial ownership of 20% or more of any class of units, that person or group
loses voting rights on all of its units. This loss of voting rights does not apply in certain circumstances. See
“—Voting Rights.”
Call Right
If at any time our general partner and its affiliates own more than 80% of the then-issued and outstanding
common units and PIK units, our general partner will have the right, which it may assign in whole or in part
to any of its affiliates or beneficial owners or to us, to acquire all, but not less than all, of the common units
and PIK units held by unaffiliated persons, as of a record date to be selected by our general partner, on at
least 10 but not more than 60 days’ notice.
The purchase price in the event of such an acquisition is the greater of:
(1)
the highest price paid by our general partner or any of its affiliates for common units or PIK units
purchased within the 90 days preceding the date on which our general partner first mails notice of its
election to purchase such units; and
(2)
the average of the daily closing prices of the common units or PIK units over the 20 trading days
preceding the date three days before notice of exercise of the call right is first mailed.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
221
As a result of our general partner’s right to purchase outstanding common units and PIK units, a holder of
common units or PIK units may have its units purchased at an undesirable time or at a price that may be
lower than market prices at various times prior to such purchase or lower than a unitholder may anticipate the
market price to be in the future. The federal income tax consequences to a unitholder of the exercise of this
call right are the same as a sale by that unitholder of his common units in the market. See “Material Federal
Income Tax Consequences—Disposition of Units.”
Non-Taxpaying Holders; Redemption
If our general partner, with the advice of counsel, determines that the tax status (or lack of proof thereof) of
one or more of our limited partners or their owners has, or is reasonably likely to have, a material adverse
effect on the rates chargeable to customers by us or our subsidiaries with respect to assets that are subject to
regulation by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or similar regulatory body, then our general partner
may adopt such amendments to our partnership agreement as it determines necessary or advisable to:
Ÿ  obtain proof of the federal income tax status of our limited partners (and their owners, to the extent relevant);
and
Ÿ  permit us to redeem the units held by any person whose tax status has or is reasonably likely to have a
material adverse effect on the rates or who fails to comply with the procedures instituted by our general
partner to obtain proof of the federal income tax status. The redemption price in the case of such a
redemption will be the average of the daily closing prices per unit for the 20 consecutive trading days
immediately prior to the date set for redemption.
Non-Citizen Assignees; Redemption
If our general partner, with the advice of counsel, determines we are subject to federal, state or local laws or
regulations that create a substantial risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any property that we have an interest in
because of the nationality, citizenship or other related status of any limited partner, then our general partner
may adopt such amendments to our partnership agreement as it determines necessary or advisable to:
Ÿ  obtain proof of the nationality, citizenship or other related status of our limited partner (and their owners, to
the extent relevant); and
Ÿ  permit us to redeem the units held by any person whose nationality, citizenship or other related status
creates substantial risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any property or who fails to comply with the procedures
instituted by our general partner to obtain proof of the nationality, citizenship or other related status. The
redemption price in the case of such redemption will be the average of the daily closing prices per unit for the
20 consecutive trading days immediately prior to the date set for redemption.
Meetings; Voting
Except as described below regarding a person or group owning 20% or more of any class of units then
outstanding, record holders of units on the record date will be entitled to notice of, and to vote at, meetings of
our unitholders and to act upon matters for which approvals may be solicited. Our general partner does not
anticipate that any meeting of unitholders will be called in the foreseeable future. Any action that is required
or permitted to be taken by the unitholders may be taken either at a meeting of the unitholders or without a
meeting if consents in writing describing the action so taken are signed by holders of the number of units
necessary to authorize or take that action at a meeting. Meetings of the unitholders may be called by our
general partner or by unitholders owning at least 20% of the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
222
outstanding units of the class for which a meeting is proposed. Unitholders may vote either in person or by
proxy at meetings. The holders of a majority of the outstanding units of the class or classes for which a
meeting has been called, represented in person or by proxy, will constitute a quorum unless any action by the
unitholders requires approval by holders of a greater percentage of the units, in which case the quorum will
be the greater percentage.
Each record holder of a unit has a vote according to his percentage interest in us, although additional limited
partner interests having special voting rights could be issued. See “—Issuance of Additional Partnership
Interests.” However, if at any time any person or group, other than our general partner and its affiliates or a
direct or subsequently approved transferee of our general partner or its affiliates and purchasers specifically
approved by our general partner acquires, in the aggregate, beneficial ownership of 20% or more of any class
of units then outstanding, that person or group will lose voting rights on all of its units and the units may not
be voted on any matter and will not be considered to be outstanding when sending notices of a meeting of
unitholders, calculating required votes, determining the presence of a quorum, or for other similar purposes.
Units held in nominee or street name account will be voted by the broker or other nominee in accordance with
the instruction of the beneficial owner unless the arrangement between the beneficial owner and his nominee
provides otherwise.
Except as our partnership agreement otherwise provides, common units and PIK units will vote together, and
will otherwise be treated, as a single class.
Any notice, demand, request, report, or proxy material required or permitted to be given or made to record
holders of units under our partnership agreement will be delivered to the record holder by us or by the
transfer agent.
Status as Limited Partner
By transfer of units in accordance with our partnership agreement, each transferee of units will be admitted as
a limited partner with respect to the units transferred when such transfer and admission are reflected in our
books and records. Except as described above under “—Limited Liability,” the common units will be fully
paid, and unitholders will not be required to make additional contributions.
Under our partnership agreement, we will indemnify the following persons in most circumstances, to the
fullest extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, claims, damages, or similar events:
Indemnification
Ÿ  our general partner;
Ÿ  any departing general partner;
Ÿ  any person who is or was an affiliate of our general partner or any departing general partner;
Ÿ  any person who is or was a director, officer, fiduciary, trustee, general partner, manager or managing member
of us or any of our subsidiaries, our general partner or any departing general partner or any of their affiliates;
Ÿ  any person who is or was serving as a director, officer, employee, agent, fiduciary, trustee, general partner,
manager or managing member of another person owing a fiduciary duty to us or any of our subsidiaries;
Ÿ  any person who controls our general partner or any departing general partner; or
Ÿ  any person designated by our general partner.
223
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Any indemnification under these provisions will only be out of our assets. Unless our general partner
otherwise agrees, it will not be personally liable for, or have any obligation to contribute or lend funds or
assets to us to enable us to effectuate, indemnification. We may purchase insurance against liabilities
asserted against and expenses incurred by persons for our activities, regardless of whether we would have
the power to indemnify the person against liabilities under our partnership agreement.
Reimbursement of Expenses
Our partnership agreement requires us to reimburse our general partner for all direct and indirect expenses it
incurs or payments it makes on our behalf and all other expenses allocable to us or otherwise incurred by our
general partner in connection with operating our business. The partnership agreement does not limit the
amount of expenses for which our general partner and its affiliates may be reimbursed. These expenses
include salary, bonus, incentive compensation and other amounts paid to persons who perform services for
us or on our behalf and expenses allocated to our general partner and its affiliates. Our general partner is
entitled to determine in good faith the expenses that are allocable to us.
Books and Reports
Our general partner is required to keep appropriate books of our business at our principal offices. The books
will be maintained for both tax and financial reporting purposes on an accrual basis. For tax and fiscal
reporting purposes, our fiscal year is the calendar year.
We will furnish or make available to record holders of our common units, within 105 days after the close of
each fiscal year, an annual report containing audited consolidated financial statements and a report on those
financial statements by our independent public accountants. Except for our fourth quarter, we will also
furnish or make available a report containing our unaudited consolidated financial statements within 50 days
after the close of each quarter. We will be deemed to have made any such report available if we file such
report with the SEC on EDGAR or make the report available on a publicly available website which we
maintain.
We will furnish each record holder of a unit with information reasonably required for federal and state tax
reporting purposes within 90 days after the close of each calendar year. This information is expected to be
furnished in summary form so that some complex calculations normally required of partners can be avoided.
Our ability to furnish this summary information to unitholders will depend on their cooperation in supplying
us with specific information. Every unitholder will receive information to assist it in determining its federal
and state tax liability and in filing its federal and state income tax returns, regardless of whether it supplies us
with information.
Right to Inspect Our Books and Records
Our partnership agreement provides that a limited partner can, upon reasonable demand and at his own
expense, have furnished to it:
a current list of the name and last known address of each record holder;
Ÿ  a current list of the name and last known address of each record holder;
Ÿ  copies of our partnership agreement, our certificate of limited partnership, related amendments and powers of
attorney under which they have been executed;
Ÿ  information regarding the status of our business and financial condition (provided that obligation shall be
satisfied to the extent the limited partner is furnished our most recent annual report and any subsequent
quarterly or periodic reports required to be filed (or which would be required to be filed) with the SEC pursuant
to Section 13 of the Exchange Act); and
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
224
Ÿ  any other information regarding our affairs that our general partner determines is just and reasonable.
Under our partnership agreement, however, each of our limited partners and other persons who acquire
interests in us, do not have rights to receive information from us or any of the persons we indemnify as
described under “—Indemnification” for the purpose of determining whether to pursue litigation or assist in
pending litigation against us or those indemnified persons relating to our affairs, except pursuant to the
applicable rules of discovery relating to the litigation commenced by the person seeking information.
Our general partner may, and intends to, keep confidential from the limited partners’ trade secrets or other
information the disclosure of which our general partner believes in good faith is not in our best interests,
could damage us or our business or that we are required by law or by agreements with third parties to keep
confidential.
Registration Rights
In connection with this offering, we will enter into an amended and restated registration rights agreement with
Northern Tier Investors, LLC, Northern Tier Holdings, ACON Refining, TPG Refining, NTR Partners LLC, NTR
Partners II LLC and NTI Management. Under the registration rights agreement, Northern Tier Holdings, ACON
Refining and TPG Refining can cause, and after ACON Refining and TPG Refining and their transferees no
longer hold registrable securities, NTR Partners LLC and NTR Partners II LLC can cause, Northern Tier Energy
LP to register their common units and PIK units under the Securities Act and to maintain a shelf registration
statement effective with respect to such units. In addition, under the agreement, Northern Tier Holdings,
ACON Refining, TPG Refining, NTR Partners, NTR Partners II LLC, and NTI Management are entitled to
participate in certain other registration statements and offerings conducted on behalf of Northern Tier Energy
LP or third parties. See “Common Units Eligible for Future Sale.” We have no current intentions to register
the PIK units for resale; however, we may be required to do so under the registration rights agreement
described above.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
225
COMMON UNITS ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
Upon the completion of this offering, there will be                  common units outstanding,                      of
which will be owned by Northern Tier Holdings, assuming the underwriters do not exercise their option to
purchase additional common units; if they exercise such option in full, Northern Tier Holdings will own
                 common units. The sale of these common units could have an adverse impact on the price of our
common units or on any trading market that may develop.
The                  common units sold in this offering (or                  common units if the underwriters exercise
their option to purchase additional common units in full) will generally be freely transferable without
restriction or further registration under the Securities Act. However, any common units held by an “affiliate”
of ours may not be resold publicly except in compliance with the registration requirements of the Securities
Act or under an exemption from the registration requirements of the Securities Act pursuant to Rule 144 or
otherwise. Rule 144 permits securities acquired by an affiliate of ours to be sold into the market in an amount
that does not exceed, during any three-month period, the greater of:
Ÿ  1% of the total number of the class of securities outstanding; or
Ÿ  the average weekly reported trading volume of the common units for the four calendar weeks prior to the sale.
Sales under Rule 144 by our affiliates are also subject to specific manner of sale provisions, holding period
requirements, notice requirements and the availability of current public information about us. A person who
is not deemed to have been an affiliate of ours at any time during the three months preceding a sale, and who
has beneficially owned common units for at least six months, would be entitled to sell those common units
under Rule 144 without regard to the volume, manner of sale and notice requirements of Rule 144 so long as
we comply with the current public information requirement for the next six months after the six-month
holding period expires.
Our partnership agreement provides that we may issue an unlimited number of limited partner interests of any
type without a vote of the unitholders. Any issuance of additional common units or other equity interests
would result in a corresponding decrease in the proportionate ownership interest in us represented by, and
could adversely affect the distributions to and market price of, common units then outstanding. See “The
Partnership Agreement—Issuance of Additional Partnership Interests.”
In connection with this offering, we will enter into an amended and restated registration rights agreement with
Northern Tier Investors, LLC, Northern Tier Holdings, ACON Refining, TPG Refining, NTR Partners LLC, NTR
Partners II LLC and NTI Management. Under the registration rights agreement, Northern Tier Holdings, ACON
Refining and TPG Refining can cause, and after ACON Refining and TPG Refining and their transferees no
longer hold registrable securities, NTR Partners LLC and NTR Partners II LLC can cause, Northern Tier Energy
LP to register their common units and PIK units under the Securities Act and to maintain a shelf registration
statement effective with respect to such units. In addition, under the agreement, Northern Tier Holdings,
ACON Refining, TPG Refining, NTR Partners LLC, NTR Partners II LLC and NTI Management are entitled to
participate in certain other registration statements and offerings conducted on behalf of Northern Tier Energy
LP or third parties. We have no current intentions to register the PIK units for resale; however, we may be
required to do so under the registration rights agreement described above.
We, our general partner, the directors and executive officers of our general partner, and Northern Tier
Holdings has agreed not to sell any common units until 180 days after the date of this prospectus, subject to
certain exceptions. See “Underwriters” for a description of these lock-up provisions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
226
In addition, we intend to file a registration statement on Form S-8 under the Securities Act to register common
units issuable under our long-term incentive plan. This registration statement is expected to be filed following
the effective date of the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part and will be effective upon
filing. Units issued under our long-term incentive plan will be eligible for resale in the public market without
restriction after the effective date of the Form S-8 registration statement, subject to Rule 144 limitations
applicable to affiliates.
227
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
MATERIAL FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
This section summarizes the material federal income tax consequences that may be relevant to prospective
common unitholders. To the extent this section discusses federal income taxes, that discussion is based
upon current provisions of the Code, Treasury Regulations, and current administrative rulings and court
decisions, all of which are subject to change. Changes in these authorities may cause the federal income tax
consequences to a prospective unitholder to vary substantially from those described below. Unless the
context otherwise requires, references in this section to “we” or “us” are references to the partnership and its
subsidiaries.
Legal conclusions contained in this section, unless otherwise noted, are the opinion of Vinson & Elkins
L.L.P. and are based on the accuracy of representations made by us to them for this purpose. However, this
section does not address all federal income tax matters that affect us or our unitholders. Furthermore, this
section focuses on unitholders who are individual citizens or residents of the United States (for federal
income tax purposes), whose functional currencies are the U.S. dollar and who hold units as capital assets
(generally, property that is held for investment). This section has limited applicability to corporations,
partnerships, entities treated as partnerships for federal income tax purposes, estates, trusts, non-resident
aliens or other unitholders subject to specialized tax treatment, such as tax-exempt institutions, non-U.S.
persons, IRAs, employee benefit plans, real estate investment trusts or mutual funds. Accordingly, because
each unitholder may have unique circumstances beyond the scope of the discussion herein, we encourage
each unitholder to consult such unitholder’s own tax advisor in analyzing the federal, state, local and non-
U.S. tax consequences that are particular to that unitholder resulting from ownership or disposition of its
units.
We are relying on opinions and advice of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. with respect to the matters described herein.
An opinion of counsel represents only that counsel’s best legal judgment and does not bind the IRS or
courts. Accordingly, the opinions and statements made herein may not be sustained by a court if contested
by the IRS. Any such contest of the matters described herein may materially and adversely impact the market
for our units and the prices at which such units trade. In addition, our costs of any contest with the IRS will
be borne indirectly by our unitholders because the costs will reduce our cash available for distribution.
Furthermore, our tax treatment, or the tax treatment of an investment in us, may be significantly modified by
future legislative or administrative changes or court decisions, which might be retroactively applied.
For the reasons described below, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has not rendered an opinion with respect to the
following federal income tax issues: (1) the treatment of a unitholder whose units are loaned to a short seller
to cover a short sale of units (please see “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Treatment of Short
Sales”); (2) whether our monthly convention for allocating taxable income and losses is permitted by existing
Treasury Regulations (please see “—Disposition of Units—Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees”);
and (3) whether our method for taking into account Section 743 adjustments is sustainable in certain cases
(please see “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Section 754 Election” and “—Uniformity of Units”).
Partnership Status
Taxation of the Partnership
We expect to be treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and, therefore, generally will not be
liable for federal income taxes. Instead, as described below, each of our unitholders will take into account its
respective share of our items of income, gain, loss and deduction in computing its federal income tax liability
as if the unitholder had earned such income directly, even if no cash distributions are made to the unitholder.
Distributions by us to a unitholder generally will not
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
228
give rise to income or gain taxable to such unitholder, unless the amount of cash distributed to a unitholder
exceeds the unitholder’s adjusted tax basis in its units.
Section 7704 of the Code generally provides that publicly traded partnerships will be treated as corporations
for federal income tax purposes. However, if 90% or more of a partnership’s gross income for every taxable
year it is publicly traded consists of “qualifying income,” the partnership may continue to be treated as a
partnership for federal income tax purposes (the “Qualifying Income Exception”). Qualifying income includes
(i) income and gains derived from the refining, transportation, processing and marketing of crude oil, natural
gas and products thereof, (ii) interest (other than from a financial business), (iii) dividends, (iv) gains from the
sale of real property and (v) gains from the sale or other disposition of capital assets held for the production
of qualifying income. We estimate that approximately 6% of our current gross income is not qualifying
income; however, this estimate could change from time to time.
Based upon factual representations made by us and our general partner regarding the composition of our
income and the other representations set forth below, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. is of the opinion that we will be
treated as a partnership and each of our partnership or limited liability company subsidiaries, other than
Northern Tier Retail Holdings LLC and Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC, or any of their subsidiaries, will be
treated as a partnership or will be disregarded as an entity separate from us for federal income tax purposes.
In rendering its opinion, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has relied on factual representations made by us and our
general partner. The representations made by us and our general partner upon which Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.
has relied include, without limitation:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Neither we nor any of our partnership or limited liability company subsidiaries, other than Northern Tier
Retail Holdings LLC and Northern Tier Energy Holdings LLC, has elected to be treated as a corporation for
federal income tax purposes;
For each taxable year since and including the year of our initial public offering, more than 90% of our
gross income has been and will be income of a character that Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has opined is
“qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code; and
Each hedging transaction that we treat as resulting in qualifying income has been and will be appropriately
identified as a hedging transaction pursuant to applicable Treasury Regulations, and has been and will be
associated with our refining operations, our purchases of crude oil or our sales of refinery products thereof
that are held or to be held by us in activities that Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has opined or will opine result in
qualifying income.
We believe that these representations are true and will be true in the future.
If we fail to meet the Qualifying Income Exception, other than a failure that is determined by the IRS to be
inadvertent and that is cured within a reasonable time after discovery (in which case the IRS may also require
us to make adjustments with respect to our unitholders or pay other amounts), we will be treated as
transferring all of our assets, subject to liabilities, to a newly formed corporation, on the first day of the year
in which we fail to meet the Qualifying Income Exception, in return for stock in that corporation and then
distributing that stock to our unitholders in liquidation of their units. This deemed contribution and
liquidation should not result in the recognition of taxable income by our unitholders or us so long as our
liabilities do not exceed the tax basis of our assets. Thereafter, we would be treated as an association taxable
as a corporation for federal income tax purposes.
If for any reason we are taxable as a corporation in any taxable year, our items of income, gain, loss and
deduction would be taken into account by us in determining the amount of our liability for federal income tax,
rather than being passed through to our unitholders. Accordingly, our taxation as a
Table of Contents
229
Index to Financial Statements
corporation would materially reduce our cash distributions to unitholders and thus would likely substantially
reduce the value of our units. In addition, any distribution made to a unitholder would be treated as (i) a
taxable dividend to the extent of our current or accumulated earnings and profits, then (ii) a nontaxable return
of capital to the extent of the unitholder’s tax basis in our units, and thereafter (iii) taxable capital gain.
The remainder of this discussion is based on the opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. that we will be treated as
a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
Limited Partner Status
Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership
Unitholders who are admitted as limited partners of the partnership, as well as unitholders whose units are
held in street name or by a nominee and who have the right to direct the nominee in the exercise of all
substantive rights attendant to the ownership of units, will be treated as partners of the partnership for federal
income tax purposes. For a discussion related to the risks of losing partner status as a result of short sales,
please see “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Treatment of Short Sales.” Unitholders who are not
treated as partners in us as described above are urged to consult their own tax advisors with respect to the tax
consequences applicable to them under the circumstances.
Flow-Through of Taxable Income
Subject to the discussion below under “—Entity-Level Collections of Unitholder Taxes” with respect to
payments we may be required to make on behalf of our unitholders, we will not pay any federal income tax.
Rather, each unitholder will be required to report on its income tax return its share of our income, gains,
losses and deductions for our taxable year or years ending with or within its taxable year without regard to
whether we make cash distributions to him. Consequently, we may allocate income to a unitholder even if that
unitholder has not received a cash distribution. The income we allocate to common unitholders will generally
be taxable as ordinary income.
Ratio of Taxable Income to Distributions
We estimate that a purchaser of units in this offering who owns those units from the date of closing of this
offering through the record date for distributions for the period ending December 31, 2015, will be allocated,
on a cumulative basis, an amount of federal taxable income for that period that will be approximately 30% of
the cash distributed with respect to that period. Because of the nature of our business and the expected
variability of our quarterly distributions, however, the ratio of our taxable income to distributions may vary
significantly from one year to another. These estimates are based upon the assumption that earnings from
operations will approximate the amount required to make the anticipated quarterly distribution on all units
and other assumptions with respect to capital expenditures, cash flow, net working capital and anticipated
cash distributions. These estimates and assumptions are subject to, among other things, numerous business,
economic, regulatory, legislative, competitive and political uncertainties beyond our control. Further, the
estimates are based on current tax law and tax reporting positions that we will adopt and with which the IRS
could disagree. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that these estimates will prove to be correct. The actual
ratio of taxable income to cash distributions could be higher or lower than expected, and any differences
could be material and could materially affect the value of the units. For example, the ratio of taxable income to
cash distributions to a purchaser of units in this offering will be higher, and perhaps substantially higher,
than our estimate with respect to the period described above if:
Ÿ  the earnings from operations exceeds the amount required to make anticipated quarterly distributions on all
units, yet we only distribute the anticipated quarterly distributions on all units; or
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
230
we make a future offering of units and use the proceeds of the offering in a manner that does not produce
Ÿ  we make a future offering of units and use the proceeds of the offering in a manner that does not produce
substantial additional deductions during the period described above, such as to repay indebtedness
outstanding at the time of this offering or to acquire property that is not eligible for depreciation or
amortization for federal income tax purposes or that is depreciable or amortizable at a rate significantly slower
than the rate applicable to our assets at the time of this offering.
Basis of Units
A unitholder’s tax basis in its units initially will be the amount it paid for those units plus its initial share of
our liabilities. That basis generally will be (i) increased by the unitholder’s share of our income and any
increases in such unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities, and (ii) decreased, but not below zero, by
distributions to it, by its share of our losses, any decreases in its share of our nonrecourse liabilities and its
share of our expenditures that are neither deductible nor required to be capitalized.
Treatment of Distributions
Distributions made by us to a unitholder generally will not be taxable to the unitholder, unless such
distributions are of cash or marketable securities that are treated as cash and exceed the unitholder’s tax
basis in its units, in which case the unitholder will recognize gain taxable in the manner described below
under “—Disposition of Units.”
Any reduction in a unitholder’s share of our “nonrecourse liabilities” (liabilities for which no partner bears
the economic risk of loss) will be treated as a distribution by us of cash to that unitholder. A decrease in a
unitholder’s percentage interest in us because of our issuance of additional units will decrease the
unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities. For purposes of the foregoing, a unitholder’s share of our
nonrecourse liabilities generally will be based upon that unitholder’s share of the unrealized appreciation (or
depreciation) in our assets, to the extent thereof, with any excess liabilities allocated based on the
unitholder’s share of our profits. Please see “Disposition of Units.”
A non-pro rata distribution of money or property (including a deemed distribution described above) may
cause a unitholder to recognize ordinary income, if the distribution reduces the unitholder’s share of our
“unrealized receivables,” including depreciation recapture and substantially appreciated “inventory items,”
both as defined in Section 751 of the Code (“Section 751 Assets”). To the extent of such reduction, the
unitholder would be deemed to receive its proportionate share of the Section 751 Assets and exchange such
assets with us in return for an allocable portion of the non-pro rata distribution. This latter deemed exchange
generally will result in the unitholder’s realization of ordinary income in an amount equal to the excess of
(1) the non-pro rata portion of that distribution over (2) the unitholder’s tax basis (generally zero) in the
Section 751 Assets deemed to be relinquished in the exchange.
Limitations on Deductibility of Losses
The deduction by a unitholder of its share of our losses will be limited to the lesser of (i) the unitholder’s tax
basis in its units, and (ii) in the case of a unitholder who is an individual, estate, trust or corporation (if more
than 50% of the corporation’s stock is owned directly or indirectly by or for five or fewer individuals or a
specific type of tax exempt organization), the amount for which the unitholder is considered to be “at risk”
with respect to our activities. In general, a unitholder will be at risk to the extent of its tax basis in its units,
reduced by (1) any portion of that basis attributable to the unitholder’s share of our liabilities, (2) any portion
of that basis representing amounts otherwise protected against loss because of a guarantee, stop loss
agreement or similar arrangement and (3) any amount of money the unitholder borrows to acquire or hold its
units, if the lender of those borrowed funds owns an interest in us, is related to another unitholder or can look
only to the units for repayment.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
231
A unitholder subject to the basis and at risk limitation must recapture losses deducted in previous years to
the extent that distributions (including distributions as a result of a reduction in a unitholder’s share of
nonrecourse liabilities) cause the unitholder’s at risk amount to be less than zero at the end of any taxable
year. Losses disallowed to a unitholder or recaptured as a result of these limitations will carry forward and
will be allowable as a deduction in a later year to the extent that the unitholder’s tax basis or at risk amount,
whichever is the limiting factor, is subsequently increased. Upon a taxable disposition of units, any gain
recognized by a unitholder can be offset by losses that were previously suspended by the at risk limitation
but not losses suspended by the basis limitation. Any loss previously suspended by the at risk limitation in
excess of that gain can no longer be used.
In addition to the basis and at risk limitations, passive activity loss limitations generally limit the deductibility
of losses incurred by individuals, estates, trusts, some closely held corporations and personal service
corporations from “passive activities” (generally, trade or business activities in which the taxpayer does not
materially participate). The passive loss limitations are applied separately with respect to each publicly traded
partnership. Consequently, any passive losses we generate will be available to offset only our passive income
generated in the future. Passive losses that are not deductible because they exceed a unitholder’s share of
income we generate may be deducted in full when the unitholder disposes of all of its units in a fully taxable
transaction with an unrelated party. The passive activity loss rules are applied after other applicable
limitations on deductions, including the at risk and basis limitations.
Limitations on Interest Deductions
The deductibility of a non-corporate taxpayer’s “investment interest expense” is generally limited to the
amount of that taxpayer’s “net investment income.” Investment interest expense includes:
Ÿ  interest on indebtedness properly allocable to property held for investment;
Ÿ  interest expense attributed to portfolio income; and
Ÿ  the portion of interest expense incurred to purchase or carry an interest in a passive activity to the extent
attributable to portfolio income.
The computation of a unitholder’s investment interest expense will take into account interest on any margin
account borrowing or other loan incurred to purchase or carry a unit. Net investment income includes gross
income from property held for investment and amounts treated as portfolio income under the passive loss
rules, less deductible expenses other than interest directly connected with the production of investment
income. Such term generally does not include qualified dividend income or gains attributable to the
disposition of property held for investment. A unitholder’s share of a publicly traded partnership’s portfolio
income and, according to the IRS, net passive income will be treated as investment income for purposes of
the investment interest expense limitation.
Entity-Level Collections of Unitholder Taxes
If we are required or elect under applicable law to pay any federal, state, local or non-U.S. tax on behalf of any
current or former unitholder, we are authorized to pay those taxes and treat the payment as a distribution of
cash to the relevant unitholder. Where the relevant unitholder’s identity cannot be determined, we are
authorized to treat the payment as a distribution to all current unitholders. We are authorized to amend our
partnership agreement in the manner necessary to maintain uniformity of intrinsic tax characteristics of units
and to adjust later distributions, so that after giving effect to these distributions, the priority and
characterization of distributions otherwise applicable under our partnership agreement is maintained as
nearly as is practicable. Payments by us as described above could give rise to an overpayment of tax on
behalf of a unitholder, in which event the unitholder may be entitled to claim a refund of the overpayment
amount. Unitholders are urged to consult their tax advisors to determine the consequences to them of any tax
payment we make on their behalf.
Table of Contents
232
Index to Financial Statements
Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction
In general, if we have a net profit, our items of income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated among our
unitholders in accordance with their percentage interests in us. If we have a net loss, our items of income,
gain, loss and deduction will be allocated first among our unitholders in accordance with their percentage
interests in us to the extent of their positive capital accounts and thereafter to our general partner.
Specified items of our income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated under Section 704(c) of the Code to
account for any difference between the tax basis and fair market value of our assets at the time such assets
are contributed to us and at the time of any subsequent offering of our units by us (a “Book-Tax Disparity”). In
addition, items of recapture income will be specially allocated to the extent possible to the unitholder who
was allocated the deduction giving rise to that recapture income in order to minimize the recognition of
ordinary income by other unitholders.
An allocation of items of our income, gain, loss or deduction, generally must have “substantial economic
effect” as determined under Treasury Regulations. If an allocation does not have substantial economic effect,
it will be reallocated to our unitholders on the basis of their interests in us, which will be determined by
taking into account all the facts and circumstances, including:
Ÿ  our partners’ relative contributions to us;
Ÿ  the interests of all of our partners in our profits and losses;
Ÿ  the interest of all of our partners in our cash flow; and
Ÿ  the rights of all of our partners to distributions of capital upon liquidation.
Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. is of the opinion that, with the exception of the issues described in “—Section 754
Election” and “—Disposition of Units—Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees,” allocations under
our partnership agreement will have substantial economic effect.
Treatment of Liquidation and Termination
In general, if we liquidate or terminate the partnership and sell all of our assets, any gain or loss recognized
upon such sale generally will be allocated among our unitholders in the manner described under “—
Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction.” Please read “—Treatment of Distributions” for a discussion
of the termination of any distributions that may result from a liquidation of the partnership. For a general
discussion of the events and circumstances of a liquidation and termination of the partnership, please read
“The Partnership Agreement—Termination and Dissolution” and “The Partnership Agreement—Liquidation
and Distribution of Proceeds.”
Treatment of Short Sales
A unitholder whose units are loaned to a “short seller” to cover a short sale of units may be treated as having
disposed of those units. If so, such unitholder would no longer be treated for tax purposes as a partner with
respect to those units during the period of the loan and may recognize gain or loss from the disposition. As a
result, during this period (i) any of our income, gain, loss or deduction allocated to those units would not be
reportable by the unitholder, and (ii) any cash distributions received by the unitholder as to those units would
be fully taxable, possibly as ordinary income.
Due to lack of controlling authority, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has not rendered an opinion regarding the tax
treatment of a unitholder whose units are loaned to a short seller to cover a short sale of our units.
Unitholders desiring to assure their status as partners and avoid the risk of gain recognition from a loan to a
short seller are urged to modify any applicable brokerage account agreements to prohibit
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
233
their brokers from borrowing and lending their units. The IRS has announced that it is studying issues
relating to the tax treatment of short sales of partnership interests. Please see “—Disposition of Units—
Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
Alternative Minimum Tax
If a unitholder is subject to federal alternative minimum tax, such tax will apply to such unitholder’s
distributive share of any items of our income, gain, loss or deduction. The current alternative minimum tax
rate for non-corporate taxpayers is 26% on the first $175,000 of alternative minimum taxable income in excess
of the exemption amount and 28% on any additional alternative minimum taxable income. Prospective
unitholders are urged to consult with their tax advisors with respect to the impact of an investment in our
units on their alternative minimum tax liability.
Tax Rates
Under current law, the highest marginal federal income tax rates for individuals applicable to ordinary income
and long-term capital gains (generally, gains from the sale or exchange of certain investment assets held for
more than one year) are 35%; and 15%, respectively. However, absent new legislation extending the current
rates, beginning January 1, 2013, the highest marginal federal income tax rate applicable to ordinary income
and long-term capital gains of individuals will increase to 39.6% and 20%, respectively. These rates are
subject to change by new legislation at any time.
A 3.8% Medicare tax on certain investment income earned by individuals, estates, and trusts will apply for
taxable years beginning after December 31, 2012. For these purposes, investment income generally includes a
unitholder’s allocable share of our income and gain realized by a unitholder from a sale of units. In the case
of an individual, the tax will be imposed on the lesser of (i) the unitholder’s net investment income from all
investments, or (ii) the amount by which the unitholder’s modified adjusted gross income exceeds $250,000 (if
the unitholder is married and filing jointly or a surviving spouse), $125,000 (if the unitholder is married and
filing separately) or $200,000 (in any other case). In the case of an estate or trust, the tax will be imposed on
the lesser of (i) undistributed net investment income, or (ii) the excess adjusted gross income over the dollar
amount at which the highest income tax bracket applicable to an estate or trust begins.
Section 754 Election
We expect to have in place an effective election under Section 754 of the Code that permits us to adjust the tax
bases in our assets as to specific purchased units under Section 743(b) of the Code to reflect the unit
purchase price. The Section 743(b) adjustment separately applies to each purchaser of units based upon the
values and bases of our assets at the time of the relevant purchase. The Section 743(b) adjustment does not
apply to a person who purchases units directly from us. For purposes of this discussion, a unitholder’s basis
in our assets will be considered to have two components: (1) its share of the tax basis in our assets as to all
unitholders (“common basis”) and (2) its Section 743(b) adjustment to that tax basis (which may be positive
or negative).
Under Treasury Regulations, a Section 743(b) adjustment attributable to property depreciable under
Section 168 of the Code, such as our storage assets, may be amortizable over the remaining cost recovery
period for such property, while a Section 743(b) adjustment attributable to properties subject to depreciation
under Section 167 of the Code, must be amortized straight-line or using the 150% declining balance method.
As a result, if we owned any assets subject to depreciation under Section 167 of the Code, the amortization
rates could give rise to differences in the taxation of unitholders purchasing units from us and unitholders
purchasing units from other unitholders.
Table of Contents
234
Index to Financial Statements
Under our partnership agreement, we are authorized to take a position to preserve the uniformity of units even
if that position is not consistent with these or any other Treasury Regulations. Please see “—Uniformity of
Units.” Consistent with this authority, we intend to treat properties depreciable under Section 167, if any, in
the same manner as properties depreciable under Section 168 for this purpose. These positions are
consistent with the methods employed by other publicly traded partnerships but are inconsistent with the
existing Treasury Regulations, and Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has not opined on the validity of this approach.
The IRS may challenge our position with respect to depreciating or amortizing the Section 743(b) adjustment
we take to preserve the uniformity of units due to lack of controlling authority. Because a unitholder’s tax
basis for its units is reduced by its share of our items of deduction or loss, any position we take that
understates deductions will overstate a unitholder’s basis in its units, and may cause the unitholder to
understate gain or overstate loss on any sale of such units. Please see “—Disposition of Units—Recognition
of Gain or Loss.” If a challenge to such treatment were sustained, the gain from the sale of units may be
increased without the benefit of additional deductions.
The calculations involved in the Section 754 election are complex and will be made on the basis of
assumptions as to the value of our assets and other matters. The IRS could seek to reallocate some or all of
any Section 743(b) adjustment we allocated to our assets subject to depreciation to goodwill or
nondepreciable assets. Goodwill, as an intangible asset, is generally nonamortizable or amortizable over a
longer period of time or under a less accelerated method than our tangible assets. We cannot assure any
unitholder that the determinations we make will not be successfully challenged by the IRS or that the
resulting deductions will not be reduced or disallowed altogether. Should the IRS require a different tax basis
adjustment to be made, and should, in our opinion, the expense of compliance exceed the benefit of the
election, we may seek permission from the IRS to revoke our Section 754 election. If permission is granted, a
subsequent purchaser of units may be allocated more income than it would have been allocated had the
election not been revoked.
Accounting Method and Taxable Year
Tax Treatment of Operations
We will use the year ending December 31 as our taxable year and the accrual method of accounting for federal
income tax purposes. Each unitholder will be required to include in income its share of our income, gain,
loss and deduction for each taxable year ending within or with its taxable year. In addition, a unitholder who
has a taxable year ending on a date other than December 31 and who disposes of all of its units following the
close of our taxable year but before the close of its taxable year must include its share of our income, gain,
loss and deduction in income for its taxable year, with the result that it will be required to include in income
for its taxable year its share of more than one year of our income, gain, loss and deduction. Please see “—
Disposition of Units—Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees.”
Tax Basis, Depreciation and Amortization
The tax basis of our assets will be used for purposes of computing depreciation and cost recovery deductions
and, ultimately, gain or loss on the disposition of these assets. The federal income tax burden associated with
the difference between the fair market value of our assets and their tax basis immediately prior to an offering
will be borne by our partners holding interests in us prior to this offering. Please see “—Tax Consequences of
Unit Ownership—Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction.”
If we dispose of depreciable property by sale, foreclosure or otherwise, all or a portion of any gain,
determined by reference to the amount of depreciation previously deducted and the nature of the property,
may be subject to the recapture rules and taxed as ordinary income rather than capital gain.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
235
Similarly, a unitholder who has taken cost recovery or depreciation deductions with respect to property we
own will likely be required to recapture some or all of those deductions as ordinary income upon a sale of its
interest in us. Please see “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and
Deduction” and “—Disposition of Units—Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
The costs we incur in offering and selling our units (called “syndication expenses”) must be capitalized and
cannot be deducted currently, ratably or upon our termination. While there are uncertainties regarding the
classification of costs as organization expenses, which may be amortized by us, and as syndication
expenses, which may not be amortized by us, the underwriting discount we incur will be treated as
syndication expenses.
Valuation and Tax Basis of Our Properties
The federal income tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of units will depend in part on our
estimates of the relative fair market values and the initial tax bases of our assets. Although we may from time
to time consult with professional appraisers regarding valuation matters, we will make many of the relative
fair market value estimates ourselves. These estimates and determinations of tax basis are subject to
challenge and will not be binding on the IRS or the courts. If the estimates of fair market value or basis are
later found to be incorrect, the character and amount of items of income, gain, loss or deduction previously
reported by unitholders could change, and unitholders could be required to adjust their tax liability for prior
years and incur interest and penalties with respect to those adjustments.
Recognition of Gain or Loss
Disposition of Units
A unitholder will be required to recognize gain or loss on a sale of units equal to the difference between the
unitholder’s amount realized and tax basis for the units sold. A unitholder’s amount realized will equal the
sum of the cash or the fair market value of other property it receives plus its share of our liabilities with
respect to such units. Because the amount realized includes a unitholder’s share of our liabilities, the gain
recognized on the sale of units could result in a tax liability in excess of any cash received from the sale.
Except as noted below, gain or loss recognized by a unitholder on the sale or exchange of a unit held for
more than one year generally will be taxable as long-term capital gain or loss. However, gain or loss
recognized on the disposition of units will be separately computed and taxed as ordinary income or loss
under Section 751 of the Code to the extent attributable to Section 751 Assets, primarily inventory items and
depreciation recapture. Ordinary income attributable to Section 751 Assets may exceed net taxable gain
realized on the sale of a unit and may be recognized even if there is a net taxable loss realized on the sale of a
unit. Thus, a unitholder may recognize both ordinary income and a capital loss upon a sale of units. Net
capital loss may offset capital gains and, in the case of individuals, up to $3,000 of ordinary income per year.
The IRS has ruled that a partner who acquires interests in a partnership in separate transactions must
combine those interests and maintain a single adjusted tax basis for all those interests. Upon a sale or other
disposition of less than all of those interests, a portion of that tax basis must be allocated to the interests sold
using an “equitable apportionment” method, which generally means that the tax basis allocated to the interest
sold equals an amount that bears the same relation to the partner’s tax basis in its entire interest in the
partnership as the value of the interest sold bears to the value of the partner’s entire interest in the
partnership.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
236
Treasury Regulations under Section 1223 of the Code allow a selling unitholder who can identify units
transferred with an ascertainable holding period to elect to use the actual holding period of the units
transferred. Thus, according to the ruling discussed above, a unitholder will be unable to select high or low
basis units to sell as would be the case with corporate stock, but, according to the Treasury Regulations, a
unitholder may designate specific units sold for purposes of determining the holding period of units
transferred. A unitholder electing to use the actual holding period of units transferred must consistently use
that identification method for all subsequent sales or exchanges of our units. A unitholder considering the
purchase of additional units or a sale of units purchased in separate transactions is urged to consult its tax
advisor as to the possible consequences of this ruling and application of the Treasury Regulations.
Specific provisions of the Code affect the taxation of some financial products and securities, including
partnership interests, by treating a taxpayer as having sold an “appreciated” partnership interest, one in
which gain would be recognized if it were sold, assigned or terminated at its fair market value, if the taxpayer
or related persons enter(s) into:
Ÿ  a short sale;
Ÿ  an offsetting notional principal contract; or
Ÿ  a futures or forward contract with respect to the partnership interest or substantially identical property.
Moreover, if a taxpayer has previously entered into a short sale, an offsetting notional principal contract or a
futures or forward contract with respect to the partnership interest, the taxpayer will be treated as having sold
that position if the taxpayer or a related person then acquires the partnership interest or substantially identical
property. The Secretary of the Treasury is also authorized to issue regulations that treat a taxpayer that enters
into transactions or positions that have substantially the same effect as the preceding transactions as having
constructively sold the financial position.
Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees
In general, our taxable income or loss will be determined quarterly, will be prorated on a monthly basis and
will be subsequently apportioned among the common unitholders in proportion to the number of units owned
by each of them as of the opening of the applicable exchange on the first business day of the month (the
“Allocation Date”). However, gain or loss realized on a sale or other disposition of our assets or, in the
discretion of the general partner, any other extraordinary item of income, gain, loss or deduction will be
allocated among the unitholders on the Allocation Date in the month in which such income, gain, loss or
deduction is recognized. As a result, a unitholder transferring units may be allocated income, gain, loss and
deduction realized after the date of transfer.
Although simplifying conventions are contemplated by the Code and most publicly traded partnerships use
similar simplifying conventions, the use of this method may not be permitted under existing Treasury
Regulations. Recently, however, the Department of the Treasury and the IRS issued proposed Treasury
Regulations that provide a safe harbor pursuant to which a publicly traded partnership may use a similar
monthly simplifying convention to allocate tax items among transferor and transferee unitholders, although
such tax items must be prorated on a daily basis. Nonetheless, the proposed regulations do not specifically
authorize the use of the proration method we have adopted. Accordingly, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. is unable to
opine on the validity of this method of allocating income and deductions between transferee and transferor
unitholders. If this method is not allowed under the Treasury Regulations, or only applies to transfers of less
than all of the unitholder’s interest, our taxable income or losses might be reallocated among the unitholders.
We are authorized to revise our method of allocation between transferee and transferor unitholders, as well as
among unitholders whose interests vary during a taxable year, to conform to a method permitted under future
Treasury Regulations.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
237
A unitholder who disposes of our units prior to the record date set for a cash distribution for that quarter will
be allocated items of our income, gain, loss and deduction attributable to the month of disposition but will
not be entitled to receive a cash distribution for that period.
Notification Requirements
A unitholder who sells or purchases any of our units is generally required to notify us in writing of that
transaction within 30 days after the transaction (or, if earlier, January 15 of the year following the transaction).
Upon receiving such notifications, we are required to notify the IRS of that transaction and to furnish specified
information to the transferor and transferee. Failure to notify us of a transfer of units may, in some cases, lead
to the imposition of penalties. However, these reporting requirements do not apply to a sale by an individual
who is a citizen of the United States and who effects the sale through a broker who will satisfy such
requirements.
Constructive Termination
We will be considered to have terminated our partnership for federal income tax purposes upon the sale or
exchange of 50% or more of the total interests in our capital and profits within a twelve-month period. For
such purposes, multiple sales of the same unit are counted only once. A constructive termination results in
the closing of our taxable year for all unitholders. In the case of a unitholder reporting on a taxable year other
than a fiscal year ending December 31, the closing of our taxable year may result in more than twelve months
of our taxable income or loss being includable in such unitholder’s taxable income for the year of
termination.
A constructive termination occurring on a date other than December 31 will result in us filing two tax returns
for one fiscal year and the cost of the preparation of these returns will be borne by all unitholders. However,
pursuant to an IRS relief procedure the IRS may allow, among other things, a constructively terminated
partnership to provide a single Schedule K-1 for the calendar year in which a termination occurs. We would
be required to make new tax elections after a termination, including a new election under Section 754 of the
Code, and a termination would result in a deferral of our deductions for depreciation. A termination could
also result in penalties if we were unable to determine that the termination had occurred. Moreover, a
termination might either accelerate the application of, or subject us to, any tax legislation enacted before the
termination.
Uniformity of Units
Because we cannot match transferors and transferees of units and for other reasons, we must maintain
uniformity of the economic and tax characteristics of the units to a purchaser of these units. In the absence of
uniformity, we may be unable to completely comply with a number of federal income tax requirements, both
statutory and regulatory. A lack of uniformity could result from a literal application of Treasury Regulation
Section 1.167(c)-1(a)(6), which is not anticipated to apply to a material portion of our assets. Any non-
uniformity could have a negative impact on the value of the units. Please see “—Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership—Section 754 Election.”
If necessary to preserve the uniformity of our units, our partnership agreement permits our general partner to
take positions in filing our tax returns even when contrary to a literal application of regulations like the one
described above. These positions may include reducing for some unitholders the depreciation, amortization
or loss deductions to which they would otherwise be entitled or reporting a slower amortization of
Section 743(b) adjustments for some unitholders than that to which they would otherwise be entitled. The
general partner does not anticipate needing to take such positions, but if they were necessary, Vinson &
Elkins L.L.P. would be unable to opine as to validity of such filing positions in the absence of direct and
controlling authority.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
238
A unitholder’s basis in units is reduced by its share of our deductions (whether or not such deductions were
claimed on an individual income tax return) so that any position that we take that understates deductions will
overstate the unitholder’s basis in its units, and may cause the unitholder to understate gain or overstate loss
on any sale of such units. Please see “—Disposition of Units—Recognition of Gain or Loss” above and “—
Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Section 754 Election” above. The IRS may challenge one or more of
any positions we take to preserve the uniformity of units. If such a challenge were sustained, the uniformity of
units might be affected, and, under some circumstances, the gain from the sale of units might be increased
without the benefit of additional deductions.
Tax-Exempt Organizations and Other Investors
Ownership of units by employee benefit plans, other tax-exempt organizations, non-resident aliens, non-U.S.
corporations and other non-U.S. persons raises issues unique to those investors and, as described below,
may have substantially adverse tax consequences to them. Prospective unitholders who are tax-exempt
entities or non-U.S. persons should consult their tax advisor before investing in our units. Employee benefit
plans and most other tax-exempt organizations, including IRAs and other retirement plans, are subject to
federal income tax on unrelated business taxable income. Virtually all of our income will be unrelated
business taxable income and will be taxable to a tax-exempt unitholder.
Non-resident aliens and foreign corporations, trusts or estates that own units will be considered to be
engaged in business in the United States because of their ownership of our units. Consequently, they will be
required to file federal tax returns to report their share of our income, gain, loss or deduction and pay federal
income tax at regular rates on their share of our net income or gain. Moreover, under rules applicable to
publicly traded partnerships, distributions to non-U.S. unitholders are subject to withholding at the highest
applicable effective tax rate. Each non-U.S. unitholder must obtain a taxpayer identification number from the
IRS and submit that number to our transfer agent on a Form W-8BEN or applicable substitute form in order to
obtain credit for these withholding taxes. A change in applicable law may require us to change these
procedures.
In addition, because a foreign corporation that owns units will be treated as engaged in a United States trade
or business, that corporation may be subject to the United States branch profits tax at a rate of 30%, in
addition to regular federal income tax, on its share of our income and gain, as adjusted for changes in the
foreign corporation’s “U.S. net equity,” which is effectively connected with the conduct of a United States
trade or business. That tax may be reduced or eliminated by an income tax treaty between the United States
and the country in which the foreign corporate unitholder is a “qualified resident.” In addition, this type of
unitholder is subject to special information reporting requirements under Section 6038C of the Code.
A foreign unitholder who sells or otherwise disposes of a unit will be subject to federal income tax on gain
realized from the sale or disposition of that unit to the extent the gain is effectively connected with a U.S.
trade or business of the foreign unitholder. Under a ruling published by the IRS, interpreting the scope of
“effectively connected income,” a foreign unitholder would be considered to be engaged in a trade or
business in the U.S. by virtue of the U.S. activities of the partnership, and part or all of that unitholder’s gain
would be effectively connected with that unitholder’s indirect U.S. trade or business. Moreover, under the
Foreign Investment in Real Property Tax Act, a foreign unitholder generally will be subject to federal income
tax upon the sale or disposition of a unit if (i) it owned (directly or constructively applying certain attribution
rules) more than 5% of our units at any time during the five-year period ending on the date of such
disposition and (ii) 50% or more of the fair market value of all of our assets consisted of U.S. real property
interests at any time during the shorter of the period during which such unitholder held the units or the 5-year
period ending on the date of disposition. We believe
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
239
that currently less than 50% of our assets consist of U.S. real property interests. However, because this
determination depends on the fair market value of our U.S. real property relative to the fair market value of our
other business assets, there can be no assurance that our current analysis is correct or that the percentage of
our assets consisting of U.S. real property interests will not equal or exceed 50% in the future.
Administrative Matters
Information Returns and Audit Procedures
We intend to furnish to each unitholder, within 90 days after the close of each taxable year, specific tax
information, including a Schedule K-1, which describes its share of our income, gain, loss and deduction for
our preceding taxable year. In preparing this information, which will not be reviewed by counsel, we will take
various accounting and reporting positions, some of which have been mentioned earlier, to determine each
unitholder’s share of income, gain, loss and deduction. We cannot assure our unitholders that those
positions will yield a result that conforms to the requirements of the Code, Treasury Regulations or
administrative interpretations of the IRS.
Neither we, nor Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. can assure prospective unitholders that the IRS will not successfully
contend in court that those positions are impermissible, and such a contention could negatively affect the
value of the units. The IRS may audit our federal income tax information returns. Adjustments resulting from
an IRS audit may require each unitholder to adjust a prior year’s tax liability, and possibly may result in an
audit of its own return. Any audit of a unitholder’s return could result in adjustments not related to our returns
as well as those related to its returns.
Partnerships generally are treated as entities separate from their owners for purposes of federal income tax
audits, judicial review of administrative adjustments by the IRS and tax settlement proceedings. The tax
treatment of partnership items of income, gain, loss and deduction are determined in a partnership
proceeding rather than in separate proceedings with the partners. The Code requires that one partner be
designated as the “Tax Matters Partner” for these purposes, and our partnership agreement designates our
general partner.
The Tax Matters Partner will make some elections on our behalf and on behalf of common unitholders. In
addition, the Tax Matters Partner can extend the statute of limitations for assessment of tax deficiencies
against unitholders for items in our returns. The Tax Matters Partner may bind a unitholder with less than a
1% profits interest in us to a settlement with the IRS unless that unitholder elects, by filing a statement with
the IRS, not to give that authority to the Tax Matters Partner. The Tax Matters Partner may seek judicial review,
by which all the common unitholders are bound, of a final partnership administrative adjustment and, if the
Tax Matters Partner fails to seek judicial review, judicial review may be sought by any unitholder having at
least a 1% interest in profits or by any group of unitholders having in the aggregate at least a 5% interest in
profits. However, only one action for judicial review will go forward, and each unitholder with an interest in
the outcome may participate in that action.
A unitholder must file a statement with the IRS identifying the treatment of any item on its federal income tax
return that is not consistent with the treatment of the item on our return. Intentional or negligent disregard of
this consistency requirement may subject a unitholder to substantial penalties.
Nominee Reporting
Persons who hold an interest in us as a nominee for another person are required to furnish to us:
(1)
the name, address and taxpayer identification number of the beneficial owner and the nominee;
(2)
a statement regarding whether the beneficial owner is:
(a)
a non-U.S. person;
240
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(b)
a non-U.S. government, an international organization or any wholly owned agency or instrumentality
of either of the foregoing; or
(c)
a tax-exempt entity;
(3)
the amount and description of units held, acquired or transferred for the beneficial owner; and
(4)
specific information including the dates of acquisitions and transfers, means of acquisitions and transfers,
and acquisition cost for purchases, as well as the amount of net proceeds from sales.
Brokers and financial institutions are required to furnish additional information, including whether they are
U.S. persons and specific information on units they acquire, hold or transfer for their own account. A penalty
of $100 per failure, up to a maximum of $1.5 million per calendar year, is imposed by the Code for failure to
report that information to us. The nominee is required to supply the beneficial owner of the units with the
information furnished to us.
Accuracy-Related Penalties
An additional tax equal to 20% of the amount of any portion of an underpayment of tax that is attributable to
one or more specified causes, including negligence or disregard of rules or regulations, substantial
understatements of income tax and substantial valuation misstatements, is imposed by the Code. No penalty
will be imposed, however, for any portion of an underpayment if it is shown that there was a reasonable cause
for the underpayment of that portion and that the taxpayer acted in good faith regarding the underpayment of
that portion.
For individuals, a substantial understatement of income tax in any taxable year exists if the amount of the
understatement exceeds the greater of 10% of the tax required to be shown on the return for the taxable year
or $5,000. The amount of any understatement subject to penalty generally is reduced if any portion is
attributable to a position adopted on the return:
(1)
for which there is, or was, “substantial authority;” or
(2)
as to which there is a reasonable basis and the relevant facts of that position are disclosed on the return.
If any item of income, gain, loss or deduction included in the distributive shares of unitholders might result
in that kind of an “understatement” of income for which no “substantial authority” exists, we must disclose
the relevant facts on our returns. In addition, we will make a reasonable effort to furnish sufficient information
for unitholders to make adequate disclosure on their returns and to take other actions as may be appropriate
to permit unitholders to avoid liability for this penalty. More stringent rules apply to “tax shelters,” which we
do not believe includes us, or any of our investments, plans or arrangements.
A substantial valuation misstatement exists if (a) the value of any property, or the tax basis of any property,
claimed on a tax return is 150% or more of the amount determined to be the correct amount of the valuation
or tax basis, (b) the price for any property or services (or for the use of property) claimed on any such return
with respect to any transaction between persons described in Code Section 482 is 200% or more (or 50% or
less) of the amount determined under Section 482 to be the correct amount of such price, or (c) the net Code
Section 482 transfer price adjustment for the taxable year exceeds the lesser of $5 million or 10% of the
taxpayer’s gross receipts. No penalty is imposed unless the portion of the underpayment attributable to a
substantial valuation misstatement exceeds $5,000 ($10,000 for a corporation other than an S Corporation or a
personal holding company). The penalty is increased to 40% in the event of a gross valuation misstatement.
We do not anticipate making any valuation misstatements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
241
In addition, the 20% accuracy-related penalty also applies to any portion of an underpayment of tax that is
attributable to transactions lacking economic substance. To the extent that such transactions are not
disclosed, the penalty imposed is increased to 40%. Additionally, there is no reasonable cause defense to the
imposition of this penalty to such transactions.
Reportable Transactions
If we were to engage in a “reportable transaction,” we (and possibly our unitholders and others) would be
required to make a detailed disclosure of the transaction to the IRS. A transaction may be a reportable
transaction based upon any of several factors, including the fact that it is a type of tax avoidance transaction
publicly identified by the IRS as a “listed transaction” or that it produces certain kinds of losses for
partnerships, individuals, S corporations, and trusts in excess of $2 million in any single tax year, or $4
million in any combination of six successive tax years. Our participation in a reportable transaction could
increase the likelihood that our federal income tax information return (and possibly our unitholders’ tax
return) would be audited by the IRS. Please see “—Administrative Matters—Information Returns and Audit
Procedures.”
Moreover, if we were to participate in a reportable transaction with a significant purpose to avoid or evade tax,
or in any listed transaction, our unitholders may be subject to the following provisions of the American Jobs
Creation Act of 2004:
Ÿ  accuracy-related penalties with a broader scope. significantly narrower exceptions, and potentially greater
amounts than described above at “—Administrative Matters—Accuracy-Related Penalties”;
Ÿ  for those persons otherwise entitled to deduct interest on federal tax deficiencies, nondeductibility of interest
on any resulting tax liability; and
Ÿ  in the case of a listed transaction, an extended statute of limitations.
We do not expect to engage in any “reportable transactions.”
State, Local and Other Tax Considerations
In addition to federal income taxes, unitholders will be subject to other taxes, including state and local
income taxes, unincorporated business taxes, and estate, inheritance or intangibles taxes that may be
imposed by the various jurisdictions in which we conduct business or own property or in which the
unitholder is a resident. We currently conduct business or own property in several states, each of which
imposes an income tax on corporations and a personal income tax. Moreover, we may also own property or
do business in other states in the future that impose income or similar taxes on nonresident individuals.
Although an analysis of those various taxes is not presented here, each prospective unitholder should
consider their potential impact on its investment in us.
It is the responsibility of each unitholder to investigate the legal and tax consequences, under the laws of
pertinent states and localities, of its investment in us. Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has not rendered an opinion on
the state, local, or non-U.S. tax consequences of an investment in us. We strongly recommend that each
prospective unitholder consult, and depend on, its own tax counsel or other advisor with regard to those
matters. It is the responsibility of each unitholder to file all tax returns that may be required of it.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
242
INVESTMENT IN NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP BY EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
An investment in us by an employee benefit plan is subject to additional considerations because the
investments of these plans are subject to the fiduciary responsibility and prohibited transaction provisions of
ERISA and restrictions imposed by Section 4975 of the Code. For these purposes the term “employee benefit
plan” includes, but is not limited to, qualified pension, profit-sharing and stock bonus plans, Keogh plans,
simplified employee pension plans and tax deferred annuities or IRAs established or maintained by an
employer or employee organization. Among other things, consideration should be given to:
Ÿ  whether the investment is prudent under Section 404(a)(1)(B) of ERISA;
Ÿ  whether in making the investment, that plan will satisfy the diversification requirements of Section 404(a)(1)
(C) of ERISA; and
Ÿ  whether the investment will result in recognition of unrelated business taxable income by the plan and, if so,
the potential after-tax investment return.
The person with investment discretion with respect to the assets of an employee benefit plan, often called a
fiduciary, should determine whether an investment in us is authorized by the appropriate governing
instrument and is a proper investment for the plan.
Section 406 of ERISA and Section 4975 of the Code prohibit employee benefit plans, and also IRAs that are
not considered part of an employee benefit plan, from engaging in specified transactions involving “plan
assets” with parties that are “parties in interest” under ERISA or “disqualified persons” under the Code with
respect to the plan.
In addition to considering whether the purchase of common units is a prohibited transaction, a fiduciary of an
employee benefit plan should consider whether the plan will, by investing in us, be deemed to own an
undivided interest in our assets, with the result that our operations would be subject to the regulatory
restrictions of ERISA, including its prohibited transaction rules, as well as the prohibited transaction rules of
the Code.
The Department of Labor regulations provide guidance with respect to whether the assets of an entity in which
employee benefit plans acquire equity interests would be deemed “plan assets” under some circumstances.
Under these regulations, an entity’s assets would not be considered to be “plan assets” if, among other
things:
(1)
(2)
(3)
the equity interests acquired by employee benefit plans are publicly offered securities—i.e., the equity
interests are widely held by 100 or more investors independent of the issuer and each other, freely
transferable and registered under some provisions of the federal securities laws;
the entity is an “operating company,” meaning it is primarily engaged in the production or sale of a product
or service other than the investment of capital either directly or through a majority-owned subsidiary or
subsidiaries; or
there is no significant investment by benefit plan investors, which is defined to mean that less than 25%
of the value of each class of equity interest is held by the employee benefit plans referred to above and
IRAs.
Our assets should not be considered “plan assets” under these regulations because it is expected that the
investment will satisfy the requirements in (1) and (2) above.
Plan fiduciaries contemplating a purchase of common units are encouraged to consult with their own counsel
regarding the consequences under ERISA and the Code in light of the serious penalties imposed on persons
who engage in prohibited transactions or other violations.
243
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
UNDERWRITING
We and the underwriters named below have entered into an underwriting agreement with respect to the
common units being offered. Subject to certain conditions, each underwriter has severally agreed to purchase
the number of common units indicated in the following table. Goldman, Sachs & Co., Barclays Capital Inc.
and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated are the representatives of the underwriters.
Underwriters
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Barclays Capital Inc.
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC
Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.
UBS Securities LLC
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
Marquarie Capital (USA) Inc.
Total
Number of
Common Units
The underwriters are committed to take and pay for all of the common units being offered, if any are taken,
other than the units covered by the option described below unless and until this option is exercised.
The underwriters have an option to buy up to an additional                 common units from us to cover sales by
the underwriters of a greater number of units than the total number set forth in the table above. They may
exercise that option for 30 days. If any common units are purchased pursuant to this option, the underwriters
will severally purchase common units in approximately the same proportion as set forth in the table above.
The following table shows the per unit and total underwriting discount to be paid to the underwriters by us.
Such amounts are shown assuming both no exercise and full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase
additional common units.
Paid by Us
Per Unit
Total
No Exercise    
$                 
     
$
Full Exercise 
$               
   
$
Common units sold by the underwriters to the public will initially be offered at the initial public offering price
set forth on the cover of this prospectus. Any units sold by the underwriters to securities dealers may be sold
at a discount of up to $         per unit from the initial public offering price. After the initial offering of the units,
the representatives may change the offering price and the other selling terms. The offering of the common
units by the underwriters is subject to receipt and acceptance and subject to the underwriters’ right to reject
any order in whole or in part.
We, our general partner, the executive officers and directors of our general partner and Northern Tier Holdings
have agreed with the underwriters, subject to certain exceptions, including an exception for sales of common
units to satisfy tax withholding and other obligations in connection with the equity awards issued under our
LTIP, not to dispose of or hedge any of their common units or securities convertible into or exchangeable for
common units during the period from the date of this prospectus continuing through the date 180 days after
the date of this prospectus, except with the prior written consent of the representatives. This agreement does
not apply to any existing employee benefit plans. See “Common Units Eligible for Future Sale” for a
discussion of certain transfer restrictions.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
244
The 180-day restricted period described in the preceding paragraph will be automatically extended if:
(1) during the last 17 days of the 180-day restricted period we issue an earnings release or announce material
news or a material event; or (2) prior to the expiration of the 180-day restricted period, we announce that we
will release earnings results during the 15-day period following the last day of the 180-day period, in which
case the restrictions described in the preceding paragraph will continue to apply until the expiration of the 18-
day period beginning on the issuance of the earnings release of the announcement of the material news or
material event.
Prior to the offering, there has been no public market for our common units. The initial public offering price
has been negotiated between us and the representatives. Among the factors to be considered in determining
the initial public offering price of the common units, in addition to prevailing market conditions, will be our
historical performance, estimates of our business potential and earnings prospects, an assessment of our
management and the consideration of the above factors in relation to market valuation of companies in
related businesses.
We have been cleared to list our common units on the NYSE under the symbol “NTI.” In order to meet one of
the requirements for listing the common units on the NYSE, the underwriters have undertaken to sell lots of
100 or more units to a minimum of 400 beneficial holders.
In connection with the offering, the underwriters may purchase and sell common units in the open market.
These transactions may include short sales, stabilizing transactions and purchases to cover positions created
by short sales. Short sales involve the sale by the underwriters of a greater number of units than they are
required to purchase in the offering, and a short position represents the amount of such sales that have not
been covered by subsequent purchases. A “covered short position” is a short position that is not greater than
the amount of additional units for which the underwriters’ option described above may be exercised. The
underwriters may cover any covered short position by either exercising their option to purchase additional
common units or purchasing units in the open market. In determining the source of units to cover the
covered short position, the underwriters will consider, among other things, the price of units available for
purchase in the open market as compared to the price at which they may purchase additional units pursuant
to the option described above. “Naked” short sales are any short sales that create a short position greater
than the amount of additional units for which the option described above may be exercised. The underwriters
must cover any such naked short position by purchasing units in the open market. A naked short position is
more likely to be created if the underwriters are concerned that there may be downward pressure on the price
of the common units in the open market after pricing that could adversely affect investors who purchase in
the offering. Stabilizing transactions consist of various bids for or purchases of common units made by the
underwriters in the open market prior to the completion of the offering.
The underwriters may also impose a penalty bid. This occurs when a particular underwriter repays to the
underwriters a portion of the underwriting discount received by it because a representative has repurchased
units sold by or for the account of such underwriter in stabilizing or short covering transactions.
Purchases to cover a short position and stabilizing transactions, as well as other purchases by the
underwriters for their own accounts, may have the effect of preventing or retarding a decline in the market
price of our common units, and together with the imposition of the penalty bid, may stabilize, maintain or
otherwise affect the market price of the common units. As a result, the price of the common units may be
higher than the price that otherwise might exist in the open market. The underwriters are not required to
engage in these activities and may end any of these activities at any time. These transactions may be effected
on the NYSE, in the over-the-counter market or otherwise.
245
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Electronic Distribution
A prospectus in electronic format may be made available on the Internet sites or through other online services
maintained by one or more of the underwriters and/or selling group members participating in this offering, or
by their affiliates. In those cases, prospective investors may view offering terms online and, depending upon
the particular underwriter or selling group member, prospective investors may be allowed to place orders
online. The underwriters may agree with us to allocate a specific number of shares for sale to online
brokerage account holders. Any such allocation for online distributions will be made by the representatives
on the same basis as other allocations.
Other than the prospectus in electronic format, the information on any underwriter’s or selling group
member’s web site and any information contained in any other web site maintained by an underwriter or
selling group member is not part of the prospectus or the registration statement of which this prospectus
forms a part, has not been approved and/or endorsed by us or any underwriter or selling group member in its
capacity as underwriter or selling group member and should not be relied upon by investors.
The underwriters do not expect sales to discretionary accounts to exceed 5% of the total number of units
offered.
We estimate that our share of the total expenses of the offering, excluding the underwriting discount, will be
approximately $        .
We have agreed to indemnify the several underwriters against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the
Securities Act.
The underwriters and their respective affiliates are full service financial institutions engaged in various
activities, which may include sales and trading, commercial and investment banking, advisory, investment
management, investment research, principal investment, hedging, market making, brokerage and other
financial and non-financial activities and services. Certain of the underwriters and their respective affiliates
have provided, and may in the future provide, a variety of these services to the issuer and to persons and
entities with relationships with the issuer, for which they received or will receive customary fees and
expenses. We have entered into hedge agreements with J. Aron & Company, an affiliate of Goldman, Sachs &
Co., and Macquarie Bank Limited, an affiliate of Macquarie Capital (USA) Inc. As described in “Use of
Proceeds,” a portion of the proceeds of this offering will be used to pay $92 million to J. Aron & Company, an
affiliate of Goldman, Sachs & Co., for losses incurred during the quarter ending June 30, 2012 as a result of
resetting the price of certain derivative contracts. If we do not complete this offering, the loss from resetting
the price of our derivative contracts will be paid to the counterparty on the same monthly schedule as the
original contracts were scheduled to settle.
In the ordinary course of their various business activities, the underwriters and their respective affiliates,
officers, directors and employees may purchase, sell or hold a broad array of investments and actively trade
securities, derivatives, loans, commodities, currencies, credit default swaps and other financial instruments
for their own account and for the accounts of their customers, and such investment and trading activities may
involve or relate to assets, securities and/or instruments of the issuer (directly, as collateral securing other
obligations or otherwise) and/or persons and entities with relationships to the issuer. The underwriters and
their respective affiliates may also communicate independent research views in respect of such assets,
securities or instruments and may at any time hold, or recommend to clients that they should acquire, long
and/or short positions in such assets, securities and instruments.
Because the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, views our common units as interests in a
direct participation program, the offering is being made in compliance with Rule 2310 of the FINRA Rules.
Investor suitability with respect to the common units will be judged similarly to the suitability with respect to
other securities that are listed for trading on a national securities exchange.
246
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Notice to Prospective Investors in the EEA
In relation to each member state of the European Economic Area that has implemented the Prospectus
Directive (each, a relevant member state), other than Germany, with effect from and including the date on
which the Prospectus Directive is implemented in that relevant member state (the relevant implementation
date), an offer of securities described in this prospectus may not be made to the public in that relevant
member state other than:
Ÿ  to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Directive;
Ÿ  to fewer than 100 or, if the relevant member state has implemented the relevant provision of the 2010 PD
Amending Directive, 150, natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the Prospectus
Directive), as permitted under the Prospectus Directive, subject to obtaining the prior consent of the relevant
Dealer or Dealers nominated by the Issuer for any such offer; or
Ÿ  in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive;
provided that no such offer of securities shall require us or any underwriter to publish a prospectus pursuant
to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive.
For purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer of securities to the public” in any relevant member
state means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the terms of the
offer and the securities to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase or subscribe for the
securities, as the expression may be varied in that member state by any measure implementing the
Prospectus Directive in that member state, and the expression “Prospectus Directive” means Directive
2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including the 2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented
in the relevant member state), and includes any relevant implementing measure in each relevant member
state. The expression “2010 PD Amending Directive” means Directive 2010/73/EU.
We have not authorized and do not authorize the making of any offer of securities through any financial
intermediary on their behalf, other than offers made by the underwriters with a view to the final placement of
the securities as contemplated in this prospectus. Accordingly, no purchaser of the securities, other than the
underwriters, is authorized to make any further offer of the securities on behalf of us or the underwriters.
Notice to Prospective Investors in the United Kingdom
Our partnership may constitute a “collective investment scheme” as defined by section 235 of the Financial
Services and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA) that is not a “recognised collective investment scheme” for the
purposes of FSMA (CIS) and that has not been authorised or otherwise approved. As an unregulated scheme,
it cannot be marketed in the United Kingdom to the general public, except in accordance with FSMA. This
prospectus is only being distributed in the United Kingdom to, and is only directed at:
(1)
if our partnership is a CIS and is marketed by a person who is an authorised person under FSMA, (a)
investment professionals falling within Article 14(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
(Promotion of Collective Investment Schemes) (Exemptions) Order 2001, as amended (the CIS Promotion
Order) or (b) high net worth companies and other persons falling within Article 22(2)(a) to (d) of the CIS
Promotion Order; or
(2)
otherwise, if marketed by a person who is not an authorised person under FSMA, (a) persons who fall
within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
247
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(Financial Promotion) Order 2005, as amended (the Financial Promotion Order) or (b) Article 49(2)(a) to (d)
of the Financial Promotion Order; and
(3)
in both cases (1) and (2) to any other person to whom it may otherwise lawfully be made (all such persons
together being referred to as “relevant persons”).
Our partnership’s common units are only available to, and any invitation, offer or agreement to subscribe,
purchase or otherwise acquire such common units will be engaged in only with, relevant persons. Any
person who is not a relevant person should not act or rely on this document or any of its contents.
An invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning of Section 21 of FSMA) in
connection with the issue or sale of any common units which are the subject of the offering contemplated by
this prospectus will only be communicated or caused to be communicated in circumstances in which Section
21(1) of FSMA does not apply to our partnership.
Notice to Prospective Investors in Switzerland
This prospectus is being communicated in Switzerland to a small number of selected investors only. Each
copy of this prospectus is addressed to a specifically named recipient and may not be copied, reproduced,
distributed or passed on to third parties. Our common units are not being offered to the public in Switzerland,
and neither this prospectus, nor any other offering materials relating to our common units may be distributed
in connection with any such public offering. We have not been registered with the Swiss Financial Market
Supervisory Authority FINMA as a foreign collective investment scheme pursuant to Article 120 of the
Collective Investment Schemes Act of June 23, 2006 (CISA). Accordingly, our common units may not be
offered to the public in or from Switzerland, and neither this prospectus, nor any other offering materials
relating to our common units may be made available through a public offering in or from Switzerland. Our
common units may only be offered and this prospectus may only be distributed in or from Switzerland by
way of private placement exclusively to qualified investors (as this term is defined in the CISA and its
implementing ordinance).
Notice to Prospective Investors in Germany
This document has not been prepared in accordance with the requirements for a securities or sales
prospectus under the German Securities Prospectus Act (Wertpapierprospektgesetz), the German Capital
Investment Act (Vermôgensanlagengesetz), or the German Investment Act (Investmentgesetz). Neither the
German Federal Financial Services Supervisory Authority (Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht –
BaFin) nor any other German authority has been notified of the intention to distribute our common units in
Germany. Consequently, our common units may not be distributed in Germany by way of public offering,
public advertisement or in any similar manner and this document and any other document relating to the
offering, as well as information or statements contained therein, may not be supplied to the public in
Germany or used in connection with any offer for subscription of our common units to the public in Germany
or any other means of public marketing. Our common units are being offered and sold in Germany only to
qualified investors which are referred to in Section 3, paragraph 2 no. 1, in connection with Section 2, no. 6,
of the German Securities Prospectus Act, Section 2 no. 4 of the German Capital Investment Act, and in
Section 2 paragraph 11 sentence 2 no. 1 of the German Investment Act. This document is strictly for use of the
person who has received it. It may not be forwarded to other persons or published in Germany.
The offering does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy our common units in any
circumstances in which such offer or solicitation is unlawful.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
248
Notice to Prospective Investors in the Netherlands
Our common units may not be offered or sold, directly or indirectly, in the Netherlands, other than to qualified
investors (gekwalificeerde beleggers) within the meaning of Article 1:1 of the Dutch Financial Supervision Act
(Wet op het financieel toezicht).
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
249
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the common units offered by this prospectus and certain other legal matters will be passed
upon for us by Vinson & Elkins L.L.P., Houston, Texas. The underwriters are being represented by Cleary
Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP, New York, New York and Baker Botts L.L.P., Houston, Texas.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 and for the year ended December 31,
2011 and for the period from June 23, 2010 (date of inception) to December 31, 2010 of Northern Tier Energy
LLC, Successor, included in this prospectus have been so included in reliance on the report of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of
said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The combined financial statements for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and for the year ended
December 31, 2009 of the St. Paul Park Refinery & Retail Marketing Business, a component of Marathon Oil
Corporation, Predecessor, included in this prospectus have been so included in reliance on the report of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of
said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the SEC a registration statement on Form S-1 (including the exhibits, schedules and
amendments thereto) under the Securities Act, with respect to our common units offered hereby. This
prospectus does not contain all of the information set forth in the registration statement and the exhibits and
schedules thereto. For further information with respect to us and the common units offered hereby, we refer
you to the registration statement and the exhibits and schedules filed therewith. Statements contained in this
prospectus as to the contents of any contract, agreement or any other document are summaries of the
material terms of this contract, agreement or other document and are not necessarily complete. With respect
to each of these contracts, agreements or other documents filed as an exhibit to the registration statement,
reference is made to the exhibits for a more complete description of the matter involved. A copy of the
registration statement, and the exhibits and schedules thereto, may be inspected without charge at the public
reference facilities maintained by the SEC at 100 F Street NE, Washington, D.C. 20549. Copies of these
materials may be obtained, upon payment of a duplicating fee, from the Public Reference Section of the SEC
at 100 F Street NE, Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information on
the operation of the public reference facility. The SEC maintains a website that contains reports, proxy and
information statements and other information regarding registrants that file electronically with the SEC. The
address of the SEC’s website is www.sec.gov.
As a result of the offering, we will become subject to the full informational requirements of the Exchange Act.
We will fulfill our obligations with respect to such requirements by filing periodic reports and other
information with the SEC. We intend to furnish our unitholders with annual reports containing financial
statements certified by an independent public accounting firm. These periodic reports and other information
will be available for inspection and copying at the SEC’s public reference room and the website of the SEC
referred to above, as well as on our website, www.ntenergy.com. This reference to our website is an inactive
textual reference only and is not a hyperlink. The contents of our website are not part of this prospectus, and
you should not consider the contents of our website in making an investment decision with respect to our
units.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
250
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page
Northern Tier Energy LLC (Successor)
Consolidated Financial Statements for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2012 and 2011
Consolidated Balance Sheet (Unaudited)
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss (Unaudited)
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (Unaudited)
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited)
Northern Tier Energy LLC (Successor) and St. Paul Park Refinery and Retail Marketing Business
(Predecessor)
  
Consolidated Financial Statements for the Year Ended December 31, 2011 and from June 23, 2010 (inception
date) to December 31, 2010 and Combined Financial Statements for the Eleven Months Ended November 30,
2010 and the Year Ended December 31, 2009
Report of Independent Registered Accounting Firm (Successor statements)
Report of Independent Registered Accounting Firm (Predecessor statements)
Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets
Consolidated and Combined Statements of Income
Consolidated and Combined Statements of Cash Flows
Consolidated and Combined Statements of Member’s Interest and Net Investment Interest
Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements
F-2  
  F-3  
  F-4  
  F-5
F-21  
 F-22  
 F-23  
 F-24  
 F-25  
 F-26  
 F-27
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-1
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions)
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Receivables, less allowance for doubtful accounts
Inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Equity method investment
Property, plant and equipment, net
March 31,
2012
(unaudited)
64.1   
126.6   
163.6   
59.5   
   
413.8
89.2
$
December 31,
2011
123.5   
81.9   
154.1   
65.5   
   
425.0
89.9
$
Pro Forma
March 31,
2012
(Note 1)
(unaudited)
$
64.1  
126.6  
163.6  
59.5  
 
413.8
89.2
Property, plant and equipment, net
Intangible assets
Other assets
Total Assets
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Derivative liability
Total current liabilities
NON-CURRENT LIABILITIES
Long-term debt
Lease financing obligation
Derivative liability
Other liabilities
Total liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Note 18)
EQUITY
Comprehensive loss
Member’s interest
Total Liabilities and Equity
$
$
$
388.4   
35.4   
35.9   
   
962.7
176.2   
77.4   
185.5   
   
439.1
290.0   
11.9   
12.5   
90.2   
   
843.7   
   
 
 
(0.4)  
119.4   
   
962.7
$
$
$
391.2   
35.4   
57.3   
   
998.8
207.4   
30.3   
109.9   
   
347.6
290.0   
11.9   
—   
37.1   
   
686.6   
   
 
 
(0.4)  
312.6   
   
998.8
$
$
$
388.4  
35.4
35.9  
 
962.7
176.2  
117.4  
185.5  
 
479.1
290.0  
11.9  
12.5  
90.2  
 
883.7
(0.4) 
79.4  
 
962.7
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-2
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
(in millions, unaudited)
REVENUE(a)
COSTS, EXPENSES AND OTHER
Cost of sales(a)
Direct operating expenses
Turnaround and related expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Selling, general and administrative
Formation costs
Contingent consideration loss (income)
Other income, net
Three Months Ended
March 31,
2012
$ 999.1
839.8   
60.7   
 
3.5   
 
 
8.5   
20.3   
 
—   
 
 
65.7   
(2.1)
March 31,
2011
$ 940.2
779.0  
61.9  
 
3.3  
 
 
7.3  
18.4  
 
2.5  
 
 
(31.8) 
(1.1)
OPERATING INCOME
Realized losses from derivative activities
Loss on early extinguishment of derivatives
Unrealized losses from derivative activities
Interest expense, net
LOSS BEFORE INCOME TAXES
Income tax provision
NET LOSS AND COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
2.7
(52.9)  
 
(44.6)  
 
(88.4)  
 
(10.4)  
 
   
   
  (193.6)
—   
 
   
   
$ (193.6)
100.7
(52.2) 
 
—  
 
  (262.9) 
(10.0) 
 
   
 
  (224.4)
(0.1) 
 
   
 
$ (224.5)
(a)      Excise taxes included in revenue and cost of sales
$
65.6
$
56.7
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-3
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions, unaudited)
Increase (decrease) in cash
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash (used by) provided by operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
Stock-based compensation expense
Contingent consideration loss (income)
Unrealized loss from derivative activities
Loss on early retirement of derivatives
Changes in assets and liabilities, net:
Accounts receivable
Inventories
Other current assets
Accounts payable and accrued expenses
Other, net
Net cash (used by) provided by operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Capital expenditures
Acquisition, net of cash acquired
Return of capital from investments
Net cash used in investing activities
Three Months Ended
March 31,
2011
March 31,
2012
$ (193.6)  
 
8.5   
0.4   
65.7   
88.4   
44.6   
 
(45.0)  
(9.5)  
8.8   
(23.5)  
0.4   
   
(54.8)  
   
 
(5.4)  
—   
0.8   
   
(4.6)
$ (224.5)
7.3  
 
0.3  
 
 
(31.8) 
  262.9  
 
—
18.5  
(40.0) 
19.9  
81.0  
0.7  
 
94.3
(6.0) 
 
  (112.8) 
1.0  
 
   
 
  (117.8)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Other financing activities, net
Net cash provided by financing activities
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
—   
   
—   
   
 
(59.4)  
 
  123.5   
   
   
$
64.1
$
—  
 
—
(23.5) 
72.8  
 
49.3
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-4
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1. DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
Description of the Business
Northern Tier Energy LLC (“NTE” or the “Company”) is an independent downstream energy company with
refining, retail and pipeline operations that serve the Petroleum Administration for Defense District II (“PADD
II”) region of the United States. The Company is a Delaware limited liability company and is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Northern Tier Holdings LLC (“NT Holdings” or the “Member”). NT Holdings is wholly owned by
Northern Tier Investors LLC (“NTI”). Additionally, NT Holdings has issued preferred stock that is solely owned
by an indirect subsidiary of Marathon Petroleum Corporation (“Marathon Petroleum”). Marathon Petroleum
was a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon Oil Corporation (“Marathon Oil”) until June 30, 2011. NTI, NT
Holdings and the Company were formed by ACON Refining Partners L.L.C. and TPG Refining L.P. and certain
members of management (collectively, the “Investors”) during 2010. Predecessor interests represent the St.
Paul Park Refinery and Retail Marketing Business formerly owned and operated by subsidiaries of Marathon
Oil. These subsidiaries, Marathon Petroleum Company, LP (“MPC LP”), Speedway LLC (“Speedway”) and
MPL Investments LLC, are together referred to as “MPC” or “Marathon” and are subsidiaries of Marathon
Petroleum. Effective December 1, 2010, the Company acquired the business from Marathon for approximately
$608 million (the “Acquisition”).
The Company includes the operations of the St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC (“SPPR”) and Northern Tier Retail
LLC (“NTR”). The Company also includes Northern Tier Bakery LLC (“NTB”), SuperAmerica Franchising LLC
(“SAF”), a 17% interest in MPL Investments Inc. (“MPLI”) and a 17% interest in Minnesota Pipe Line
Company, LLC (“Minnesota Pipe Line”). MPLI owns 100% of the preferred interest in Minnesota Pipe Line
which owns and operates a 455,000 barrel per day (“bpd”) crude oil pipeline in Minnesota (see Note 2).
SPPR, which is located in St. Paul Park, Minnesota, has total crude oil throughput capacity of 74,000 barrels
per calendar day. Refinery operations include crude fractionation, catalytic cracking, hydrotreating, reforming,
alkylation, sulfur recovery and a hydrogen plant. The refinery processes predominately North Dakota and
Canadian crude oils into products such as gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, kerosene, asphalt, propane, propylene
and sulfur. The refined products are sold to markets primarily located in the Upper Great Plains of the United
States.
NTR operates 166 convenience stores under the SuperAmerica brand. SAF supports 67 franchised stores
which also utilize the SuperAmerica brand. The SuperAmerica stores are primarily located in Minnesota and
Wisconsin and sell gasoline, merchandise, and in some locations, diesel fuel. There is a wide range of
merchandise sold at the stores including prepared foods, beverages and non-food items. The merchandise
sold includes a significant number of proprietary items.
NTB prepares and distributes food products under the SuperMom’s Bakery brand primarily to SuperAmerica
branded retail outlets.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared in
accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) for interim financial
information. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and footnotes required by GAAP for
complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments (consisting of normal recurring
accruals) considered necessary for a fair presentation of the results for the periods reported have been
included. Operating results for the three months ended March 31, 2012 are not
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-5
necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2012, or for any
other period.
The condensed consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2011 has been derived from the audited financial
statements of the Company at that date but does not include all of the information and footnotes required by
GAAP for complete financial statements. The accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements
should be read in conjunction with the consolidated and combined financial statements and notes thereto
included in the Company’s 2011 financial statements.
Unaudited Pro Forma Balance Sheet
Included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets is an unaudited pro forma balance sheet as of March 31, 2012.
The pro forma balance sheet adjusts the March 31, 2012 consolidated balance sheet to reflect the Company’s
equity distribution to NT Holdings (see Note 20—Subsequent Events) as if it were declared and payable as of
March 31, 2012.
Subsequent Events
Events and transactions subsequent to the balance sheet date have been evaluated through May 29, 2012, the
date these consolidated financial statements were available to be issued, for potential recognition or
disclosure in the financial statements.
2. SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of Consolidation and Combination
The Company was incorporated on June 23, 2010. NTI entered into the Acquisition agreement with Marathon
on October 6, 2010 and closed the Acquisition on December 1, 2010. Accordingly, the accompanying financial
statements present the consolidated accounts of such acquired businesses. All significant intercompany
accounts have been eliminated in these consolidated and combined financial statements.
The Company’s common interest in Minnesota Pipe Line is accounted for using the equity method of
accounting in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards
Codification (“ASC”) Topic 323. Income from equity method investment represents the Company’s
proportionate share of net income available to common owners generated by Minnesota Pipe Line.
The equity method investment is assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts or circumstances
indicate a loss in value has occurred. When the loss is deemed to be other than temporary, the carrying value
of the equity method investment is written down to fair value, and the amount of the write-down is included in
net income. See Note 7 for further information on the Company’s equity investment.
MPLI owns all of the preferred membership units of Minnesota Pipe Line. This investment in MPLI which
provides the Company no significant influence over Minnesota Pipe Line is accounted for as a cost method
investment. The investment in MPLI is carried at a cost of $6.9 million as of March 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011 and is included in other noncurrent assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-6
reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the respective reporting periods. Actual results could
differ from those estimates. In addition, significant estimates were used in accounting for the Acquisition
under the purchase method of accounting.
Operating Segments
The Company has two reportable operating segments:
Ÿ  Refining—operates the St. Paul Park, Minnesota, refinery, terminal and related assets, including the
Company’s interest in MPLI and Minnesota Pipe Line, and
Ÿ  Retail—operates 166 convenience stores primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin. The Retail segment also
includes the operations of NTB and SAF.
See Note 19 for further information on the Company’s operating segments.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less from the date of
purchase to be cash equivalents.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment is recorded at cost and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated
useful lives of the assets. Such assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If the sum of the
expected undiscounted future cash flows from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than
the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized based on the fair value of the asset.
When property, plant and equipment depreciated on an individual basis are sold or otherwise disposed of,
any gains or losses are reported in net income. Gains on the disposal of property, plant and equipment are
recognized when earned, which is generally at the time of closing. If a loss on disposal is expected, such
losses are generally recognized when the assets are classified as held for sale.
Expenditures for routine maintenance and repair costs are expensed when incurred. Refinery process units
require periodic major maintenance and repairs that are commonly referred to as “turnarounds.” The required
frequency of the maintenance varies by unit, but generally is every two to six years depending on the
processing unit involved. Turnaround costs are expensed as incurred.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company is exposed to earnings and cash flow volatility based on the timing and change in refined
product prices and crude oil prices. To manage these risks, the Company may use derivative instruments
associated with the purchase or sale of crude oil and refined products. Crack spread option and swap
contracts are used to hedge the volatility of refining margins. The Company also may use futures contracts to
manage price risks associated with inventory quantities above or below target levels. The Company does not
enter into derivative contracts for speculative purposes. All derivative instruments are recorded in the
consolidated balance sheet at fair value and are classified depending on the maturity date of the underlying
contracts. Changes in the fair value of its contracts are accounted for by marking them to market and
recognizing any resulting gains or losses in its statements of income. These gains and losses are reported
within operating activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Excise Taxes
F-7
The Company is required by various governmental authorities, including federal and state, to collect and
remit taxes on certain products. Such taxes are presented on a gross basis in revenues and costs and
expenses in the consolidated and combined statements of operations. These taxes totaled $65.6 million and
$56.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company and its subsidiaries are limited liability companies and are therefore pass-through entities for
income tax purposes. As a result, the Company does not incur federal income taxes.
Reclassification
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior year financial information in order to conform to the
Company’s current presentation.
Accounting Developments
On January 1, 2012 we adopted ASU No. 2011-05, “Comprehensive Income (ASC Topic 220): Presentation of
Comprehensive Income” (“ASU 2011-05”), which amends current comprehensive income guidance. This ASU
eliminates the option to present the components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of
shareholders’ equity. Instead, the Company must report comprehensive income in either a single continuous
statement of comprehensive income which contains two sections, net income and other comprehensive
income, or in two separate but consecutive statements. Also effective January 1, 2012 we adopted ASU 2011-
12 “Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Deferral of the Effective Date for Amendments to the Presentation of
Reclassifications of Items Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income in Accounting Standards Update
No. 2011-05” (“ASU 2011-12”). ASU 2011-12 defers the effectiveness for the requirement to present on the face
of our financial statements the effects of reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive income on
the components of net income and other comprehensive income. Our presentation of comprehensive income
in this quarterly report complies with these accounting standards.
In December 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-11, “Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities”
(“ASU 2011-11”). ASU 2011-11 retains the existing offsetting requirements and enhances the disclosure
requirements to allow investors to better compare financial statements prepared under U.S. GAAP with those
prepared under IFRS. This new guidance is to be applied retrospectively. ASU 2011-11 will be effective for the
Company’s quarterly and annual financial statements beginning with our first quarter 2013 reporting. The
Company believes that the adoption of ASU 2011-11 will not have a material impact on its consolidated
financial statements.
3. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The Investors, which include ACON Refining Partners L.L.C. and TPG Refining L.P., are related parties of the
Company. Minnesota Pipe Line is also a related party of the Company. Subsequent to the Acquisition (see
Note 4), the Company entered into a crude oil supply and logistics agreement with a third party and no longer
has direct transactions with Minnesota Pipe Line.
Upon completion of the Acquisition, the Company entered into a management services agreement with the
Investors pursuant to which they provide the Company with ongoing management, advisory and consulting
services. The Investors also receive quarterly management fees equal to 1%
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-8
of the Company’s “Adjusted EBITDA” (as defined in the agreement) for the previous quarter (subject to a
minimum annual fee of $2 million), as well as reimbursements for out-of pocket expenses incurred by them in
connection with providing such management services. The Company also pays the Investors’ specified
success fees in connection with advice they provide in relation with certain corporate transactions. The
Company incurred management fees relating to these services of $0.5 million for both the three months ended
March 31, 2012 and 2011.
4. ACQUISITION
As previously described in Note 1, effective December 1, 2010, the Company acquired the business from MPC
for $608 million. The Acquisition was accounted for by the purchase method of accounting for business
combinations. Included in this amount was the estimated fair value of earn-out payments of $54 million as of
the Acquisition date. Of the $608 million purchase price, $361 million was paid in cash as of December 31,
2010 and $80 million was satisfied by issuing MPC a perpetual payment in kind preferred interest in NT
Holdings. The residual purchase price of $113 million (excluding the contingent earn-out consideration) was
paid during the three months ended March 31, 2011.
The Company would be required to pay Marathon the earn-out payments if the Company’s Adjusted EBITDA
(as defined in the agreement, the “Agreement Adjusted EBITDA”) exceeds $165 million less, among other
things, any rental expense related to the real estate lease arrangement (described below) during any year in
each of the next eight years following the Acquisition. Agreement Adjusted EBITDA adjusts for, among other
items, (i) any unrealized gains or losses relating to derivative activities, (ii) any gains or losses generated by
the liquidation of any LIFO inventory layers, (iii) any losses related to lower of cost or market inventory
adjustments, and (iv) any gains on the sale of property, plant or equipment and certain other assets. Marathon
would receive 40% of the amount by which Agreement Adjusted EBITDA exceeds the specified threshold in
any year during the eight years following the Acquisition not to exceed $125 million over the eight years
following the Acquisition. The Acquisition agreement also includes a margin support component that would
require Marathon to pay the Company up to $30 million per year to the extent the Agreement Adjusted EBITDA
is below $145 million less, among other things, any rental expense related to the real estate lease
arrangement (described below), in either of the first two twelve month periods ending November 30, 2011 or
2012 up to a maximum of $60 million. Any such payments made by Marathon would have increased the
amount that we may be required to pay Marathon over the earn-out period (see Note 18). Subsequent fair value
adjustments to these collective contingent consideration arrangements (earn-out arrangement and margin
support arrangement) will be recorded in the statement of income based on quarterly remeasurements. See
Note 12 for further information on the Company’s fair value measurements and Note 20 regarding a potential
settlement of the arrangements reached subsequent to March 31, 2012.
The cash component of the purchase price along with acquisition related costs were financed by an
approximate $180 million cash investment by the Investors and aggregate borrowings of $290 million. See
Note 11 for a description of the Company’s financing arrangements.
Concurrent with the Acquisition, the following transactions also occurred:
Ÿ  Certain Marathon assets (including real property interests and land related to 135 of the SuperAmerica
convenience stores and the SuperMom’s bakery) were sold to a third party equity real estate investment
trust. In connection with the closing of the Acquisition, the Company is leasing these properties from the real
estate investment trust on a long-term basis.
Ÿ  A third-party purchased substantially all of the crude oil inventory associated with operations of the refinery
directly from Marathon.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-9
MPC agreed to provide the Company with administrative and support services subsequent to the Acquisition
pursuant to a transition services agreement, including finance and accounting, human resources, and
information systems services, as well as support services generally for a period of up to eighteen months in
connection with the transition from being a part of MPC’s systems and infrastructure to having its own
systems and infrastructure. The transition services agreement required the Company to pay MPC for the
provision of the transition services, as well as to reimburse MPC for compensation paid to MPC employees
providing such transition services. In addition, under the agreement, Marathon provided support services for
the operation of the refining and retail business segments, using the employees that were ultimately expected
to be transitioned to the Company. The Company was obligated to reimburse MPC for the compensation paid
to MPC employees providing such operations services, plus the agreed burden rates. For the three months
ended March 31, 2011, the Company recognized expenses of approximately $7.7 million related to
administrative and support services. The Company also paid $6.7 million in December 2010 of which $1.7
million was amortized during the three months ended March 31, 2011. The majority of transition services were
completed as of December 31, 2011 and, as such, the three months ended March 31, 2012 include no
transition service charges from Marathon.
5. INCOME TAXES
For the period subsequent to the Acquisition, the Company is a pass through entity for federal income tax
purposes. As a result, there are no federal income taxes incurred. For the three months ended March 31, 2012
and 2011, the Company incurred state income taxes of less than $0.1 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
6. INVENTORIES
(in millions)
Crude oil and refinery feedstocks
Refined products
Merchandise
Supplies and sundry items
Total
March 31,
2012
$
5.5    
  123.7    
20.7    
 
13.7    
 
   
    
$ 163.6
December 31,
2011
9.1  
109.1  
21.1  
14.8  
 
154.1
$
 
 
 
   
$
The LIFO method accounted for 79% and 77% of total inventory value at March 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011, respectively. Current acquisition costs were estimated to exceed the LIFO inventory value by $12.8
million and $20.0 million at March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively.
7. EQUITY METHOD INVESTMENT
The Company has a 17% common interest in Minnesota Pipe Line. The carrying value of this equity method
investment was $89.2 million and $89.9 million at March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively.
As of March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, the carrying amount of the equity method investment was $6.8
million and $6.9 million higher than the underlying net assets of the investee, respectively. The Company is
amortizing this difference over the remaining life of Minnesota Pipe Line’s primary asset (the fixed asset life
of the pipeline).
Distributions received from Minnesota Pipe Line were $3.4 million and $2.2 million for the three months
ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Equity income from Minnesota Pipe Line was $2.8 million and
$1.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
F-10
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
8. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Major classes of property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”) consisted of the following:
(in millions)
Land
Retail stores and equipment
Refinery and equipment
Software
Other equipment
Precious metals
Assets under construction
Less: accumulated depreciation
Property, plant and equipment, net
5 years
Estimated
Useful Lives   
  
2 - 22 years  
5 - 24 years  
  
2 - 7 years
March 31,
2012
8.7    
$
 
50.9    
  324.8    
 
15.8    
2.3    
 
10.5    
 
 
14.2    
   
    
  427.2    
38.8    
 
   
    
$ 388.4
December 31,
2011
8.7  
50.4  
318.1  
14.7  
1.9  
10.5  
17.4  
 
421.7  
30.5  
 
391.2
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
$
PP&E included gross assets acquired under capital leases of $12.0 million and $12.5 million at March 31, 2012
and December 31, 2011, respectively, with related accumulated depreciation of $0.9 million and $1.4 million,
respectively.
9. INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Intangible assets were ascribed value as a result of the Acquisition and are comprised of franchise rights
amounting to $19.8 million and trademarks amounting to $15.6 million at both March 31, 2012 and
December 31, 2011. These assets have an indefinite life and therefore are not amortized, but rather are tested
for impairment annually or sooner if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the
intangible asset has been reduced below carrying value.
10. DERIVATIVES
The Company is subject to crude oil and refined product market price fluctuations caused by supply
conditions, weather, economic conditions and other factors. In October 2010, at the request of the Company,
MPC initiated a strategy to mitigate refining margin risk on a portion of the business’s 2011 and 2012
projected refinery production. In connection with the Acquisition, derivative instruments executed pursuant to
this strategy, along with all corresponding rights and obligations, were assumed by the Company. The
Company also may periodically use futures contracts to manage price risks associated with inventory
quantities above or below target levels.
Under the risk mitigation strategy, the Company may buy or sell an amount equal to a fixed price times a
certain number of barrels, and to buy or sell in return an amount equal to a specified variable price times the
same amount of barrels. Physical volumes are not exchanged and these contracts are net settled with cash.
The contracts are not being accounted for as hedges for financial reporting purposes. The Company
recognizes all derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities at fair value on the balance sheet and any
related net gain or loss is recorded as a gain or loss in the derivative activity caption on the consolidated
statements of income. Observable quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets (Level 2 as
described in Note 12) are considered to determine the fair values for the purpose of marking to market the
derivative instruments at each period end. At March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, the Company had open
commodity derivative instruments consisting of crude oil futures to buy 15 million and 17 million barrels,
respectively, and refined
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-11
products futures and swaps to sell 15 million and 17 million barrels, respectively, primarily to protect the
value of refining margins through 2012 and 2013. For the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, there
were losses related to derivative activities of $185.9 million and $315.1 million, respectively. Of these total
losses, $97.5 million and $52.2 million represented realized losses on settled contracts (including early
extinguishments as noted below) and $88.4 million and $262.9 million represented unrealized losses on open
contracts for the three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
The Company has entered into arrangements to settle a portion of its existing derivative instruments ahead of
their respective expiration dates. The cash payments for the early extinguishment of these derivative
instruments have been deferred and will come due beginning in December 2012 and continue through
December 2013. The early extinguishments are treated as a current period loss as of the date of
extinguishment. During the three months ended March 31, 2012 the Company incurred $44.6 million of
realized losses related to these early extinguishments. Interest accrues on the early extinguishment liability at
a weighted average interest rate of 5.5%. Interest expense related to these liabilities in the quarter ended
March 31, 2012 was $0.4 million.
The following table summarizes the fair value amounts of the Company’s outstanding derivative instruments
by location on the balance sheet as of March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011:
(in millions)
Commodity swaps and futures
Commodity swaps and futures
Balance Sheet Classification    
Current liabilities
  
Noncurrent liabilities
March 31,
2012
$ 185.5    
12.5    
 
   
    
$ 198.0
December 31,
2011
109.9  
—  
 
109.9
$
 
   
$
Under the Company’s risk management strategy, the Company is exposed to credit risk in the event of
nonperformance by its counterparty on these derivative instruments. The counterparties are large financial
institutions with credit ratings as of March 31, 2012 of at least A- by Standard and Poor’s and A2 by Moody’s.
In the event of default, the Company would potentially be subject to losses on a derivative instrument’s mark-
to-market gains. The Company does not expect nonperformance on any of its derivative instruments.
The Company has provided letters of credit for a fixed dollar amount under its asset-based revolving credit
facility (as discussed in Note 11) to the counterparty on the derivative instruments utilized under the crack
spread derivative strategy. The Company is not subject to any margin calls for these crack spread derivatives
and the counterparty does not have the right to demand any additional collateral beyond the aforementioned
fixed dollar letters of credit. Any outstanding collateral is released to the Company upon settlement of the
related derivative instrument.
11. DEBT
In connection with the Acquisition, the Company entered into various financing arrangements including
$290.0 million of 10.50% Senior Secured Notes due December 1, 2017 (“Secured Notes”) and a $300 million
secured asset-based revolving credit facility (“ABL Facility”).
Secured Notes
The Secured Notes are guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior secured basis by all of the Company’s
existing and future direct and indirect subsidiaries; however, not on a full and unconditional basis as a result
of subsidiaries being able to be released as guarantors under certain customary circumstances for such
arrangements. A subsidiary guarantee can be released under customary circumstances, including (a) the sale
of the subsidiary, (b) the subsidiary is declared “unrestricted,”
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-12
(c) the legal or covenant defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of the indenture, or (d) liquidation or
dissolution of the subsidiary. Separate condensed consolidating financial information is not included as the
Company does not have independent assets or operations. The Company is required to make interest
payments on June 1 and December 1 of each year, which commenced on June 1, 2011. There are no
scheduled principal payments required prior to the notes maturing on December 1, 2017. Borrowings bear
interest at 10.50%.
At any time prior to the maturity date of the notes, the Company may, at its option, redeem all or any portion
of the notes for the outstanding principal amount plus unpaid interest and a make-whole premium as defined
in the indenture. If the Company experiences a change in control or makes certain asset dispositions, as
defined under the indenture, the Company may be required to repurchase all or part of the notes plus unpaid
interest and in certain cases pay a redemption premium.
The Secured Notes contain a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability, subject to
certain exceptions, of the Company and its subsidiaries to sell or otherwise dispose of assets, including
capital stock of subsidiaries, incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, repay other
indebtedness, pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock, create liens on assets, make
investments, loans or advances, make certain acquisitions, engage in mergers or consolidations, engage in
certain transactions with affiliates, change the business conducted by itself and its subsidiaries, and enter
into agreements that restrict dividends from restricted subsidiaries.
ABL Facility
The ABL Facility provides for revolving credit financing through December 1, 2015 in an aggregate principal
amount of up to $300 million (of which $150 million may be utilized for the issuance of letters of credit and up
to $30 million may be short-term borrowings upon same-day notice, referred to as swingline loans) and may
be increased up to a maximum aggregate principal amount of $400 million, subject to borrowing base
availability and lender approval. Availability under the ABL Facility at any time will be the lesser of (a) the
aggregate commitments under the ABL Facility or (b) the borrowing base, less any outstanding borrowings
and letters of credit. The borrowing base is calculated based on a percentage of eligible accounts receivable,
petroleum inventory and other assets.
Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest, at the Company’s option, at either (a) an alternative base rate,
plus an applicable margin (ranging between 1.75% and 2.25%) or (b) a LIBOR rate plus applicable margin
(ranging between 2.75% and 3.25%). The alternate base rate is the greater of (a) the prime rate, (b) the Federal
Funds Effective rate plus 50 basis points, or (c) one-month LIBOR rate plus 100 basis points and a spread of
up to 225 basis points based upon percentage utilization of this facility. In addition to paying interest on
outstanding borrowings, the Company is also required to pay an annual commitment fee ranging from 0.375%
to 0.625% and letter of credit fees.
As of March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, the availability under the ABL Facility was $156.7 million and
$108.0 million, respectively. This availability is net of $61.6 million in outstanding letters of credit at both
March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011. The Company had no borrowings under the ABL Facility at March 31,
2012 or December 31, 2011.
The ABL Facility has a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenant requirement of at least 1.0 to
1.0. The covenant is operative when the Company’s availability under the facility is less than the greater of
(a) 15% of the lesser of the $300 million commitment amount or the borrowing base or (b) $22.5 million.
The ABL Facility also contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain
exceptions, the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to sell or otherwise dispose of
F-13
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
assets, incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, pay dividends and distributions or repurchase
capital stock, create liens on assets, make investments, loans or advances, make certain acquisitions, engage
in mergers or consolidations, and engage in certain transactions with affiliates.
12. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
As defined in accounting guidance, fair value is the price that would be received for the sale of an asset or
paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Accounting guidance describes three approaches to measuring the fair value of assets and liabilities: the
market approach, the income approach and the cost approach, each of which includes multiple valuation
techniques. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions
involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities. The income approach uses valuation techniques to
measure fair value by converting future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, into a single present value
amount using current market expectations about those future amounts. The cost approach is based on the
amount that would currently be required to replace the service capacity of an asset. This is often referred to as
current replacement cost. The cost approach assumes that the fair value would not exceed what it would cost
a market participant to acquire or construct a substitute asset of comparable utility, adjusted for
obsolescence.
Accounting guidance does not prescribe which valuation technique should be used when measuring fair
value and does not prioritize among the techniques. Accounting guidance establishes a fair value hierarchy
that prioritizes the inputs used in applying the various valuation techniques. Inputs broadly refer to the
assumptions that market participants use to make pricing decisions, including assumptions about risk. Level
1 inputs are given the highest priority in the fair value hierarchy while Level 3 inputs are given the lowest
priority. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Ÿ  Level 1—Observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active
markets as of the reporting date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or liability
occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
Ÿ  Level 2—Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data.
These are inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or
indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Ÿ  Level 3—Unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data and may be used with internally
developed methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
The Company uses a market or income approach for recurring fair value measurements and endeavors to use
the best information available. Accordingly, valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs
are favored. The assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires
judgment and may affect the placement of assets and liabilities within the levels of the fair value hierarchy.
The Company’s current asset and liability accounts contain certain financial instruments, the most significant
of which are trade accounts receivables and trade payables. The Company believes the carrying values of its
current assets and liabilities approximate fair value. The Company’s fair value assessment incorporates a
variety of considerations, including the short-term duration of the instruments, the Company’s historical
incurrence of insignificant bad debt expense and the Company’s expectation of future insignificant bad debt
expense, which includes an evaluation of counterparty credit risk.
Table of Contents
F-14
Index to Financial Statements
The following table provides the assets and liabilities carried at fair value measured on a recurring basis at
March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011:
(in millions)
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Other assets
Contingent consideration—margin support
LIABILITIES
Derivative liability—current
Derivative liability—long-term
Accrued liabilities
Contingent consideration—earn-out
Other liabilities
Contingent consideration—earn-out
(in millions)
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Other assets
Contingent consideration—margin support
LIABILITIES
Derivative liability—current
Other liabilities
Contingent consideration—earn-out
Balance at
$
$
March 31, 2012    
    
 
  
64.1    
  
2.8    
    
66.9    
    
  
185.5    
12.5    
  
31.7    
  
47.5    
    
277.2
$
$
Balance at
$
$
December 31, 2011    
 
    
  
123.5    
  
20.2    
    
143.7    
    
  
109.9    
  
30.9    
    
140.8
$
$
Quoted
prices in
active
markets
(Level 1)    
    
 
  
$ 64.1    
  
—    
 
    
   
$ 64.1    
   
    
  
$ —    
—    
 
  
—    
  
—    
 
   
    
$ —
Quoted
prices in
active
markets
(Level 1)    
 
    
  
$ 123.5    
  
—    
 
   
    
$ 123.5    
   
    
  
$ —    
  
—    
 
   
    
$ —
Significant
other
observable
$
$
inputs
(Level 2)     
    
  
—    
  
—    
    
—    
    
  
185.5    
12.5    
  
—    
  
—    
    
198.0
$
$
Significant
other
observable
$
$
inputs
(Level 2)     
    
  
—    
  
—    
    
—    
    
  
109.9    
  
—    
    
109.9
$
$
Unobservable
inputs
(Level 3)
—
2.8  
 
2.8
—  
—
31.7
47.5  
 
79.2
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Unobservable
inputs
(Level 3)
—
20.2  
 
20.2
—
30.9  
 
30.9
The impacts of changes in the fair value of these arrangements are recorded in the statements of income as
contingent consideration income, net. The Company recorded a $65.7 million non-cash charge during the
three months ended March 31, 2012 and $31.8 million of contingent consideration income during the three
months ended March 31, 2011 related to changes in the fair value of the Company’s Level 3 contingent
consideration arrangements.
Our contingent consideration agreements (margin support and earn out) are reported at fair value using Level
3 inputs due to such agreements not having observable market prices. The fair value of the agreements are
determined based on a Monte Carlo simulation prepared by a third party service provider using management
projections of future period EBITDA levels.
F-15
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurement of our Level 3 agreements are the
management projections of EBITDA. In developing these management projections, the Company uses the
forward market prices for various crude oil types, other feedstocks and refined products and applies its
historical operating performance metrics against those forward market prices to develop its projected future
EBITDA. Significant increases (decreases) in the projected future EBITDA levels would result in significantly
higher (lower) fair value measurements.
Assets not recorded at fair value on a recurring basis, such as property, plant and equipment, intangible
assets and cost method investments are recognized at fair value when they are impaired. During both the
three months ended March 31, 2012 and 2011, there were no adjustments to the fair value of such assets. The
Company recorded assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the Acquisition at fair value.
The carrying value of debt, which is reported on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets, reflects the cash
proceeds received upon its issuance, net of subsequent repayments. The fair value of the Secured Notes
disclosed below was determined based on quoted prices in active markets (Level 1).
(in millions)
Secured Notes
March 31, 2012
Carrying
Amount
Fair
Value  
  
   $ 290.0     $319.7     $ 290.0     $316.5
Fair
Value
December 31, 2011  
Carrying
Amount
13. ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
The following table summarizes the changes in asset retirement obligations:
(in millions)
Asset retirement obligation balance at beginning of period
Accretion expense (included in depreciation and amortization)
Asset retirement obligation balance at end of period
14. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
Three months
Ended
March 31,
2012
$
 
 
$
1.5    
0.1    
    
1.6
Three months
Ended
March 31,
2011
$
 
 
$
2.1  
0.1  
 
2.2
NTI sponsors an equity participation plan which provides for the grant of profit interest units to certain
employees and independent non-employee directors of the Company. The plan has reserved approximately
29 million units for issuance under the plan. The exercise price for a unit shall not be less than 100% of the
fair market value of our equity units on the date of grant. Units vest in annual installments over a period of
five years after the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant.
A summary of profit interest unit activity is set forth below:
Outstanding at December 31, 2011
Number of
Units
Weighted
Average
Exercise
(in millions)
Price
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Term
Outstanding at December 31, 2011
Granted
Outstanding at March 31, 2012
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
24.2    
1.2
25.4
$ 1.87    
2.70
$ 1.91
9.2
8.8
F-16
The estimated weighted average fair value as of the grant date for units granted during the three months
ended March 31, 2012 and 2011 were $0.88 and $0.35, respectively, based upon the following assumptions:
Expected life (years)
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
Risk-free interest rate
2012    2011
   6.5  
   6.5  
   55.5%    40.6%
   0.0%    0.0%
   1.4%    2.7%
The weighted average expected life for the grants is calculated using the simplified method, which defines the
expected life as the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted average vesting period.
Expected volatility for the grants is based primarily on the historical volatility of a representative group of
peer companies for a period consistent with the expected life of the awards.
As of March 31, 2012, and 2011, the total unrecognized compensation cost for profit interest units was $7.7
million and $6.7 million, respectively. This non-cash expense will be recognized on a straight-line basis
through 2016.
15. DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN
During 2011, the Company also began to sponsor a defined benefit cash balance pension plan (the “Cash
Balance Plan”) for eligible employees. Company contributions are made to the cash account of the
participants equal to 5.0% of eligible compensation. Participants’ cash accounts also receive interest credits
each year based upon the average thirty year United States Treasury bond rate published in September
preceding the respective plan year. Participants become fully vested in their accounts after three years of
service. The Plan was not in place during the three months ended March 31, 2011. The net periodic benefit
cost related to the Cash Balance Plan for the three months ended March 31, 2012 of $0.4 million related
primarily to current period service costs.
16. SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION
Supplemental cash flow information is as follows:
(in millions)
Net cash from operating activities included:
Interest paid
Noncash investing and financing activities include:
Capital expenditures included in accounts payable
17. LEASING ARRANGEMENTS
Three Months Ended
March 31,
2011
March 31,
2012
1.1    
  
—
$
$
$
$
1.0
0.8
As described in Note 4, concurrent with the Acquisition, certain Marathon assets (including real property
interests and land related to 135 of the SuperAmerica convenience stores and the SuperMom’s bakery) were
sold to a third party equity real estate investment trust. In connection with the closing of the Acquisition, the
Company has assumed the leasing of these properties from the real estate investment trust on a long-term
basis.
In accordance with ASC Topic 840-40 “Sale-Leaseback Transactions”, the Company determined that
subsequent to the sale, it had a continuing involvement for a portion of these property interests due to
potential environmental obligations or due to subleasing arrangements. For these respective properties, the
fair value of the assets and the related financing obligation will remain on the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-17
Company’s consolidated balance sheet until the end of the lease term or until the continuing involvement is
resolved. The assets are included in property, plant and equipment and are being depreciated over their
remaining useful lives. The lease payments relating to these property interests are recognized as interest
expense. During 2011, the Company’s continuing involvement ended for a subset of these stores and, as
such, the related fair value of the assets and the financing obligation for these stores have been removed from
the Company’s consolidated balance sheet.
The remainder of properties sold to the third party real estate investment trust are treated as operating leases.
The Company also leases a variety of facilities and equipment under other operating leases, including land
and building space, office equipment, vehicles, rail tracks for storage of rail tank cars near the refinery and
numerous rail tank cars.
18. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
The Company is the subject of, or party to, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters.
Certain of these matters are discussed below. The ultimate resolution of these contingencies could,
individually or in the aggregate, be material to the Company’s consolidated and combined financial
statements. However, management believes that the Company will remain a viable and competitive enterprise
even though it is possible that these contingencies could be resolved unfavorably.
Contingent Consideration
As described in Note 4, the Acquisition provides for contingent consideration, or earn-out payments, that
could result in additional payments of up to a total of $125 million to MPC over an eight year period ending
December 1, 2018 based on operating performance. The Acquisition agreement also includes a margin
support component that requires Marathon to pay the Company up to $30 million per year to the extent the
Agreement Adjusted EBITDA is below $145 million less, among other things, any rental expense related to the
real estate lease arrangement, in either of the first two twelve month periods ending November 30, 2011 or
2012 up to a maximum of $60 million. Any such payments made by Marathon will increase the amount that we
may be required to pay Marathon over the earn-out period. See Note 12 for additional information relating to
the fair value of contingent arrangements related to the Acquisition. In addition to the estimated values related
to future periods discussed in Note 12, the Company has recorded a receivable of $30.0 million as of
March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011 relating to the margin support component of the contingent
consideration arrangement for the first twelve months ended November 30, 2011. MPC has disputed
approximately $12 million of this amount. Subsequent to March 31, 2012, the Company reached a potential
settlement on this dispute (see Note 20).
Environmental Matters
The Company is subject to federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations relating to the environment.
These laws generally provide for control of pollutants released into the environment and require responsible
parties to undertake remediation of hazardous waste disposal sites. Penalties may be imposed for
noncompliance. At March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, liabilities for remediation totaled $4.7 million and
$4.7 million, respectively. These liabilities are expected to be settled over at least the next 10 years. It is not
presently possible to estimate the ultimate amount of all remediation costs that might be incurred or the
penalties that may be imposed. Furthermore, environmental remediation costs may vary from estimates
because of changes in laws, regulations and their interpretation; additional information on the extent and
nature of site contamination; and improvements in technology. Receivables for recoverable costs from the
state, under programs to assist companies in clean-up efforts related to underground storage tanks at retail
marketing outlets, were $0.3 million and $0.2 million at March 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Franchise Agreements
F-18
In the normal course of its business, SAF enters into ten year license agreements with the operators of
franchised SuperAmerica brand retail outlets. These agreements obligate SAF or its affiliates to provide
certain services including information technology support, maintenance, credit card processing and signage
for specified monthly fees.
Guarantees
Certain agreements related to assets sold in the normal course of business contain performance and general
guarantees, including guarantees regarding inaccuracies in representations, warranties, covenants and
agreements, and environmental and general indemnifications that require the Company to perform upon the
occurrence of a triggering event or condition. These guarantees and indemnifications were part of the normal
course of selling assets. The Company has assumed these guarantees and indemnifications upon the
Acquisition. However, in certain cases, MPC LP has also provided an indemnification in favor of the
Company.
The Company is not typically able to calculate the maximum potential amount of future payments that could
be made under such contractual provisions because of the variability inherent in the guarantees and
indemnities. Most often, the nature of the guarantees and indemnities is such that there is no appropriate
method for quantifying the exposure because the Company has little or no past experience associated with
the underlying triggering event upon which a reasonable prediction of the outcome can be based. The
Company is not currently making any payments relating to such guarantees or indemnifications.
19. SEGMENT INFORMATION
The Company has two reportable operating segments: Refining and Retail. Each of these segments is
organized and managed based upon the nature of the products and services they offer. The segment
disclosures reflect management’s current organizational structure.
Ÿ  Refining—operates the St. Paul Park, Minnesota, refinery, terminal and related assets, including the
Company’s interest in MPLI and Minnesota Pipe Line, and
Ÿ  Retail—operates 166 convenience stores primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin. The Retail segment also
includes the operations of NTB and SAF.
Operating results for the Company’s operating segments are as follows:
(in millions)
Three months ended March 31, 2012
Revenues
Customer
Intersegment
Segment revenues
Elimination of intersegment revenues
Refining    
  
  
$654.5    
  240.0    
   
    
  894.5    
  —
Retail
$344.6   
  —   
   
   
  344.6   
  —
Other
$ —   
—   
 
   
   
 
—   
  (240.0)
Total
$ 999.1  
240.0  
 
   
 
  1,239.1  
(240.0)
Total revenues
Income (loss) from operations
Income from equity method investment
Depreciation and amortization
Capital expenditures
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(in millions)
Three months ended March 31, 2011
Revenues
Customer
Intersegment
Segment revenues
Elimination of intersegment revenues
Total revenues
Income (loss) from operations
Income from equity method investment
Depreciation and amortization
Capital expenditures
F-19
$894.5    
   
    
$ 78.7    
2.8    
$
5.8    
$
$
4.9
$344.6   
   
   
$ (0.4)  
$ —   
$ 1.8   
$ 0.3
$(240.0)  
   
   
$ (75.6)  
$ —   
0.9   
$
$
0.2
$ 999.1
$
$
$
$
2.7  
2.8  
8.5  
5.4
Refining    
  
  
$599.5    
  245.7    
   
    
  845.2    
  —    
   
    
$845.2    
   
    
$ 78.5    
1.4    
$
5.1    
$
$
5.0
Retail
$340.7   
  —   
   
   
  340.7   
  —   
   
   
$340.7   
   
   
$ (2.4)  
$ —   
$ 1.9   
$ 0.1
Other
$ —   
 
—   
   
   
 
—   
  (245.7)  
   
   
$(245.7)  
   
   
$ 24.6   
$ —   
0.3   
$
$
0.9
Total
$ 940.2  
 
245.7  
   
 
  1,185.9  
 
(245.7) 
   
 
$ 940.2  
   
 
$ 100.7  
1.4  
$
7.3  
$
$
6.0
Intersegment sales from the Refining segment to the Retail segment consist primarily of sales of refined
products which are recorded based on contractual prices that are market based. Revenues from external
customers are nearly all in the United States.
Total assets by segment were as follows:
(in millions)
At March 31, 2012
At December 31, 2011
Retail
Other
Refining    
 
   $682.8     $133.7     $146.2     $962.7  
  
 
   $655.2     $219.8     $123.8     $998.8
Total
All property, plant and equipment are located in the United States.
20. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On May 4, 2012, the Company entered into a settlement agreement with Marathon in connection with the
contingent consideration agreement (see Note 18). Under the terms of this settlement agreement, Marathon
will receive $40 million of the net proceeds from Northern Tier Energy LP’s initial public offering, and NT
Holdings will redeem Marathon’s existing preferred interest with a portion of the net proceeds from this
offering and issue Marathon a new $45 million preferred interest in NT Holdings in consideration for
relinquishing all claims with respect to earn-out payments under the contingent consideration agreement. The
Company has also agreed, pursuant to the settlement agreement, to relinquish all claims to margin support
payments under the contingent consideration agreement. The settlement agreement is contingent upon the
consummation of Northern Tier Energy LP’s initial public offering by no later than December 31, 2012.
On May 22, 2012 the Company paid an equity distribution to NT Holdings in the amount of $40.0 million.
During the second quarter of 2012, the Company reset the price of its derivative contracts for the period of
July 2012 through December 2012 and recognized a loss of approximately $92 million. The Company plans to
use a portion of the net proceeds of the initial public offering of Northern Tier Energy LP to settle this
obligation. If this offering is not completed, the loss from resetting the price of the derivative contracts will be
paid to the counterparty on the same monthly schedule as the original contracts were scheduled to settle.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-20
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors of Northern Tier Energy LLC:
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of
income, cash flows and member’s interest present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Northern Tier Energy LLC and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2011 and 2010, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2011 and for the period from June 23, 2010
(date of inception) to December 31, 2010 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. We conducted
our audits of these statements in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements,
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Houston, Texas
April 10, 2012
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-21
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To Marathon Oil Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying combined statements of income, cash flows and net investment present
fairly, in all material respects, the results of operations and cash flows of the St. Paul Refinery & Retail
Marketing Business, a component of Marathon Oil Corporation, for the eleven month period ended
November 30, 2010 and the year ended December 31, 2009 in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America. These combined financial statements are the responsibility of
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these combined financial statements based on
our audits. We conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Houston, Texas
April 12, 2011, except for the change in the composition of reportable segments discussed in Note 19 to the
combined financial statements, as to which the date is December 12, 2011.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-22
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions)
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Receivables, less allowance for doubtful accounts
Inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Equity method investment
Property, plant and equipment, net
Intangible assets
Other assets
Total Assets
LIABILITIES AND MEMBER’S INTEREST
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Derivative liability
Total current liabilities
NON-CURRENT LIABILITIES
Long-term debt
Lease financing obligation
Derivative liability
Other liabilities
Total liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Note 18)
EQUITY
December 31,
2011
December 31,
2010
$
$
$
123.5    
81.9    
154.1    
65.5    
    
425.0
89.9    
391.2    
35.4    
57.3    
    
998.8
207.4    
30.3    
109.9    
    
347.6
290.0    
11.9    
—    
37.1    
    
686.6
$
$
$
72.8  
100.2  
156.4  
28.7  
 
358.1
92.4  
386.3  
35.4  
58.4  
 
930.6
183.4  
20.5  
45.6  
 
249.5
290.0  
24.5  
22.4  
59.2  
 
645.6
EQUITY
Member’s interest
Total Liabilities and Member’s Interest
$
312.2    
    
998.8
$
285.0  
 
930.6
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated and combined financial statements.
F-23
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
REVENUE(a)
COSTS, EXPENSES AND OTHER
Cost of sales(a)
Direct operating expenses
Turnaround and related expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Selling, general and administrative
Formation costs
Contingent consideration income
Other (income) expense, net
OPERATING INCOME
Realized losses from derivative activities  
Unrealized losses from derivative
activities
Bargain purchase gain
Interest expense, net
EARNINGS BEFORE INCOME TAXES
Income tax provision
NET EARNINGS
(a)Excise taxes included in revenue and
cost of sales
(in millions)
Successor
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
   
4,280.8
$
June 23, 2010
(inception date)
to December 31,
2010
344.9
$
3,508.0   
260.3   
22.6   
29.5   
90.7   
7.4   
(55.8)  
(4.5)  
   
422.6
(310.3)
(41.9)  
—   
(42.1)  
   
28.3
—   
   
28.3
$
$
307.5  
21.4  
—  
2.2  
6.4  
3.6  
—  
0.1  
 
3.7
—
(27.1) 
51.4  
(3.2) 
 
24.8
—  
 
24.8
$
242.9
$
25.1
Predecessor
Eleven Months
Ended
November 30,
2010
   
3,195.2
$
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
 
2,940.5
$
2,697.9   
227.0   
9.5   
37.3   
59.6   
—   
—   
(5.4)  
   
169.3
2,507.9  
238.3  
0.6  
40.2  
64.7  
—  
—  
(1.1) 
 
89.9
—
(40.9)  
—   
(0.3)  
   
128.1
(67.1)  
   
61.0
$
—
—  
—  
(0.4) 
 
89.5
(34.8) 
 
54.7
$
$
271.8
$
289.6
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated and combined financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-24
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions)
Successor
Increase (decrease) in cash
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING
ACTIVITIES
Net earnings
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to
net cash provided by operating
activities:
 
Depreciation and amortization
 
Stock-based compensation expense
 
Bargain purchase gain
 
Equity method investment, net
 
Contingent consideration income
 
Unrealized loss from derivative activities  
Deferred taxes
 
Changes in assets and liabilities, net:
 
Accounts receivable
 
Inventories
 
Other current assets
 
Accounts payable and accrued
expenses
Receivables from and payables to
related parties
Other, net
Net cash provided by operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING
ACTIVITIES
Capital expenditures
Acquisition, net of cash acquired
Disposals of assets
Return of capital from investments
Net cash used in investing activities
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING
ACTIVITIES
Borrowings from senior secured notes
Borrowings from revolving credit
arrangement
Repayments of revolving credit
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
June 23, 2010
(inception date)
to
December 31
2010
$
28.3
$
24.8
29.5   
1.6   
—   
—   
(55.8)  
41.9   
—   
 
18.3   
2.3   
(6.8)
146.4
—   
3.6   
   
209.3
(45.9)  
(112.8)  
—   
2.4   
   
(156.3)
—
95.0
2.2   
0.1   
(51.4)  
0.6   
—   
27.1   
—   
 
(100.2)  
38.6   
(27.7)
86.4
—   
(0.5)  
   
—
(2.5)  
(360.8)  
—   
—   
   
(363.3)
290.0
—
Predecessor
Eleven Months
Ended
November 30,
Year Ended
December 31,
2010
2009
$
61.0
37.3   
0.3   
—   
0.6   
—   
40.9   
(0.8)  
 
(16.3)  
2.5   
—
23.8
(1.2)  
(2.7)  
   
145.4
(29.8)  
—   
0.4   
0.1   
   
(29.3)
—
—
$
54.7
40.2  
0.3  
—  
0.3  
—  
—  
0.5
(14.7) 
(6.8) 
—
31.2
23.8  
(0.1) 
 
129.4
(29.0) 
—  
0.7  
3.3  
 
(25.0)
—
—
Repayments of revolving credit
arrangement
Financing costs
Investment from members
Distributions to Member’s Interest
Distributions to Marathon, net
Net cash (used in) provided by financing
activities
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning
of period
Cash and cash equivalents at end of
period
$
(95.0)  
—   
—   
(2.3)  
—
(2.3)  
   
 
50.7
72.8
123.5
$
—   
(34.1)  
180.2   
—   
—
436.1   
   
 
72.8
—
72.8
$
—   
—   
—   
—   
(115.4)
(115.4)  
   
 
0.7
6.0
6.7
$
—  
—  
—  
—  
(103.9)
(103.9)
0.5
5.5
6.0
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated and combined financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-25
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF MEMBER’S INTEREST AND NET INVESTMENT
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LLC
(in millions)
Balance at January 1, 2009 (Predecessor)
Net earnings
Distributions to Marathon, net
Balance at December 31, 2009 (Predecessor)
Net earnings
Distributions to Marathon, net
Balance at November 30, 2010 (Predecessor)
Balance at June 23, 2010 (Successor Inception Date)
Net earnings
Capital contribution
Stock-based compensation
Balance at December 31, 2010 (Successor)
Net earnings
Equity
Net
Investment   
$
415.5
Member’s
Interest  
$
—
$
$
54.7   
(104.0)  
   
366.2   
   
61.0   
(114.8)  
   
312.4
$
—  
—  
 
—  
 
—  
—  
 
—
—   
—   
—   
—   
   
—
—  
$
 
24.8  
  260.1  
0.1  
 
   
 
  285.0
Net earnings
Capital distributions
Other comprehensive loss
Stock-based compensation
Balance at December 31, 2011 (Successor)
$
—   
—
—   
—   
   
—
28.3  
(2.3)
(0.4) 
 
1.6  
 
   
 
$ 312.2
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated and combined financial statements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-26
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1. DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
Description of the Business
Northern Tier Energy LLC (“NTE” or the “Company”) is an independent downstream energy company with
refining, retail and pipeline operations that serve the Petroleum Administration for Defense District II (“PADD
II”) region of the United States. The Company is a Delaware limited liability company and is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Northern Tier Holdings LLC (“NT Holdings” or the “Member”). NT Holdings is wholly owned by
Northern Tier Investors LLC (“NTI”). Additionally, NT Holdings has issued preferred stock that is solely owned
by an indirect subsidiary of Marathon Petroleum Corporation (“Marathon Petroleum”). Marathon Petroleum
was a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon Oil Corporation (“Marathon Oil”) until June 30, 2011. NTI, NT
Holdings and the Company were formed by ACON Investments L.L.C. and TPG Refining, L.P. and certain
members of management (collectively, the “Investors”) during 2010.
Predecessor interests represent the St. Paul Park Refinery & Retail Marketing Business formerly owned and
operated by subsidiaries of Marathon Oil. These subsidiaries, Marathon Petroleum Company LP (“MPC LP”),
Speedway LLC (“Speedway”) and MPL Investments LLC, are together referred to as “MPC” or “Marathon” and
are subsidiaries of Marathon Petroleum. Predecessor interests are hereinafter referred to as the
“Predecessor.” Effective December 1, 2010, the Company acquired the Predecessor business from Marathon
for approximately $608 million (the “Acquisition”).
The Company includes the operations of the St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC (“SPPR”) and Northern Tier Retail
LLC (“NTR”). The Company also includes Northern Tier Bakery LLC (“NTB”), SuperAmerica Franchising LLC
(“SAF”), a 17% interest in MPL Investments Inc. (“MPLI”) and a 17% interest in Minnesota Pipe Line
Company, LLC (“Minnesota Pipe Line”). MPLI owns 100% of the preferred interest in Minnesota Pipe Line
which owns and operates a 455,000 barrels per day crude oil pipeline in Minnesota (see Note 2).
SPPR, which is located in St. Paul Park, Minnesota, has total crude oil throughput capacity of 74,000 barrels
per calendar day. Refinery operations include crude fractionation, catalytic cracking, hydrotreating, reforming,
alkylation, sulfur recovery and a hydrogen plant. The refinery processes predominately North Dakota and
Canadian crude oils into products such as gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, kerosene, asphalt, propane, propylene
and sulfur. The refined products are sold to markets primarily located in the Upper Great Plains of the United
States.
NTR operates 166 convenience stores under the SuperAmerica brand. SAF supports 67 franchised stores
which also utilize the SuperAmerica brand. The SuperAmerica stores are primarily located in Minnesota and
Wisconsin and sell gasoline, merchandise, and in some locations, diesel fuel. There is a wide range of
merchandise sold at the stores including prepared foods, beverages and non-food items. The merchandise
sold includes a significant number of proprietary items.
NTB prepares and distributes food products under the SuperMom’s Bakery brand primarily to SuperAmerica
branded retail outlets.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated and combined financial statements present separately the financial position,
results of operations, cash flows and changes in equity for both the Company and the Predecessor. In
connection with the Acquisition, further described in Note 4, a new accounting basis was established for the
Company as of the acquisition date based upon the fair value of the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-27
assets acquired and liabilities assumed, in accordance with the guidance for business combinations.
Financial information for the pre- and post-acquisition periods has been separated by a line on the face of the
consolidated and combined financial statements to highlight the fact that the financial information for such
periods have been prepared under two different historical-cost bases of accounting. For all periods prior to
the closing of the Acquisition, the accompanying combined financial statements reflect all assets, liabilities,
revenues, expenses and cash flows directly attributable to the Predecessor.
Subsequent Events
Events and transactions subsequent to the balance sheet date have been evaluated through April 10, 2012, the
date these consolidated and combined financial statements were available to be issued, for potential
recognition or disclosure in the financial statements.
2. SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of Consolidation and Combination
Prior to the closing of the Acquisition, the Predecessor was legally held by multiple subsidiaries and affiliates
of Marathon Oil. As such, the accompanying Predecessor financial statements present the combined accounts
of such businesses for all periods prior to the Acquisition. The Company was incorporated on June 23, 2010.
NTI entered into the Acquisition agreement with Marathon on October 6, 2010. After the closing of the
Acquisition on December 1, 2010, the Company acquired the stock or net assets of those Predecessor
businesses from NTI. Accordingly, the accompanying financial statements present the consolidated accounts
of such acquired businesses for all periods subsequent to December 1, 2010. The Company had no operating
activities between its June 23, 2010 inception date and the date the Predecessor businesses were acquired
although it incurred various transaction and formation costs which have been included in the total successor
period of June 23, 2010 through December 31, 2010 (the “Successor Period”).
All significant intercompany accounts have been eliminated in these consolidated and combined financial
statements.
The Company’s and the Predecessor’s 17% common interest in Minnesota Pipe Line is accounted for using
the equity method of accounting in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”)
Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 323. Income from equity method investment represents the
Company’s and the Predecessor’s proportionate share of net income available to common owners generated
by Minnesota Pipe Line.
The equity method investment is assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts or circumstances
indicate a loss in value has occurred. When the loss is deemed to be other than temporary, the carrying value
of the equity method investment is written down to fair value, and the amount of the write-down is included in
net income. See Note 7 for further information on the Company’s equity investment.
MPLI owns all of the preferred membership units of Minnesota Pipe Line. This investment in MPLI which
provides the Company (and previously, the Predecessor) no significant influence over Minnesota Pipe Line is
accounted for as a cost method investment. The investment in MPLI is carried at a cost of $6.9 million as of
December 31, 2011 and $7.0 as of December 31, 2010 and is included in other noncurrent assets on the
consolidated balance sheets.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-28
of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the
consolidated and combined financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during
the respective reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. In addition, significant
estimates were used in accounting for the Acquisition under the purchase method of accounting.
The Predecessor financial statements include allocations of general, administrative and overhead costs of
Marathon that are attributable to the Predecessor’s operations. Management believes the assumptions and
allocations underlying the combined financial statements are reasonable. However, these combined financial
statements do not include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred had the Predecessor been
a stand-alone entity during the periods presented and do not reflect the Predecessor’s combined results of
operations, financial position and cash flows had it been a stand-alone company during the periods
presented.
Operating Segments
The Company has two reportable operating segments:
Ÿ  Refining—operates the St. Paul Park, Minnesota, refinery, terminal and related assets, including the
Company’s interest in MPLI and Minnesota Pipe Line, and
Ÿ  Retail—operates 166 convenience stores primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin. The Retail segment also
includes the operations of NTB and SAF.
See Note 19 for further information on the Company’s operating segments.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when products are shipped or services are provided to customers, title is
transferred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured. Revenues are
recorded net of discounts granted to customers. Shipping and other transportation costs billed to customers
are presented on a gross basis in revenues and cost of sales.
Rebates from vendors are recognized as a reduction of cost of sales when the initiating transaction occurs.
Incentives that are derived from contractual provisions are accrued based on past experience and recognized
in cost of sales.
Excise Taxes
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) is required by various governmental authorities, including
federal and state, to collect and remit taxes on certain products. Such taxes are presented on a gross basis in
revenues and costs and expenses in the consolidated and combined statements of income. These taxes
totaled $242.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, $25.1 million for the Successor Period, $271.8
million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and $289.6 million for the year ended December 31,
2009.
Refined Product Exchanges
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) enters into exchange contracts whereby it agrees to deliver a
particular quantity and quality of refined products at a specified location and date to a particular counterparty
and to receive from the same counterparty a particular quantity and quality of refined products at a specified
location on the same or another specified date. The exchange receipts and deliveries are nonmonetary
transactions, with the exception of associated grade or location
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-29
differentials that are settled in cash. These transactions are not recorded as revenue because they involve the
exchange of refined product inventories held for sale in the ordinary course of business to facilitate sales to
customers. The exchange transactions are recognized at the carrying amount of the inventory transferred plus
any cash settlement due to grade or location differentials.
Advertising
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) expenses the costs of advertising as incurred. Advertising
expense was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, less than $0.1 million for the Successor
Period, $2.6 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and $2.1 million for the year ended
December 31, 2009.
Income Taxes
After the Acquisition, the Company and its subsidiaries are limited liability companies and are therefore pass-
through entities for federal income tax purposes. As a result, the Company does not incur federal income
taxes. The Predecessor’s taxable income has historically been included in the consolidated U.S. federal
income tax returns of Marathon Oil and also in a number of state income tax returns, which were filed as
consolidated returns.
For the Predecessor, the provision for income taxes was computed as if the Predecessor were a stand-alone
tax-paying entity and as if it paid the amount of its current federal and state tax liabilities to Marathon Oil in
each period. As such, the accrual and payment of the current federal and state tax liabilities are recorded
within the net investment in the combined financial statements of the Predecessor in the period incurred.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities were recognized based on temporary differences between the financial
statement carrying amounts of the Predecessor’s assets and liabilities and their tax bases as reported in
Marathon Oil’s tax filings with the respective taxing authorities. The realization of deferred tax assets was
assessed periodically based on several interrelated factors. These factors include the Predecessor’s
expectation to generate sufficient future taxable income in order to utilize tax credits and operating loss carry-
forwards.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less from the date of
purchase to be cash equivalents.
Receivables and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Receivables of the Company (and previously, the Predecessor) primarily consist of customer accounts
receivable. The accounts receivable are due from a diverse base including companies in the petroleum
industry, airlines and the federal government. The allowance for doubtful accounts is reviewed quarterly for
collectability. All customer receivables are recorded at the invoiced amounts and generally do not bear
interest. When it becomes probable the receivable will not be collected, the balances for customer receivables
are charged directly to bad debt expense. The allowance for doubtful accounts was less than $0.1 million as
of December 31, 2011 and 2010.
Inventories
Inventories are carried at the lower of cost or market value. Cost of inventories is determined primarily under
the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method. However, the Company (and previously, the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-30
Predecessor) maintains some inventories whose cost is primarily determined using the first-in, first-out
method. The Company has LIFO pools for crude oil and other feedstocks and for refined products in its
Refining segment and a LIFO pool for refined products in its Retail segment for inventory held by the retail
stores.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment is recorded at cost and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated
useful lives of the assets. Such assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If the sum of the
expected undiscounted future cash flows from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than
the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized based on the fair value of the asset.
When property, plant and equipment depreciated on an individual basis are sold or otherwise disposed of,
any gains or losses are reported in net income. Gains on the disposal of property, plant and equipment are
recognized when earned, which is generally at the time of closing. If a loss on disposal is expected, such
losses are generally recognized when the assets are classified as held for sale.
Expenditures for routine maintenance and repair costs are expensed when incurred. Refinery process units
require periodic major maintenance and repairs that are commonly referred to as “turnarounds.” The required
frequency of the maintenance varies by unit, but generally is every two to six years depending on the
processing unit involved. Turnaround costs are expensed as incurred.
Internal-Use Software Development Costs
The Company capitalizes certain external and internal computer software costs incurred during the
application development stage. The application development stage generally includes software design and
configuration, coding, testing and installation activities. Training and maintenance costs are expensed as
incurred, while upgrades and enhancements are capitalized if it is probable that such expenditures will result
in additional functionality. Capitalized software costs are depreciated over the estimated useful life of the
underlying project on a straight-line basis, generally not exceeding five years.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets primarily include a retail marketing trade name and franchise agreements. These assets
have an indefinite life and therefore are not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment annually and when
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the intangible asset has been reduced below
carrying value.
Financing Costs
Financing origination fees are deferred and classified within other assets on the consolidated balance sheet.
Amortization is provided on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement, which approximates the
effective interest method.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) is exposed to earnings and cash flow volatility based on the
timing and change in refined product prices and crude oil prices. To manage these risks, the Company uses
derivative instruments associated with the purchase or sale of crude oil and refined
Table of Contents
F-31
Index to Financial Statements
products. Crack spread option contracts are used to hedge the volatility of refining margins. The Company
also may use futures contracts to manage price risks associated with inventory quantities above or below
target levels. The Company does not enter into derivative contracts for speculative purposes. All derivative
instruments are recorded in the consolidated balance sheet at fair value and are classified depending on the
maturity date of the underlying contracts. Changes in the fair value of its contracts are accounted for by
marking them to market and recognizing any resulting gains or losses in its statements of income. These
gains and losses are reported within operating activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Environmental Costs
Environmental expenditures are capitalized if the costs mitigate or prevent future contamination or if the costs
improve environmental safety or efficiency of the existing assets. The Company (and previously, the
Predecessor) provides for remediation costs and penalties when the responsibility to remediate is probable
and the amount of associated costs can be reasonably estimated. The timing of remediation accruals
coincides with completion of a feasibility study or the commitment to a formal plan of action. Remediation
liabilities are accrued based on estimates of known environmental exposure and are discounted when the
estimated amounts are reasonably fixed and determinable. If recoveries of remediation costs from third
parties are probable, a receivable is recorded and is discounted to net present value when the estimated
amount is reasonably fixed and determinable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The fair value of asset retirement obligations is recognized in the period in which the obligations are incurred
if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. Conditional asset retirement obligations for removal and
disposal of fire-retardant material from certain refining assets have been recognized. The amounts recorded
for such obligations are based on the most probable current cost projections. Asset retirement obligations
have not been recognized for the removal of materials and equipment from or the closure of certain refinery,
pipeline, terminal and retail marketing assets because the fair value cannot be reasonably estimated since the
settlement dates of the obligations are indeterminable.
Current inflation rates and credit-adjusted-risk-free interest rates are used to estimate the fair value of asset
retirement obligations. Depreciation of capitalized asset retirement costs and accretion of asset retirement
obligations are recorded over time. Depreciation is determined on a straight-line basis, while accretion
escalates over the lives of the assets.
Employee Benefit Plans
The Predecessor’s employees participated in various employee benefit plans of Marathon. These plans
include qualified, non-contributory defined benefit retirement plans, employee savings plans, employee and
retiree medical and life insurance plans, dental plans and other such benefits. For the purposes of the
combined financial statements, the Predecessor was considered to be participating in multi-employer benefit
plans of Marathon. As a participant in multi-employer benefit plans, the Predecessor recognized as expense
in each period the required allocations from Marathon, and it did not recognize any employee benefit plan
liabilities.
Subsequent to the Acquisition, the majority of the Predecessor’s employees still participated in the employee
benefit plans of Marathon under a transition services agreement. See Note 4 for a further description of this
transition services agreement.
Any employee not covered under an employee benefit plan of Marathon participates in retirement plans,
medical and life insurance plans, dental plans and other such benefits sponsored by the Company (see Note
15).
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-32
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes compensation expense for stock-based awards issued over the requisite service
period for each separately vesting tranche, as if multiple awards were granted. Stock-based compensation
costs are measured at the date of grant, based on the fair value of the award. Stock-based compensation
expense recognized was $1.6 million, $0.1 million, $0.3 million and $0.3 million for the year ended
December 31, 2011, the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010, the eleven months ended November 30,
2010, and the year ended December 31, 2009, respectively.
Net Investment
The net investment represents a net balance reflecting Marathon’s initial investment in the Predecessor and
subsequent adjustments resulting from the operations of the Predecessor and various transactions between
the Predecessor and Marathon. The balance is the result of the Predecessor’s participation in Marathon’s
centralized cash management programs under which the Predecessor’s cash receipts were remitted to and all
cash disbursements were funded by Marathon. Other transactions affecting the net investment include
general, administrative and overhead costs incurred by Marathon that are allocated to the Predecessor. There
are no terms of settlement or interest charges associated with the net investment balance.
Comprehensive Income
The Company has unrecognized prior service cost related to its defined benefit cash balance plan as of
December 31, 2011 (see Note 15). This unrecognized prior service cost of $0.4 million is recognized directly to
member’s interest as an element of other comprehensive income. The Predecessor has reported no
comprehensive income due to the absence of items of other comprehensive income in the periods presented.
Concentrations of Risk
The Predecessor is exposed to related party risk as a portion of both sales revenues and costs are derived
from transactions with Marathon Oil’s subsidiaries and affiliates. Sales to related parties for eleven months
ended November 30, 2010 and for the year ended December 31, 2009 were both 7% of total sales. For the
eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and for the year ended December 31, 2009 purchases from related
parties were both 45% of total costs and expenses.
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) is exposed to credit risk in the event of nonpayment by
customers. The creditworthiness of customers is subject to continuing review. No single non-related party
customer accounts for more than 10% of annual revenues.
Crude oil is the principal raw material for the Company and the majority of the crude oil processed is
delivered to the refinery through a pipeline that is owned by Minnesota Pipe Line, a related party. A prolonged
disruption of that pipeline’s operations would materially impact the Company’s ability to economically obtain
raw materials.
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) is exposed to concentrated geographical risk as most of its
operations are conducted in certain states.
Accounting Developments
In May 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update
(“ASU”) No. 2011-04, “Fair Value Measurements (Topic 820): Amendments to Achieve
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-33
Common Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure Requirements in U.S. GAAP and IFRS,” (“ASU 2011-04”).
ASU 2011-04 changes the wording used to describe many of the requirements in U.S. GAAP for measuring fair
value and for disclosing information about fair value measurements to ensure consistency between U.S.
GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”). ASU 2011-04 also expands the disclosures
for fair value measurements that are estimated using significant unobservable (Level 3) inputs. This new
guidance is to be applied prospectively. ASU 2011-04 will be effective for the Company’s quarterly and annual
financial statements beginning with our first quarter 2012 reporting. The Company believes that the adoption
of this standard will not materially impact its consolidated financial statements because the guidance only
provides for enhanced disclosure requirements.
In June 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-05, “Comprehensive Income (ASC Topic 220): Presentation of
Comprehensive Income,” (“ASU 2011-05”) which amends current comprehensive income guidance. This ASU
eliminates the option to present the components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of
shareholders’ equity. Instead, the Company must report comprehensive income in either a single continuous
statement of comprehensive income which contains two sections, net income and other comprehensive
income, or in two separate but consecutive statements. ASU 2011-05 will be effective for the Company’s
quarterly and annual financial statements beginning with our first quarter 2012 reporting. However, in
December 2011 the FASB issued ASU 2011-12 Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Deferral of the Effective
Date for Amendments to the Presentation of Reclassifications of Items Out of Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income in Accounting Standards Update No. 2011-05. ASU 2011-12 defers the effectiveness for
the requirement to present on the face of our financial statements the effects of reclassifications out of
accumulated other comprehensive income on the components of net income and other comprehensive
income. The Company believes that the adoption of ASU 2011-05, as amended by ASU 2011-12, will not have a
material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-11, “Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities”
(“ASU 2011-11”). ASU 2011-11 retains the existing offsetting requirements and enhances the disclosure
requirements to allow investors to better compare financial statements prepared under U.S. GAAP with those
prepared under IFRS. This new guidance is to be applied retrospectively. ASU 2011-11 will be effective for the
Company’s quarterly and annual financial statements beginning with our first quarter 2013 reporting. The
Company believes that the adoption of ASU 2011-11 will not have a material impact on its consolidated
financial statements.
3. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The Investors, which include ACON Investments L.L.C. and TPG Refining, L.P., are related parties of the
Company. Minnesota Pipe Line is also a related party of the Company. Subsequent to the Acquisition (see
Note 4), the Company entered into a crude oil supply and logistics agreement with a third party and no longer
has direct transaction with Minnesota Pipe Line.
Related parties for the Predecessor include the following:
Ÿ  Marathon Oil Company (“MOC”), which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon Oil. MOC purchases or
produces crude oil in the United States that is used at MPC’s refineries.
Ÿ  MPC LP, which changed its name from Marathon Petroleum Company LLC on October 1, 2010, was a wholly
owned subsidiary of Marathon Oil. MPC LP refines, markets and transports crude oil and petroleum products,
primarily in the Midwest, Upper Great Plains, Gulf Coast and southeastern regions of the United States.
Ÿ  Marathon Petroleum Trading Canada LLC (“MP Trading Canada”), which was a wholly owned subsidiary of
MPC LP. MP Trading Canada purchases crude oil in Canada to be used at MPC LP’s refineries.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-34
Ÿ  Minnesota Pipe Line, in which Marathon owned (and now the Company owns) a 17 percent interest.
Minnesota Pipe Line owns and operates a crude oil pipeline running from Clearbrook, Minnesota to Pine
Bend, Minnesota.
Ÿ  Speedway was a wholly owned subsidiary of Marathon Oil. Under the Predecessor, Speedway was the owner
of the SuperAmerica branded convenience stores that were sold to NTR as part of the Acquisition.
Predecessor revenues from related parties for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 were $210.1
million and $216.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 and represented sales to MPC LP. Related
party sales to MPC LP consisted primarily of sales of refined products. Refined product sales to MPC LP were
recorded at intercompany transfer prices that were market-based prices.
Predecessor purchases from related parties were as follows:
(in millions)
MOC
MPC LP
MP Trading Canada
Minnesota Pipe Line
Speedway
Total
Eleven
Months Ended
November 31,
2010
276.9    
67.5    
992.3    
25.3    
16.3    
    
1,378.3
$
 
 
 
 
   
$
Year Ended
December 31, 2009 
$
155.6  
64.2  
 
1,027.7  
 
26.4  
 
 
16.4  
   
 
1,290.3  
$
Related party purchases from MOC and MP Trading Canada consisted primarily of crude oil. Purchases from
MOC were recorded at contracted prices that were market-based. Purchases from MP Trading Canada were
recorded at contracted prices based on MP Trading Canada’s acquisition cost, plus an administrative fee.
Related party purchases from MPC LP consisted primarily of purchases of refined products and refinery
feedstocks, certain general and administrative costs, and costs associated with the Refining segment
participating in MPC LP’s multi-employer benefit plans. Refined product and refinery feedstock purchases
from MPC LP were recorded at intercompany transfer prices that were market-based prices. Related party
purchases from Minnesota Pipe Line consisted primarily of crude oil transportation services which were
based on published tariffs. Related party purchases from Speedway consisted of certain overhead costs and
costs associated with the Retail segment participating in Speedway’s multi-employer benefit plans.
MPC LP and Speedway provided certain services to the Predecessor such as marketing, crude acquisition,
engineering, human resources, insurance, treasury, accounting, tax, legal, procurement and information
technology services. Charges for these services were allocated based on usage or other methods, such as
headcount, capital employed or store count, which management believes to be reasonable. Related party
purchases reflect charges for these services of $26.5 million and $29.1 million for the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010 and the year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. The allocation methods included in
the combined income statements were consistently applied.
For the purposes of the combined financial statements, the Predecessor was considered to participate in
multi-employer benefit plans of MPC LP and Speedway. The Predecessor’s allocated share of MPC LP and
Speedway’s employee benefit plan expenses, including costs related to stock-based compensation plans, is
included in related party purchases and was $21.5 million and $20.3 million for the eleven months ended
November 30, 2010 and the year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. Expenses for employee benefit plans
other than stock-based compensation plans were
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-35
allocated to the Predecessor primarily as a percentage of salary and wage expense. For the stock-based
compensation plans, the Predecessor was charged with the expenses directly attributed to its employees
which were $0.3 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 and the year ended December 31,
2009.
Upon completion of the Acquisition, the Company entered into a management services agreement with the
Investors pursuant to which they provide the Company with ongoing management, advisory and consulting
services. The Investors also receive quarterly management fees equal to 1% of the Company’s “Adjusted
EBITDA” (as defined in the agreement) for the previous quarter (subject to a minimum annual fee of $2
million), as well as reimbursements for out-of pocket expenses incurred by them in connection with providing
such management services. The Company also pays the Investors’ specified success fees in connection with
advice they provide in relation with certain corporate transactions. For the year ended December 31, 2011, the
Company incurred fees relating to these services of $2.1 million.
4. ACQUISITION
As previously described in Note 1, effective December 1, 2010, the Company acquired the Predecessor
business from MPC for $608 million. Included in this amount was the estimated fair value of earn-out
payments of $54 million as of the Acquisition date. Of the $608 million purchase price, $361 million was paid
in cash as of December 31, 2010 and $80 million was satisfied by issuing MPC a perpetual payment in kind
preferred interest in NT Holdings. The residual purchase price of $113 million (excluding the contingent earn-
out consideration) was paid during the three months ended March 31, 2011.
The Company will be required to pay Marathon the earn-out payments if the Company’s Adjusted EBITDA (as
defined in the agreement, the “Agreement Adjusted EBITDA”) exceeds $165 million less, among other things,
any rental expense related to the real estate lease arrangement (described below) during any year in each of
the next eight years following the Acquisition. Agreement Adjusted EBITDA adjusts for, among other items,
(i) any unrealized gains or losses relating to derivative activities, (ii) any gains or losses generated by the
liquidation of any LIFO inventory layers, (iii) any losses related to lower of cost or market inventory
adjustments, and (iv) any gains on the sale of property, plant or equipment and certain other assets. Marathon
will receive 40% of the amount by which Agreement Adjusted EBITDA exceeds the specified threshold in any
year during the eight years following the Acquisition not to exceed $125 million over the eight years following
the Acquisition. The Acquisition agreement also includes a margin support component that requires
Marathon to pay the Company up to $30 million per year to the extent the Agreement Adjusted EBITDA is
below $145 million less, among other things, any rental expense related to the real estate lease arrangement
(described below), in either of the first two twelve month periods ending November 30, 2011 or 2012 up to a
maximum of $60 million. Any such payments made by Marathon will increase the amount that we may be
required to pay Marathon over the earn-out period (see Note 18). Subsequent fair value adjustments to these
collective contingent consideration arrangements (earn-out arrangement and margin support arrangement)
will be recorded in the statement of income based on quarterly remeasurements. See Note 12 for further
information on the Company’s fair value measurements.
The cash component of the purchase price along with acquisition related costs were financed by an
approximate $180 million cash investment by the Investors and aggregate borrowings of $290 million. See
Note 11 for a description of the Company’s financing arrangements.
Concurrent with the Acquisition, the following transactions also occurred:
Ÿ  Certain Marathon assets (including real property interests and land related to 135 of the SuperAmerica
convenience stores and the SuperMom’s bakery) were sold to a third party
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-36
equity real estate investment trust. In connection with the closing of the Acquisition, the Company is leasing
these properties from the real estate investment trust on a long-term basis.
Ÿ  A third-party purchased substantially all of the crude oil inventory associated with operations of the refinery
directly from Marathon.
The Acquisition was accounted for by the purchase method of accounting for business combinations. The
excess of the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired over total purchase consideration was recorded
as an estimated bargain purchase gain during 2010. This gain was a result of the market dynamics from the
time the purchase price was agreed upon compared to the market as of the closing date of the Acquisition.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the following fair value allocation of the
purchase of the net assets acquired:
(in millions)
Total consideration
Allocation of consideration:
Store cash acquired
Inventory
Property, plant and equipment
Minnesota Pipe Line investment
MPLI investment
Intangible assets
Margin support contract
Derivative liability
Lease financing obligation
Other, net
Bargain purchase gain
$608.0
0.6  
  195.0  
  385.0  
  93.0  
 
7.0  
  35.4  
  17.3  
  (40.9) 
  (24.5) 
(8.5) 
 
   
 
$ (51.4)
At this time, the valuations and other studies needed to provide a final basis for estimating the fair value of
the net assets acquired have been completed.
MPC agreed to provide the Company with administrative and support services subsequent to the Acquisition
pursuant to a transition services agreement, including finance and accounting, human resources, and
information systems services, as well as support services generally for a period of up to eighteen months in
connection with the transition from being a part of MPC’s systems and infrastructure to having its own
systems and infrastructure. The transition services agreement required the Company to pay MPC for the
provision of the transition services, as well as to reimburse MPC for compensation paid to MPC employees
providing such transition services. In addition, under the agreement, Marathon provided support services for
the operation of the refining and retail business segments, using the employees that were ultimately expected
to be transitioned to the Company. The Company was obligated to reimburse MPC for the compensation paid
to MPC employees providing such operations services, plus the agreed burden rates. MPC was obligated to
provide these services to the Company for twelve months from the Acquisition date, but the services could be
extended for an additional six months beyond the initial twelve month period, if necessary. The transition
services agreement may be terminated by a mutual agreement of the parties, and the Company or MPC may
also unilaterally terminate the agreement upon a material breach by the other party. For the year ended
December 31, 2011, the Company has recognized expenses of approximately $15.0 million related to
administrative and support services. The Company also paid $6.7 million in December 2010 of which $6.1
million was amortized during 2011 as these services were incurred. The majority of transition services have
been completed as of December 31, 2011.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
5. INCOME TAXES
F-37
For the period subsequent to the Acquisition, the Company is a pass through entity for federal income tax
purposes. As a result, there are no federal income taxes incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2011 and
the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010 the Company incurred state income taxes of less than $0.1
million.
For all periods prior to the Acquisition, the taxable results of the Predecessor were included in the
consolidated U.S. federal and various state and local tax returns of Marathon Oil. Also, in certain state, local
and foreign jurisdictions, the Predecessor filed on a stand-alone basis. The tax provisions and related balance
sheet disclosures for the period prior to the closing of the Acquisition have been prepared assuming the
Predecessor was a stand-alone taxpayer for the periods presented.
The components of the Predecessor’s income tax provision are as follows:
(in millions)
Income Tax Provision
Federal
Current
Deferred
State and local
Current
Deferred
Total
Current
Deferred
Eleven
Months Ended
November 30,
2010
51.2   
(0.6)  
   
50.6   
 
16.7   
(0.2)  
   
16.5   
 
67.9   
(0.8)  
   
67.1
$
 
 
$
$
 
 
$
$
 
 
$
Predecessor
Year Ended
December 31, 2009
$
 
 
$
$
 
 
$
$
 
 
$
25.9  
0.4  
 
26.3
8.4  
0.1  
 
8.5
34.3  
0.5  
 
34.8
A reconciliation of the federal statutory income tax rate (35 percent) for the Predecessor applied to income
before income taxes to the provision for income taxes is as follows:
(in millions)
Statutory rate applied to income before taxes
State and local income taxes, net of federalincome tax
effects
Domestic manufacturing deductions
Valuation allowance for capital loss carryforward
Dividend received deduction
Other, net
Actual income tax provision
Eleven
Months Ended
November 30,
2010
44.8
10.7   
(2.6)  
14.3   
(0.2)  
0.1   
   
67.1
$
$
Predecessor
Year Ended
December 31, 2009 
$
31.3
$
5.5  
(1.2) 
—  
(0.9) 
0.1  
 
34.8
As further described in Note 10, net income for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010 included
unrealized losses of $40.9 million related to derivative instruments held on November 30, 2010. For income
tax purposes, MPC must classify gains and losses on these instruments as capital gains and losses. These
capital losses may only be deducted for tax purposes to the extent of capital
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-38
gains. For the purposes of the combined financial statements, management believes it is more likely than not
that the Predecessor will not generate sufficient future capital gains to realize the capital losses. As such, a
valuation allowance has been provided for the full value of the tax benefits related to these unrealized losses.
The results of Speedway, SuperMom’s LLC and the interest in Minnesota Pipe Line were included in the
income tax returns of MPC LP prior to January 1, 2010. Beginning in 2010, the activity of these businesses
was included in Marathon Oil’s income tax returns. MPC LP and Marathon Oil are continuously undergoing
examination of their U.S. federal income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service. Such audits have been
completed through the 2007 tax year. MPC LP and Marathon Oil believe they have made adequate provision
for federal income taxes and interest which may become payable for years not yet settled. Further, MPC LP
and Marathon Oil are routinely involved in Minnesota tax audits. MPC LP and Marathon Oil believe all other
audits will be resolved within the amounts paid and/or provided for these liabilities.
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) follows the provisions of ASC 740 related to accounting for
uncertainties in income taxes. No unrecognized tax benefits are recorded by the Company as of December 31,
2011 and 2010.
6. INVENTORIES
(in millions)
Crude oil and refinery feedstocks
Refined products
Merchandise
Supplies and sundry items
Total
December 31,
December 31,
2011
9.1    
109.1    
21.1    
14.8    
    
154.1
$
 
 
 
   
$
2010
24.3  
102.7  
14.8  
14.6  
 
156.4
$
 
 
 
   
$
The LIFO method accounted for 77% and 81% of total inventory value at December 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively. Current acquisition costs were estimated to exceed the LIFO inventory value by $20.0 million and
$2.1 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. During 2011, reductions in quantities of crude oil
and refinery feedstocks inventory resulted in a liquidation of LIFO inventory quantities acquired at lower costs
in prior years. The 2011 LIFO liquidation resulted in a decrease in cost of sales of approximately $4.1 million.
As a result of LIFO inventory liquidations in prior periods, cost of sales decreased and income from
operations increased by $2.1 million, $2.1 million and $1.7 million for the Successor Period ended
December 31, 2010, the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, and the year ended December 31, 2009,
respectively.
7. EQUITY METHOD INVESTMENT
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) has a 17% common interest in Minnesota Pipe Line. The
carrying value of this equity method investment was $89.9 million and $92.4 million at December 31, 2011 and
2010, respectively.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-39
Summarized financial information for Minnesota Pipe Line is as follows:
(in millions)
Revenues
Operating costs and expenses
Income from operations
Net income
Net income available to common
shareholders
Successor
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
115.6    
53.8    
43.2    
43.2
33.5
$
One
Month Ended
December 31,
2010
8.7    
7.4    
1.3    
1.3
0.5
$
(in millions)
Balance sheet data:
Current assets
Noncurrent assets
Total assets
Current liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities
Total liabilities
Members capital
Predecessor
Eleven
Months Ended
November 30,
2010
101.6    
36.8    
42.4    
42.4
33.6
$
Successor
December 31,
2011
12.1    
492.8    
    
504.9    
    
16.6    
0.1    
    
16.7    
    
488.2
$
 
   
$
   
$
 
   
$
   
$
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
101.5  
55.6  
18.4  
18.4
8.7
$
December 31,
2010
$
 
   
$
   
$
 
   
$
   
$
8.0  
507.6  
 
515.6  
 
13.8  
0.2  
 
14.0  
 
501.6
As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the carrying amount of the equity method investment was $6.9 million and
$7.1 million higher than the underlying net assets of the investee, respectively. The Company is amortizing
this difference over the remaining life of Minnesota Pipe Line’s primary asset (the fixed asset life of the
pipeline).
Distributions received from Minnesota Pipe Line were $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, $0.7
for the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010, $6.0 million for the eleven months ended November 30,
2010 and $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2009.
8. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Major classes of property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”) consisted of the following:
(in millions)
Land
Retail stores and equipment
Refinery and equipment
Software
Other equipment
Precious metals
Assets under construction
Less: accumulated depreciation
Property, plant and equipment, net
5 years
Estimated
Useful Lives   
  
2 - 22 years  
5 - 24 years  
  
2 - 7 years
December 31,
December 31,
2011
8.7    
50.4    
318.1    
14.7    
1.9    
10.5    
17.4    
    
421.7    
30.5    
    
391.2
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
$
2010
8.7  
61.2  
271.2  
—  
1.8  
10.5  
35.1  
 
388.5  
2.2  
 
386.3
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
$
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-40
PP&E included gross assets acquired under capital leases of $12.5 million and $12.5 million with related
amounts of accumulated depreciation and amortization of $1.4 million and less than $0.1 million at
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
9. INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Intangible assets were ascribed value as a result of the Acquisition and are comprised of franchise rights
amounting to $19.8 million and trademarks amounting to $15.6 million at both December 31, 2011 and 2010.
These assets have an indefinite life and therefore are not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment
annually or sooner if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the intangible asset
has been reduced below carrying value.
10. DERIVATIVES
The Company is subject to crude oil and refined product market price fluctuations caused by supply
conditions, weather, economic conditions and other factors. In October 2010, at the request of the Company,
MPC initiated a crack spread derivative strategy to mitigate refining margin risk on a portion of the business’
2011 and 2012 projected refinery production. In connection with the Acquisition, derivative instruments
executed pursuant to this strategy, along with all corresponding rights and obligations, were assumed by the
Company. The Company also may periodically use futures contracts to manage price risks associated with
inventory quantities above or below target levels.
Under the derivative strategy, the Company agrees to buy or sell an amount equal to a fixed price times a
certain number of barrels, and to buy or sell in return an amount equal to a specified variable price times the
same amount of barrels. Physical volumes are not exchanged and these contracts are net settled with cash.
The contracts are not being accounted for as hedges for financial reporting purposes. The Company
recognizes all derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities at fair value on the balance sheet and any
related net gain or loss is recorded as a gain or loss in the derivative activity caption on the consolidated and
combined statements of income. Observable quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets
(Level 2 as described in Note 12) are considered to determine the fair values for the purpose of marking to
market the derivative instruments at each period end. At December 31, 2011, the Company had open
commodity derivative instruments consisting of crude oil futures to buy 17 million barrels and refined
products futures and swaps to sell 17 million barrels primarily to protect the value of refining margins
through 2012. For the year ended December 31, 2011, there were losses related to derivative activities of
$352.2 million. Of these total losses, $310.3 million represented realized losses on settled contracts and $41.9
million represented unrealized losses on open contracts for the year ended December 31, 2011.
At December 31, 2010, the Company had open commodity derivative instruments consisting of crude oil
futures and finished product swaps on 35 million barrels. For the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010
and for the eleven months ended November 30, 2010, there were unrealized losses related to derivative
activities of $27.1 million and $40.9 million, respectively.
The following table summarizes the fair value amounts of the Company’s outstanding derivative instruments
by location on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2011 and 2010:
(in millions)
Commodity swaps and futures
Commodity swaps and futures
Balance Sheet Classification   
Current liabilities
 
Noncurrent liabilities
December 31,
December 31,
2011
109.9   
—   
   
109.9
$
 
   
$
2010
45.6  
22.4  
 
68.0
$
 
 
$
F-41
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Under the Company’s crack spread derivative strategy, the Company is exposed to credit risk in the event of
nonperformance by its counterparty on these derivative instruments. The counterparty is a large financial
institution with a credit rating as of December 31, 2011 of at least A- by Standard and Poor’s and A1 by
Moody’s. In the event of default, the Company would potentially be subject to losses on a derivative
instrument’s mark-to-market gains. The Company does not expect nonperformance on any of its derivative
instruments.
The Company has provided letters of credit for a fixed dollar amount under its asset-based revolving credit
facility (as discussed in Note 11) to the counterparty on the derivative instruments utilized under the crack
spread derivative strategy. The Company is not subject to any margin calls for these crack spread derivatives
and the counterparty does not have the right to demand any additional collateral beyond the aforementioned
fixed dollar letters of credit. Any outstanding collateral is released to the Company upon settlement of the
related derivative instrument.
11. DEBT
In connection with the Acquisition, the Company entered into various financing arrangements including
$290.0 million of 10.50% Senior Secured Notes due December 1, 2017 (“Secured Notes”) and a $300 million
secured asset-based revolving credit facility (“ABL Facility”).
Secured Notes
The Secured Notes are guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior secured basis by all of the Company’s
existing and future direct and indirect subsidiaries; however, not on a full and unconditional basis as a result
of subsidiaries being able to be released as guarantors under certain customary circumstances for such
arrangements. A subsidiary guarantee can be released under customary circumstances, including (a) the sale
of the subsidiary, (b) the subsidiary is declared “unrestricted,” (c) the legal or covenant defeasance or
satisfaction and discharge of the indenture, or (d) liquidation or dissolution of the subsidiary. Separate
condensed consolidating financial information is not included as the Company does not have independent
assets or operations. The Company is required to make interest payments on June 1 and December 1 of each
year, commencing on June 1, 2011. There are no scheduled principal payments required prior to the notes
maturing on December 1, 2017. Borrowings bear interest at 10.50%.
At any time prior to the maturity date of the notes, the Company may, at its option, redeem all or any portion
of the notes for the outstanding principal amount plus unpaid interest and a make-whole premium as defined
in the indenture. If the Company experiences a change in control or makes certain asset dispositions, as
defined under the indenture, the Company may be required to repurchase all or part of the notes plus unpaid
interest and in certain cases pay a redemption premium.
The Secured Notes contain a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability, subject to
certain exceptions, of the Company and its subsidiaries to sell or otherwise dispose of assets, including
capital stock of subsidiaries, incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, repay other
indebtedness, pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock, create liens on assets, make
investments, loans or advances, make certain acquisitions, engage in mergers or consolidations, engage in
certain transactions with affiliates, change the business conducted by itself and its subsidiaries, and enter
into agreements that restrict dividends from restricted subsidiaries.
ABL Facility
The ABL Facility provides for revolving credit financing through December 1, 2015 in an aggregate principal
amount of up to $300 million (of which $150 million may be utilized for the issuance of letters of credit and up
to $30 million may be short-term borrowings upon same-day notice, referred
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-42
to as swingline loans) and may be increased up to a maximum aggregate principal amount of $400 million,
subject to borrowing base availability and lender approval. Availability under the ABL Facility at any time will
be the lesser of (a) the aggregate commitments under the ABL Facility or (b) the borrowing base, less any
outstanding borrowings and letters of credit. The borrowing base is calculated based on a percentage of
eligible accounts receivable, petroleum inventory and other assets.
Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest, at the Company’s option, at either (a) an alternative base rate,
plus an applicable margin (ranging between 1.75% and 2.25%) or (b) a LIBOR rate plus applicable margin
(ranging between 2.75% and 3.25%). The alternate base rate is the greater of (a) the prime rate, (b) the Federal
Funds Effective rate plus 50 basis points, or (c) one-month LIBOR rate plus 100 basis points and a spread of
up to 225 basis points based upon percentage utilization of this facility. In addition to paying interest on
outstanding borrowings, the Company is also required to pay an annual commitment fee ranging from 0.375%
to 0.625% and letter of credit fees.
As of December 31, 2011, the availability under the ABL Facility was $108.0 million. This availability is net of
$61.6 million in outstanding letters of credit. The Company had no borrowings under the ABL Facility at
December 31, 2011 and 2010.
The ABL Facility has a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenant requirement of at least 1.0 to
1.0. The covenant is operative when the Company’s availability under the facility is less than the greater of
(a) 15% of the lesser of the $300 million commitment amount or the borrowing base or (b) $22.5 million.
The ABL Facility also contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain
exceptions, the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to sell or otherwise dispose of assets, incur
additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock,
create liens on assets, make investments, loans or advances, make certain acquisitions, engage in mergers or
consolidations, and engage in certain transactions with affiliates.
12. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
As defined in accounting guidance, fair value is the price that would be received for the sale of an asset or
paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Accounting guidance describes three approaches to measuring the fair value of assets and liabilities: the
market approach, the income approach and the cost approach, each of which includes multiple valuation
techniques. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions
involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities. The income approach uses valuation techniques to
measure fair value by converting future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, into a single present value
amount using current market expectations about those future amounts. The cost approach is based on the
amount that would currently be required to replace the service capacity of an asset. This is often referred to as
current replacement cost. The cost approach assumes that the fair value would not exceed what it would cost
a market participant to acquire or construct a substitute asset of comparable utility, adjusted for
obsolescence.
Accounting guidance does not prescribe which valuation technique should be used when measuring fair
value and does not prioritize among the techniques. Accounting guidance establishes a fair value hierarchy
that prioritizes the inputs used in applying the various valuation techniques. Inputs broadly refer to the
assumptions that market participants use to make pricing decisions, including assumptions about risk. Level
1 inputs are given the highest priority in the fair value hierarchy while Level 3 inputs are given the lowest
priority. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Ÿ  Level 1—Observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active
markets as of the reporting date. Active markets are those in which
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-43
transactions for the asset or liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on
an ongoing basis.
Ÿ  Level 2—Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data.
These are inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or
indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Ÿ  Level 3—Unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data and may be used with internally
developed methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
The Company uses a market or income approach for recurring fair value measurements and endeavors to use
the best information available. Accordingly, valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs
are favored. The assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires
judgment and may affect the placement of assets and liabilities within the levels of the fair value hierarchy.
The Company’s current asset and liability accounts contain certain financial instruments, the most significant
of which are trade accounts receivables and trade payables. The Company believes the carrying values of its
current assets and liabilities approximate fair value. The Company’s fair value assessment incorporates a
variety of considerations, including the short-term duration of the instruments, the Company’s historical
incurrence of insignificant bad debt expense and the Company’s expectation of future insignificant bad debt
expense, which includes an evaluation of counterparty credit risk.
The following table provides the assets and liabilities carried at fair value measured on a recurring basis at
December 31, 2011 and 2010:
Quoted
prices in
active
markets
(Level 1)    
  
$ 123.5    
  
—    
 
    
   
$ 123.5    
   
    
  
$ —    
  
—    
 
   
    
$ —
Balance at
$
$
December 31, 2011    
  
123.5    
  
20.2    
    
143.7    
    
  
109.9    
  
30.9    
    
140.8
$
$
F-44
(in millions)
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Other assets
Contingent consideration—margin support
LIABILITIES
Derivative liability—current
Other liabilities
Contingent consideration—earn-out
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Significant
other
observable
inputs
(Level 2)     
  
—    
  
—    
    
—    
    
  
109.9    
  
—    
    
109.9
$
$
$
$
Unobservable
inputs
(Level 3)
$
$
$
$
—
20.2  
 
20.2
—
30.9  
 
30.9
(in millions)
  
ASSETS
  
Cash and cash equivalents
  
Other assets
  
Contingent consideration—margin support
LIABILITIES
Derivative liability—current
Derivative liability—long-term
Other liabilities
Contingent consideration—earn-out
Balance at
$
$
December 31, 2010    
  
72.8    
  
17.3    
    
90.1    
    
  
45.6    
22.4    
  
53.8    
    
121.8
$
$
Quoted
prices in
active
markets
(Level 1)    
  
$ 72.8    
  
—    
 
   
    
$ 72.8    
   
    
  
$ —    
—    
 
  
—    
 
   
    
$ —
Significant
other
observable
$
$
inputs
(Level 2)     
  
—    
  
—    
    
—    
    
  
45.6    
22.4    
  
—    
    
68.0
$
$
Unobservable
inputs
(Level 3)
$
$
$
$
—
17.3  
 
17.3
—  
—
53.8  
 
53.8
The Company determines the fair value of its contingent consideration arrangements (margin support and
earn-out) based on a probability-weighted income approach derived from financial performance estimates.
The impacts of changes in the fair value of these arrangements are recorded in the statements of income as
contingent consideration income, net. Changes in the fair value of the Company’s Level 3 contingent
consideration arrangements during the year ended December 31, 2011 were due to updated financial
performance estimates and are as follows:
(in $ millions)
Fair Value at December 31, 2010
Transfer to Receivable from MPC (included in other current assets)
Change in fair value of remaining years
Fair Value at December 31, 2011
Margin
Support   
$ 17.3   
  (30.0)  
  32.9   
   
   
$ 20.2
Earnout   
$ (53.8)  
  —   
  22.9   
   
   
$ (30.9)
Net
Impact 
$(36.5) 
  (30.0) 
  55.8  
   
 
$(10.7)
Assets not recorded at fair value on a recurring basis, such as property, plant and equipment, intangible
assets and cost method investments are recognized at fair value when they are impaired. During the year
ended December 31, 2011, there were no adjustments to the fair value of such assets. The Company recorded
assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the Acquisition at fair value.
The carrying value of debt, which is reported on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets, reflects the cash
proceeds received upon its issuance, net of subsequent repayments. The fair value of the Secured Notes
disclosed below was determined based on quoted prices in active markets.
(in millions)
Secured Notes
F-45
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
13. ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
December 31, 2011     
Carrying
Amount
Fair
Value
Fair
Value  
  
   $ 290.0     $316.5     $ 290.0     $299.4
December 31, 2010  
Carrying
Amount
The following table summarizes the changes in asset retirement obligations:
(in millions)
Asset retirement obligation balance at
beginning of period
Revisions of previous estimates
Accretion expense (included in
depreciation and amortization)
Liabilities settled
Asset retirement obligation balance at
end of year
Year
Ended
June 23,
2010
(inception
date) to
December 31,
December 31,
2011
2010
$
$
2.1   
(0.9)
0.3   
—
1.5
$
$
2.1   
—
—   
—
2.1
Successor
Predecessor
Eleven
Months
Ended
Year
Ended
November 30,
December 31,
2010
2009
$
$
3.3   
—
0.2   
(0.1)
3.4
$
$
3.3  
(0.1)
0.2  
(0.1)
3.3
As a result of the Acquisition, the asset retirement obligation of the Predecessor was adjusted to a fair value
of $2.1 million. Accretion expense for the year ended December 31, 2011 and the Successor Period ended
December 31, 2010 was $0.3 million and less than $0.1 million, respectively.
14. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
NTI sponsors an equity participation plan which provides for the grant of profit interest units to certain
employees and independent non-employee directors of the Company. The plan has reserved approximately
29 million units for issuance under the plan. The exercise price for a unit shall not be less than 100% of the
fair market value of our equity units on the date of grant. Units vest in annual installments over a period of
five years after the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant.
A summary of profit interest unit activity is set forth below:
Number of
Units
(in millions)   
—   
 
22.7   
 
   
   
22.7   
 
3.5   
 
(2.0)  
 
   
   
24.2
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price    
$ —   
1.78   
 
 
1.78   
2.23   
(1.38)  
 
$ 1.87
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Term
9.9
9.2
F-46
Outstanding at inception
Granted
Outstanding at December 31, 2010
Granted
Cancelled
Outstanding at December 31, 2011
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
The estimated weighted average fair value as of grant date of units granted during 2011 and 2010 was $0.57
and $0.30, respectively, based upon the following assumptions:
Expected life (years)
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
Risk-free interest rate
2011
2010
6.5
5.75 - 6.5
40.6% - 49.6%    40.6%
   0.0%
  
2.5% - 2.7%    2.7%
0.0%
The weighted average expected life for the grants is calculated using the simplified method, which defines the
expected life as the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted average vesting period.
Expected volatility for the grants is based primarily on the historical volatility of a representative group of
peer companies for a period consistent with the expected life of the awards.
For the year ended December 31, 2011 and the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010, the Company
recognized $1.6 million and $0.1 million, respectively, of compensation costs related to profit interest units.
As of December 31, 2011, the total unrecognized compensation cost for profit interest units was $7.0 million.
This non-cash expense will be recognized on a straight line basis through 2016.
15. EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
Defined Contribution Plans
During 2011, the Company began sponsoring qualified defined contribution plans (collectively, the
“Retirement Savings Plans”) for eligible employees. Eligibility is based upon a minimum age requirement
and a minimum level of service. Participants may make contributions for a percentage of their annual
compensation subject to Internal Revenue Service limits. The Company provides a matching contribution at
the rate of 100% of up to between 4.5% and 7.0% (depending on the participant group) of a participant’s
contribution. The Company also provides a non-elective fixed annual contribution of 2.0% to 3.5% of eligible
compensation depending on the participant group. Total Company contributions to the Retirement Savings
Plans were $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2011.
Defined Benefit Plan
During 2011, the Company also began to sponsor a defined benefit cash balance pension plan (the “Cash
Balance Plan”) for eligible employees. Company contributions are made to the cash account of the
participants equal to 5.0% of eligible compensation. Participants’ cash accounts also receive interest credits
each year based upon the average thirty year United States Treasury bond rate published in September
preceding the respective plan year. Participants become fully vested in their accounts after three years of
service.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-47
Funded Status and Net Period Benefit Costs
The changes to the benefit obligation, fair value of plan assets and funded status of the Cash Balance Plan for
the year ended December 31, 2011 were as follows:
(in millions)
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
Service cost
Plan amendments
Benefit obligation at end of year
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
Year Ended
December 31, 2011
$
 
 
 
$
—  
0.1  
0.4  
 
0.5
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
Employer contributions
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
Reconciliation of funded status:
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
Benefit obligation at end of year
Funded status at end of year
$
 
 
$
$
 
 
$
—  
0.1  
 
0.1
0.1  
0.5  
 
(0.4)
At December 31, 2011, the projected benefit obligations exceeded the fair value of plan assets by $0.4 million.
This unfunded pension obligation is classified in other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
The components of net period benefit cost and other amounts recognized in member’s interest related to the
Cash Balance Plan for the year ended December 31, 2011 were as follows:
Components of net periodic benefit cost:
Service cost
Net periodic benefit cost
Changes recognized in member’s interest:
Prior service cost
Total changes recognized in member’s interest
Assumptions
Year Ended
December 31, 2011
$
 
$
$
 
$
0.1  
 
0.1
0.4  
 
0.4
The weighted average assumptions used to determine the Company’s benefit obligation are as follows:
Discount rate
Rate of compensation increase
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
December 31,
2011
4.75% 
4.00%
F-48
The weighted average assumptions used to determine the net period benefit cost are as follows:
Discount rate
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
Rate of compensation increase
Year Ended
December 31, 2011
5.00% 
4.50% 
4.00%
The assumptions used in the determination of the Company’s obligations and benefit cost are based upon
management’s best estimates as of the annual measurement date. The discount rate utilized was based upon
bond portfolio curves over a duration similar to the Cash Balance Plan’s expected future cash flows as of the
measurement date. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is the weighted average rate of
earnings expected of the funds invested or to be invested based upon the targeted investment strategy for the
plan. The assumed average rate of compensation increase is the average annual compensation increase
expected over the remaining employment periods for the participating employees.
Contributions, Plan Assets and Estimated Future Benefit Payments
Employer contributions were made during December 2011 based upon ERISA’s minimum required funding
amounts. These contributions were invested entirely into a money market fund which is deemed a Level 1
asset as described in Note 12. The Company expects funding requirements of approximately $0.4 million
during 2012.
At December 31, 2011, anticipated benefit payments to participants from the Cash Balance Plan in future years
are as follows:
(in millions)
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017-2021
16. SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION
Supplemental cash flow information is as follows:
Successor
Year Ended
December 31,
2011
June 23, 2010
(inception date)
to December 31,
2010
$
$
37.9
—
(12.1)
—
—
$
$
F-49
—
—
24.5
80.0
—
(in millions)
Net cash from operating activities
included:
Interest paid
Income taxes paid through MPC LP
and Speedway
Noncash investing and financing
activities include:
PP&E recognized (derecognized) in
sale leaseback
Acquisition consideration funded by
Investors
PP&E contributions by
(distributions to) Marathon
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
17. LEASING ARRANGEMENTS
$ —  
  0.1  
  0.2  
  0.3  
  0.4  
  3.8
Predecessor
Eleven Months
Ended
November  30,
2010
Year Ended
December 31,
2009
$
$
—
67.9
—
—
0.6
$
$
—
34.3
—
—
(0.1)
As described in Note 4, concurrent with the Acquisition, certain Marathon assets (including real property
interests and land related to 135 of the SuperAmerica convenience stores and the SuperMom’s bakery) were
sold to a third party equity real estate investment trust. In connection with the closing of the Acquisition, the
Company has assumed the leasing of these properties from the real estate investment trust on a long-term
basis.
In accordance with ASC 840-40, the Company determined that subsequent to the sale, it had a continuing
involvement for a portion of these property interests due to potential environmental obligations or due to
subleasing arrangements. For these respective properties, the fair value of the assets and the related
financing obligation will remain on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet until the end of the lease term
or until the continuing involvement is resolved. The assets are included in property, plant and equipment and
are being depreciated over their remaining useful lives. The lease payments relating to these property
interests are recognized as interest expense. During 2011, the Company’s continuing involvement ended for a
subset of these stores and, as such, the related fair value of the assets and the financing obligation for these
stores have been removed from the Company’s consolidated balance sheet.
The remainder of properties sold to the third party real estate investment trust are treated as operating leases.
The Company (and previously, the Predecessor) also leases a variety of facilities and equipment under other
operating leases, including land and building space, office equipment, vehicles, rail tracks for storage of rail
tank cars near the refinery and numerous rail tank cars.
Future minimum commitments for operating lease obligations having an initial or remaining non-cancelable
lease terms in excess of one year are as follows:
(in millions)
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Thereafter
Total noncancelable operating lease payments
$ 22.2  
  21.9  
  
  21.7  
  
  21.2  
  
  20.9  
  
  180.3  
  
  
 
   
   $288.2
Rental expense was $24.2 million, $2.2 million, $5.3 million and $5.2 million for the year ended December 31,
2011, the Successor Period ended December 31, 2010, the eleven month period ended November 30, 2010, and
for the year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. Rental expense includes operating leases with initial or
remaining non-cancelable terms of less than one year.
18. CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
The Company and the Predecessor are the subject of, or party to, contingencies and commitments involving a
variety of matters. Certain of these matters are discussed below. The ultimate resolution of these
contingencies could, individually or in the aggregate, be material to the Company’s consolidated and
combined financial statements. However, management believes that the Company will remain a viable and
competitive enterprise even though it is possible that these contingencies could be resolved unfavorably.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Contingent Consideration
F-50
As described in Note 4, the Acquisition provides for contingent consideration, or earn-out payments, that
could result in additional payments of up to a total of $125 million to MPC over an eight year period ending
December 1, 2018 based on operating performance. The Acquisition agreement also includes a margin
support component that requires Marathon to pay the Company up to $30 million per year to the extent the
Agreement Adjusted EBITDA is below $145 million less, among other things, any rental expense related to the
real estate lease arrangement, in either of the first two twelve month periods ending November 30, 2011 or
2012 up to a maximum of $60 million. Any such payments made by Marathon will increase the amount that we
may be required to pay Marathon over the earn-out period. See Note 12 for additional information relating to
the fair value of contingent arrangements related to the Acquisition. As of December 31, 2011, the Company
has recorded a receivable of $30.0 million relating to the margin support component of the contingent
consideration arrangement for the first twelve months ended November 30, 2011. MPC has disputed
approximately $12 million of this amount. While the Company cannot predict the resolution of the dispute at
this time, management believes the outcome will not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated
financial position or liquidity.
Environmental Matters
The Company and the Predecessor are subject to federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations
relating to the environment. These laws generally provide for control of pollutants released into the
environment and require responsible parties to undertake remediation of hazardous waste disposal sites.
Penalties may be imposed for noncompliance. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, liabilities for remediation
totaled $4.7 million and $3.5 million, respectively. These liabilities are expected to be settled over at least the
next 10 years. It is not presently possible to estimate the ultimate amount of all remediation costs that might
be incurred or the penalties that may be imposed. Furthermore, environmental remediation costs may vary
from estimates because of changes in laws, regulations and their interpretation; additional information on the
extent and nature of site contamination; and improvements in technology. Receivables for recoverable costs
from the state, under programs to assist companies in clean-up efforts related to underground storage tanks
at retail marketing outlets, were $0.2 million at both December 31, 2011 and 2010.
Franchise Agreements
In the normal course of its business, SAF enters into ten year license agreements with the operators of
franchised SuperAmerica brand retail outlets. These agreements obligate SAF or its affiliates to provide
certain services including information technology support, maintenance, credit card processing and signage
for specified monthly fees.
Guarantees
Over the years, the Predecessor has sold various assets in the normal course of business. Certain of the
related agreements contain performance and general guarantees, including guarantees regarding inaccuracies
in representations, warranties, covenants and agreements, and environmental and general indemnifications
that require the Predecessor to perform upon the occurrence of a triggering event or condition. These
guarantees and indemnifications are part of the normal course of selling assets. The Company has assumed
these guarantees and indemnifications upon the Acquisition. However, in certain cases, MPC has also
provided an indemnification in favor of the Company.
The Company is not typically able to calculate the maximum potential amount of future payments that could
be made under such contractual provisions because of the variability inherent in the
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-51
guarantees and indemnities. Most often, the nature of the guarantees and indemnities is such that there is no
appropriate method for quantifying the exposure because the Company has little or no past experience
associated with the underlying triggering event upon which a reasonable prediction of the outcome can be
based. The Company is not currently making any payments relating to such guarantees or indemnifications.
19. SEGMENT INFORMATION
The Company has two reportable operating segments: Refining and Retail. Each of these segments is
organized and managed based upon the nature of the products and services they offer. The segment
disclosures reflect management’s current organizational structure.
Refining—operates the St. Paul Park, Minnesota, refinery, terminal and related assets, including the
Refining—operates the St. Paul Park, Minnesota, refinery, terminal and related assets, including the
Company’s interest in MPLI and Minnesota Pipe Line, and
Ÿ
Ÿ  Retail—operates 166 convenience stores primarily in Minnesota and Wisconsin. The Retail segment also
includes the operations of NTB and SAF.
The Company’s interest in MPLI and Minnesota Pipe Line were previously presented within the “Other”
segment by the Predecessor. Additionally, the Company’s presentation of certain sales to franchisees is
different from the Predecessor’s practice. All Predecessor period information has been recast to conform to
the current presentation.
Operating results for the Company’s operating segments are as follows:
(in millions)
Year ended December 31, 2011
Revenues
Customer
Intersegment
Segment revenues
Elimination of intersegment revenues
Total revenues
Income from operations
Income from equity method investment
Depreciation and amortization
Capital expenditures
(in millions)
Period ended December 31, 2010 (Successor)
Revenues
Customer
Intersegment
Segment revenues
Elimination of intersegment revenues
Total revenues
Income (loss) from operations
Income from equity method investment
Depreciation and amortization
Capital expenditures
Other
Retail
Refining
1,043.1    
   
    
  3,804.1    
—
—    
 
    
   
  1,519.8    
—
—   
   $2,761.0     $1,519.8     $
—   
 
  
   
   
  
 
—   
  
  (1,043.1)  
  
  
   
   
   $3,804.1     $1,519.8     $(1,043.1)  
   
  
   
20.4   
   $ 388.2     $
   $
5.7     $
—   
0.8   
21.5     $
   $
   $
33.9     $
2.8
14.0     $
—     $
7.2     $
9.2     $
Retail
Refining
70.2    
    
312.2    
—
—    
    
102.9    
—
$ 242.0     $ 102.9     $
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
   $ 312.2     $ 102.9     $
  
   
   
0.5     $
   $
—     $
   $
0.5     $
   $
   $
—     $
9.1     $
0.1     $
1.7     $
2.5     $
Other
—   
—   
   
—   
(70.2)  
   
(70.2)  
   
(5.9)  
—   
—   
—
F-52
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(in millions)
Eleven months ended November 30, 2010 (Predecessor)
Revenues
Customer
Intersegment
Related parties
Refining     
  
  
  
  
  
   $1,778.3    
811.4    
  
210.1
Retail
1,206.8    
 
—    
 
—
Other
—   
—   
—
Total
$ 4,280.8  
  1,043.1  
   
 
  5,323.9  
  (1,043.1) 
   
 
$ 4,280.8  
   
 
422.6  
$
$
5.7  
29.5  
$
$
45.9
Total
$
 
   
 
 
   
$
   
$
$
$
$
344.9  
70.2  
 
415.1  
(70.2) 
 
344.9  
 
3.7  
0.1  
2.2  
2.5
Total
$2,985.1  
 
811.4  
 
210.1
Segment revenues
Elimination of intersegment revenues
Total revenues
Income from operations
Income from equity method investment
Depreciation and amortization
Capital expenditures
(in millions)
Year ended December 31, 2009 (Predecessor)
Revenues
Customer
Intersegment
Related parties
Segment revenues
Elimination of intersegment revenues
Total revenues
Income from operations
Income from equity method investment
Depreciation and amortization
Capital expenditures
1,206.8    
—
2,799.8    
—
—   
  
  (811.4)  
  
  
   
   
   $2,799.8     $1,206.8     $(811.4)  
  
   
   
26.5     $ —   
   $ 142.8     $
   $
5.4     $
—     $ —   
12.4     $ —   
24.9     $
   $
   $
29.4     $
0.4     $ —
Other
Retail
1,129.2    
 
—    
—    
 
   
    
  1,129.2    
 
—
Refining     
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
—   
 
   $1,594.6    
—   
 
719.4    
 
  
—   
 
216.7    
 
  
   
   
   
    
  
 
—   
  2,530.7    
  
  (719.4)  
 
—    
  
  
   
   
    
   
   $2,530.7     $1,129.2     $(719.4)  
   
  
   
19.3     $ —   
   $
—     $ —   
   $
14.2     $ —   
   $
   $
2.9     $ —
70.6     $
1.1     $
26.0     $
26.1     $
4,006.6  
(811.4) 
 
   
 
$3,195.2  
   
 
$ 169.3  
$
5.4  
37.3  
$
$
29.8
Total
$2,723.8  
 
719.4  
216.7  
 
   
 
  3,659.9  
 
(719.4) 
   
 
$2,940.5  
   
 
89.9  
$
1.1  
$
40.2  
$
$
29.0
Intersegment sales from the Refining segment to the Retail segment consist primarily of sales of refined
products which are recorded based on contractual prices that are market based. Revenues from external
customers are nearly all in the United States.
Total assets by segment were as follows:
(in millions)
At December 31, 2011
At December 31, 2010
All property, plant and equipment are located in the United States.
Total
Retail
Other
Refining    
 
   $655.2     $219.8     $123.8     $998.8  
  
 
   $667.7     $136.7     $126.2     $930.6
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
F-53
APPENDIX A
FORM OF
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED
AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
OF
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 1.1  Definitions
Section 1.2  Construction
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE II
ORGANIZATION
Section 2.1  Formation
Section 2.2  Name
Section 2.3  Registered Office; Registered Agent; Principal Office; Other Offices
Section 2.4  Purpose and Business
Section 2.5  Powers
Section 2.6  Term
Section 2.7  Title to Partnership Assets
ARTICLE III
RIGHTS OF LIMITED PARTNERS
Section 3.1  Limitation of Liability
Section 3.2  Management of Business
Section 3.3  Outside Activities of the Limited Partners
Section 3.4  Rights of Limited Partners
ARTICLE IV
CERTIFICATES; RECORD HOLDERS; TRANSFER OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS; REDEMPTION OF
PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS
Section 4.1  Certificates
Section 4.2  Mutilated, Destroyed, Lost or Stolen Certificates
Section 4.3  Record Holders
Section 4.4  Transfer Generally
Section 4.5  Registration and Transfer of Limited Partner Interests
Section 4.6  Transfer of the General Partner’s General Partner Interest
Section 4.7  Restrictions on Transfers
Section 4.8  Eligibility Certificates; Ineligible Holders
Section 4.9  Redemption of Partnership Interests of Ineligible Holders
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
A-i
ARTICLE V
CAPITAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ISSUANCE OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS
Section 5.1   Organizational Contributions
Section 5.2   Contributions by the General Partner and its Affiliates
Section 5.3   Contributions by Initial Limited Partners
Section 5.4   Interest and Withdrawal
Section 5.5   Capital Accounts
Section 5.6   Issuances of Additional Partnership Interests
Section 5.7
1  
   13
13  
   14  
   14  
   14  
   14  
   15  
   15
15  
   15  
   16  
   16
17  
   17  
   18  
   18  
   19  
   20  
   20  
   21  
   22
23  
   24  
   24  
   24  
   24  
   27
Section 5.7
  Limited Preemptive Right
Section 5.8   Splits and Combinations
Section 5.9   Fully Paid and Non-Assessable Nature of Limited Partner Interests
ARTICLE VI
ALLOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
Section 6.1   Allocations for Capital Account Purposes
Section 6.2   Allocations for Tax Purposes
Section 6.3   Distributions; Distributions to Record Holders
Section 6.4   Special Provisions Relating to the PIK Common Units
ARTICLE VII
MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF BUSINESS
Section 7.1   Management
Section 7.2   Replacement of Fiduciary Duties
Section 7.3   Certificate of Limited Partnership
Section 7.4   Restrictions on the General Partner’s Authority
Section 7.5   Reimbursement of the General Partner
Section 7.6   Outside Activities
Section 7.7   Indemnification
Section 7.8   Liability of Indemnitees
Section 7.9   Standards of Conduct and Modification of Duties
Section 7.10  Other Matters Concerning the General Partner and Indemnitees
Section 7.11  Purchase or Sale of Partnership Interests
Section 7.12  Reliance by Third Parties
ARTICLE VIII
BOOKS, RECORDS, ACCOUNTING AND REPORTS
Section 8.1   Records and Accounting
Section 8.2   Fiscal Year
Section 8.3   Reports
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 9.1   Tax Returns and Information
Section 9.2   Tax Elections
Section 9.3   Tax Controversies
Section 9.4   Withholding; Tax Payments
A-ii
ARTICLE IX
TAX MATTERS
ARTICLE X
ADMISSION OF PARTNERS
Section 10.1  Admission of Limited Partners
Section 10.2  Admission of Successor General Partner
Section 10.3  Amendment of Agreement and Certificate of Limited Partnership
ARTICLE XI
WITHDRAWAL OR REMOVAL OF PARTNERS
Section 11.1  Withdrawal of the General Partner
Section 11.2  Removal of the General Partner
Section 11.3  Interest of Departing General Partner
Section 11.4
28  
   29  
   29
30  
   33  
   35  
   35
36  
   38  
   39  
   39  
   39  
   40  
   41  
   43  
   44  
   45  
   46  
   46
47  
   47  
   47
48
  48
  48
  48
49
  50
  50
50
  52
  53
Section 11.4
Conversion of PIK Common Units
Section 11.5  Withdrawal of Limited Partners
ARTICLE XII
DISSOLUTION AND LIQUIDATION
Section 12.1  Dissolution
Section 12.2  Continuation of the Business of the Partnership After Dissolution
Section 12.3  Liquidator
Section 12.4  Liquidation
Section 12.5  Cancellation of Certificate of Limited Partnership
Section 12.6  Return of Contributions
Section 12.7  Waiver of Partition
Section 12.8  Capital Account Restoration
ARTICLE XIII
AMENDMENT OF PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT; MEETINGS; RECORD DATE
Section 13.1  Amendments to be Adopted Solely by the General Partner
Section 13.2  Amendment Procedures
Section 13.3  Amendment Requirements
Section 13.4  Special Meetings
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
A-iii
Section 13.5   Notice of a Meeting
Section 13.6   Record Date
Section 13.7   Adjournment
Section 13.8   Waiver of Notice; Approval of Meeting; Approval of Minutes
Section 13.9   Quorum and Voting
Section 13.10  Conduct of a Meeting
Section 13.11  Action Without a Meeting
Section 13.12  Right to Vote and Related Matters
ARTICLE XIV
MERGER OR CONSOLIDATION
Section 14.1   Authority
Section 14.2   Procedure for Merger or Consolidation
Section 14.3   Approval by Limited Partners
Section 14.4   Certificate of Merger
Section 14.5   Effect of Merger or Consolidation
ARTICLE XV
RIGHT TO ACQUIRE LIMITED PARTNER INTERESTS
Section 15.1   Right to Acquire Limited Partner Interests
ARTICLE XVI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 16.1   Addresses and Notices; Written Communications
Section 16.2   Further Action
Section 16.3   Binding Effect
Section 16.4   Integration
Section 16.5   Creditors
Section 16.6   Waiver
Section 16.7
53
  53
53
  54
  54
  55
  56
  56
  56
  56
56
  58
  58
  59
60
  60
  60
  60
  60
  61
  61
  62
63
  63
  64
  65
  65
66
67
  68
  68
  68
  68
  69
Third-Party Beneficiaries
Section 16.7
Section 16.8   Counterparts
Section 16.9   Applicable Law; Forum, Venue and Jurisdiction
Section 16.10  Invalidity of Provisions
Section 16.11  Consent of Partners
Section 16.12  Facsimile Signatures
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
A-iv
69
  69
  69
  70
  70
  70
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT
OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP OF NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
THIS FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP OF NORTHERN TIER
ENERGY LP dated as of                 , 2012, is entered into by and between Northern Tier Energy GP LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company, as the General Partner, and Northern Tier Holdings LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company, as the Organizational Limited Partner, together with any other Persons who become
Partners in the Partnership or parties hereto as provided herein. In consideration of the covenants, conditions
and agreements contained herein, the parties hereto hereby agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS
Section 1.1 Definitions. The following definitions shall be for all purposes, unless otherwise clearly indicated
to the contrary, applied to the terms used in this Agreement.
“Adjusted Capital Account” means the Capital Account maintained for each Partner as of the end of each
taxable period of the Partnership, (a) increased by any amounts that such Partner is obligated to restore under
the standards set by Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(ii)(c) (or is deemed obligated to restore under
Treasury Regulation Sections 1.704-2(g) and 1.704-2(i)(5)) and (b) decreased by (i) the amount of all losses and
deductions that, as of the end of such taxable period, are reasonably expected to be allocated to such Partner
in subsequent taxable periods under Sections 704(e)(2) and 706(d) of the Code and Treasury Regulation
Section 1.751-1(b)(2)(ii), and (ii) the amount of all distributions that, as of the end of such taxable period, are
reasonably expected to be made to such Partner in subsequent taxable periods in accordance with the terms
of this Agreement or otherwise to the extent they exceed offsetting increases to such Partner’s Capital
Account that are reasonably expected to occur during (or prior to) the taxable period in which such
distributions are reasonably expected to be made (other than increases as a result of a minimum gain
chargeback pursuant to Section 6.1(b)(i) or 6.1(b)(ii)). The foregoing definition of Adjusted Capital Account is
intended to comply with the provisions of Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(ii)(d) and shall be
interpreted consistently therewith. The “Adjusted Capital Account” of a Partner in respect of any Partnership
Interest shall be the amount that such Adjusted Capital Account would be if such Partnership Interest were the
only interest in the Partnership held by such Partner from and after the date on which such Partnership
Interest was first issued.
“Adjusted Property” means any property the Carrying Value of which has been adjusted pursuant to
Section 5.5(d).
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any Person, any other Person that directly or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries controls, is controlled by or is under common control with, the Person in question. As used
herein, the term “control” means the possession, direct or indirect, of the power to direct or cause the
direction of the management and policies of a Person, whether through ownership of voting securities, by
contract or otherwise.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-1
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
“Agreed Allocation” means any allocation, other than a Required Allocation, of an item of income, gain, loss
or deduction pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.1, including a Curative Allocation (if appropriate to the
context in which the term “Agreed Allocation” is used).
“Agreed Value” of any Contributed Property means the fair market value of such property at the time of
contribution and in the case of an Adjusted Property, the fair market value of such Adjusted Property on the
date of the revaluation event as described in Section 5.5(d), in both cases as determined by the General
Partner.
“Agreement” means this First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of Northern Tier
Energy LP, as it may be amended, supplemented or restated from time to time.
“Associate” means, when used to indicate a relationship with any Person, (a) any corporation or organization
of which such Person is a director, officer, manager, general partner or managing member or is, directly or
indirectly, the owner of 20% or more of any class of voting stock or other voting interest; (b) any trust or other
estate in which such Person has at least a 20% beneficial interest or as to which such Person serves as
trustee or in a similar fiduciary capacity; and (c) any relative or spouse of such Person, or any relative of such
spouse, who has the same principal residence as such Person.
“Board of Directors” means the board of directors of the General Partner.
“Book-Tax Disparity” means with respect to any item of Contributed Property or Adjusted Property, as of the
date of any determination, the difference between the Carrying Value of such Contributed Property or Adjusted
Property and the adjusted basis thereof for U.S. federal income tax purposes as of such date. A Partner’s
share of the Partnership’s Book-Tax Disparities in all of its Contributed Property and Adjusted Property will be
reflected by the difference between such Partner’s Capital Account balance as maintained pursuant to
Section 5.5 and the hypothetical balance of such Partner’s Capital Account computed as if it had been
maintained strictly in accordance with U.S. federal income tax accounting principles.
“Business Day” means Monday through Friday of each week, except that a legal holiday recognized as such
by the government of the United States of America or the State of Minnesota shall not be regarded as a
Business Day.
“Capital Account” means the capital account maintained for a Partner pursuant to Section 5.5. The “Capital
Account” of a Partner in respect of any Partnership Interest shall be the amount that such Capital Account
would be if such Partnership Interest were the only interest in the Partnership held by such Partner from and
after the date on which such Partnership Interest was first issued.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-2
“Capital Contribution” means any cash, cash equivalents or the Net Agreed Value of Contributed Property that
is contributed or deemed contributed to the Partnership by, or on behalf of, a Partner (including, in the case
of an underwritten offering of Units, the amount of any underwriting discounts or commissions).
“Carrying Value” means (a) with respect to a Contributed Property or Adjusted Property, the Agreed Value of
such property reduced (but not below zero) by all depreciation, amortization and cost recovery deductions
charged to the Partners’ Capital Accounts in respect of such property, and (b) with respect to any other
Partnership property, the adjusted basis of such property for U.S. federal income tax purposes, all as of the
time of determination. The Carrying Value of any property shall be adjusted from time to time in accordance
with Section 5.5(d) and to reflect changes, additions or other adjustments to the Carrying Value for
dispositions and acquisitions of Partnership properties, as deemed appropriate by the General Partner.
“Cause” means a court of competent jurisdiction has entered a final, non-appealable judgment finding the
General Partner liable for actual fraud or willful misconduct in its capacity as a general partner of the
Partnership.
“Certificate” means a certificate in such form (including in global form if permitted by applicable rules and
regulations) as may be adopted by the General Partner, issued by the Partnership evidencing ownership of
one or more Partnership Interests. The initial form of certificate approved by the General Partner for Common
Units is attached as Exhibit A to this Agreement.
“Certificate of Limited Partnership” means the Certificate of Limited Partnership of the Partnership filed with
the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware as referenced in Section 7.3, as such Certificate of Limited
Partnership may be amended, supplemented or restated from time to time.
“Citizenship Eligibility Trigger” is defined in Section 4.8(a)(ii).
“Closing Date” means the first date on which Common Units are issued and delivered by the Partnership to
the Underwriters pursuant to the provisions of the Underwriting Agreement.
“Closing Price” means, in respect of any class of Limited Partner Interests, as of the date of determination,
the last sale price on such day, regular way, or in case no such sale takes place on such day, the average of
the closing bid and asked prices on such day, regular way, in either case as reported in the principal
consolidated transaction reporting system with respect to securities listed or admitted to trading on the
principal National Securities Exchange on which such Limited Partner Interests are listed or admitted to
trading or, if such Limited Partner Interests are not listed or admitted to trading on any National Securities
Exchange, the last quoted price on such day or, if not so quoted, the average of the high bid and low asked
prices on such day in the over-the-counter market, as reported by the primary reporting system then in use in
relation to such Limited Partner Interests of such class, or, if on any such day such Limited Partner Interests
of such class are not quoted by any such organization, the average of the closing
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-3
bid and asked prices on such day as furnished by a professional market maker making a market in such
Limited Partner Interests of such class selected by the General Partner, or if on any such day no market maker
is making a market in such Limited Partner Interests of such class, the fair value of such Limited Partner
Interests on such day as determined by the General Partner.
“Code” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended and in effect from time to time. Any
reference herein to a specific section or sections of the Code shall be deemed to include a reference to any
corresponding provision of any successor law.
“Commission” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Common Unit” means a Partnership Interest representing a fractional part of the Partnership Interests of all
Limited Partners, and having the rights and obligations specified with respect to Common Units in this
Agreement. The term “Common Unit” does not refer to or include any PIK Common Unit prior to its
conversion into a Common Unit pursuant to the terms hereof.
“Conflicts Committee” means a committee of the Board of Directors composed entirely of two or more
directors, each of whom (a) is not an officer or employee of the General Partner, (b) is not an officer or
employee of any Affiliate of the General Partner or a director of any Affiliate of the General Partner (other than
any Group Member), (c) is not a holder of any ownership interest in the General Partner or any of its Affiliates,
including any Group Member, other than Common Units, PIK Common Units and awards that are granted to
such director under the LTIP and (d) meets the independence standards required of directors who serve on an
audit committee of a board of directors established by the Securities Exchange Act and the rules and
regulations of the Commission thereunder and by the National Securities Exchange on which the Common
Units are listed or admitted to trading (or, if the Common Units are not listed or admitted on any National
Securities Exchange, the New York Stock Exchange).
“Contributed Property” means each property, in such form as may be permitted by the Delaware Act, but
excluding cash, contributed to the Partnership. Once the Carrying Value of a Contributed Property is adjusted
pursuant to Section 5.5(d), such property shall no longer constitute a Contributed Property, but shall be
deemed an Adjusted Property.
“Contribution Agreement” means that certain Transaction Agreement, dated as of , 2012, among the General
Partner, the Partnership, and certain other parties, together with any additional conveyance documents and
instruments contemplated or referenced thereunder, as such may be amended, supplemented or restated from
time to time.
“Curative Allocation” means any allocation of an item of income, gain, deduction, loss or credit pursuant to
the provisions of Section 6.1(b)(xi).
“Current Market Price” means, in respect of any class of Limited Partner Interests, as of the date of
determination, the average of the daily Closing Prices per Limited Partner Interest of such class for the 20
consecutive Trading Days immediately prior to such date.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-4
“Deferred Issuance and Distribution” means both (a) the issuance by the Partnership of a number of
additional Common Units that is equal to the excess, if any, of (x) [            ] over (y) the aggregate number, if
any, of Common Units actually purchased by and issued to the Underwriters pursuant to the Underwriters’
Option on the Option Closing Date(s), and (b) a distribution of cash in an amount equal to the total amount of
cash contributed by the Underwriters to the Partnership on or in connection with any Option Closing Date
with respect to Common Units issued by the Partnership upon the applicable exercise of the Underwriters’
Option as described in Section 5.3(b), if any.
“Delaware Act” means the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act, 6 Del C. Section 17-101, et seq.,
as amended, supplemented or restated from time to time, and any successor to such statute.
“Departing General Partner” means a former General Partner from and after the effective date of any
withdrawal or removal of such former General Partner pursuant to Section 11.1 or 11.2.
“Derivative Instruments” means options, rights, warrants, appreciation rights, tracking, profit and phantom
interests and other derivative instruments relating to, convertible into or exchangeable for Partnership
Interests.
“Economic Risk of Loss” has the meaning set forth in Treasury Regulation Section 1.752-2(a).
“Eligibility Certificate” is defined in Section 4.8(b).
“Eligible Holder” means a Limited Partner whose (a) U.S. federal income tax status would not, in the
determination of the General Partner, have the material adverse effect described in Section 4.8(a)(i) or
(b) nationality, citizenship or other related status would not, in the determination of the General Partner,
create a substantial risk of cancellation or forfeiture as described in Section 4.8(a)(ii).
“Event of Withdrawal” is defined in Section 11.1(a).
“General Partner” means Northern Tier Energy GP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and its
successors and permitted assigns that are admitted to the Partnership as general partner of the Partnership,
in their capacities as general partner of the Partnership (except as the context otherwise requires).
“General Partner Interest” means the management interest of the General Partner in the Partnership (in its
capacity as a general partner and without reference to any Limited Partner Interest held by it) and includes any
and all rights, powers and benefits to which the General Partner is entitled as provided in this Agreement,
together with all obligations of the General Partner to comply with the terms and provisions of this
Agreement. The General Partner Interest does not include any rights to ownership or profits or losses or any
rights to receive distributions from operations or upon the liquidation or winding-up of the Partnership.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-5
“Gross Liability Value” means, with respect to any Liability of the Partnership described in Treasury
Regulation Section 1.752-7(b)(3)(i), the amount of cash that a willing assignor would pay to a willing assignee
to assume such Liability in an arm’s-length transaction.
“Group” means a Person that with or through any of its Affiliates or Associates has any contract,
arrangement, understanding or relationship for the purpose of acquiring, holding, voting (except voting
pursuant to a revocable proxy or consent given to such Person in response to a proxy or consent solicitation
made to 10 or more Persons), exercising investment power or disposing of any Partnership Interests with any
other Person that beneficially owns, or whose Affiliates or Associates beneficially own, directly or indirectly,
Partnership Interests.
“Group Member” means a member of the Partnership Group.
“Group Member Agreement” means the partnership agreement of any Group Member, other than the
Partnership, that is a limited or general partnership, the limited liability company agreement of any Group
Member that is a limited liability company, the certificate of incorporation and bylaws or similar
organizational documents of any Group Member that is a corporation, the joint venture agreement or similar
governing document of any Group Member that is a joint venture and the governing or organizational or
similar documents of any other Group Member that is a Person other than a limited or general partnership,
limited liability company, corporation or joint venture, as such may be amended, supplemented or restated
from time to time.
“Indemnitee” means (a) any General Partner, (b) any Departing General Partner, (c) any Person who is or was
an Affiliate of the General Partner or any Departing General Partner, (d) any Person who is or was a manager,
managing member, general partner, director, officer, employee, agent, fiduciary or trustee of (i) any Group
Member, a General Partner or any Departing General Partner or (ii) any Affiliate of any Group Member, a
General Partner or any Departing General Partner, (e) any Person who is or was serving at the request of a
General Partner, any Departing General Partner or any of their respective Affiliates as an officer, director,
manager, managing member, general partner, employee, agent, fiduciary or trustee of another Person owing a
fiduciary or similar duty to any Group Member; provided that a Person shall not be an Indemnitee by reason
of providing, on a fee-for-services basis, trustee, fiduciary or custodial services, (f) any Person who controls a
General Partner or Departing General Partner and (g) any Person the General Partner designates as an
“Indemnitee” for purposes of this Agreement because such Person’s service, status or relationship exposes
such Person to potential claims, demands, actions, suits or proceedings relating to the Partnership Group’s
business and affairs.
“Ineligible Holder” is defined in Section 4.8(c).
“Initial Limited Partners” means the Organizational Limited Partner (with respect to the Common Units and
PIK Common Units received by it pursuant to Section 5.2) and the Underwriters, in each case upon being
admitted to the Partnership in accordance with Section 10.1.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-6
“Initial Offering” means the initial offering and sale of Common Units to the public, as described in the
Registration Statement, including any Common Units issued pursuant to the exercise of the Underwriters’
Option.
“Liability” means any liability or obligation of any nature, whether accrued, contingent or otherwise.
“Limited Partner” means, unless the context otherwise requires, each Initial Limited Partner and each
additional Person that becomes a Limited Partner pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, in each case, in
such Person’s capacity as a limited partner of the Partnership.
“Limited Partner Interest” means the ownership interest of a Limited Partner in the Partnership, which may be
evidenced by Common Units, PIK Common Units or other Partnership Interests or a combination thereof or
interest therein (but excluding Derivative Instruments), and includes any and all benefits to which such
Limited Partner is entitled as provided in this Agreement, together with all obligations of such Limited Partner
to comply with the terms and provisions of this Agreement.
“Liquidation Date” means (a) in the case of an event giving rise to the dissolution of the Partnership of the
type described in clauses (a) and (b) of the first sentence of Section 12.2, the date on which the applicable
time period during which the holders of Outstanding Units have the right to elect to continue the business of
the Partnership has expired without such an election being made, and (b) in the case of any other event giving
rise to the dissolution of the Partnership, the date on which such event occurs.
“Liquidator” means one or more Persons selected by the General Partner to perform the functions described
in Section 12.4 as liquidating trustee of the Partnership within the meaning of the Delaware Act.
“LTIP” means the Long-Term Incentive Plan of the General Partner, as may be amended, or any equity
compensation plan successor thereto.
“Merger Agreement” is defined in Section 14.1.
“National Securities Exchange” means an exchange registered with the Commission under Section 6(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act (or any successor to such Section) and any other securities exchange (whether or not
registered with the Commission under Section 6(a) (or successor to such Section) of the Securities Exchange
Act) that the General Partner shall designate as a National Securities Exchange for purposes of this
Agreement.
“Net Agreed Value” means, (a) in the case of any Contributed Property, the Agreed Value of such property
reduced by any Liabilities either assumed by the Partnership upon such
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-7
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
contribution or to which such property is subject when contributed and (b) in the case of any property
distributed to a Partner by the Partnership, the Partnership’s Carrying Value of such property (as adjusted
pursuant to Section 5.5(d)(ii)) at the time such property is distributed, reduced by any Liability either assumed
by such Partner upon such distribution or to which such property is subject at the time of distribution.
“Net Income” means, for any taxable period, the excess, if any, of the Partnership’s items of income and gain
for such taxable period over the Partnership’s items of loss and deduction for such taxable period. The items
included in the calculation of Net Income shall be determined in accordance with Section 5.5 but shall not
include any items specially allocated under Section 6.1(b).
“Net Loss” means, for any taxable period, the excess, if any, of the Partnership’s items of loss and deduction
for such taxable period over the Partnership’s items of income and gain for such taxable period. The items
included in the calculation of Net Loss shall be determined in accordance with Section 5.5 but shall not
include any items specially allocated under Section 6.1(b).
“Nonrecourse Built-in Gain” means with respect to any Contributed Properties or Adjusted Properties that are
subject to a mortgage or pledge securing a Nonrecourse Liability, the amount of any taxable gain that would
be allocated to the Partners pursuant to Section 6.2(b) if such properties were disposed of in a taxable
transaction in full satisfaction of such liabilities and for no other consideration.
“Nonrecourse Deductions” means any and all items of loss, deduction or expenditure (including any
expenditure described in Section 705(a)(2)(B) of the Code) that, in accordance with the principles of Treasury
Regulation Section 1.704-2(b), are attributable to a Nonrecourse Liability.
“Nonrecourse Liability” has the meaning set forth in Treasury Regulation Section 1.752-1(a)(2).
“Northern Tier Holdings” means Northern Tier Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
“Notice of Election to Purchase” is defined in Section 15.1(b).
“Opinion of Counsel” means a written opinion of counsel (who may be regular counsel to the Partnership or
the General Partner or any of its Affiliates) acceptable to the General Partner.
“Option Closing Date” means the date or dates on which any Common Units are sold by the Partnership to
the Underwriters upon exercise of the Underwriters’ Option.
“Organizational Limited Partner” means Northern Tier Holdings, in its capacity as the organizational limited
partner of the Partnership pursuant to this Agreement.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-8
“Outstanding” means, with respect to Partnership Interests, all Partnership Interests that are issued by the
Partnership and reflected as outstanding on the Partnership’s books and records as of the date of
determination; provided, however, that if at any time any Person or Group (other than the General Partner or
its Affiliates, including (i) Northern Tier Holdings (ii) TPG Refining, L.P. and any of its Affiliates and (iii) ACON
Refining Partners L.L.C. and any of its Affiliates) beneficially owns 20% or more of the Outstanding
Partnership Interests of any class then Outstanding, none of the Partnership Interests owned by such Person
or Group shall be entitled to be voted on any matter or be considered to be Outstanding when sending
notices of a meeting of Limited Partners to vote on any matter (unless otherwise required by law), calculating
required votes, determining the presence of a quorum or for other similar purposes under this Agreement,
except that Partnership Interests so owned shall be considered to be Outstanding for purposes of
Section 11.1(b)(iv) (such Partnership Interests shall not, however, be treated as a separate class of Partnership
Interests for purposes of this Agreement or the Delaware Act); provided, further, that the foregoing limitation
shall not apply to (i) any Person or Group who acquired 20% or more of the Outstanding Partnership Interests
of any class then Outstanding directly from the General Partner or its Affiliates (other than the Partnership),
(ii) any Person or Group who acquired 20% or more of the Outstanding Partnership Interests of any class then
Outstanding directly or indirectly from a Person or Group described in clause (i) provided that the General
Partner shall have notified such Person or Group in writing that such limitation shall not apply, or (iii) any
Person or Group who acquired 20% or more of any Partnership Interests issued by the Partnership provided
that the General Partner shall have notified such Person or Group in writing that such limitation shall not
apply.
“Partner Nonrecourse Debt” has the meaning set forth in Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-2(b)(4).
“Partner Nonrecourse Debt Minimum Gain” has the meaning set forth in Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-
2(i)(2).
“Partner Nonrecourse Deductions” means any and all items of loss, deduction or expenditure (including any
expenditure described in Section 705(a)(2)(B) of the Code) that, in accordance with the principles of Treasury
Regulation Section 1.704-2(i), are attributable to a Partner Nonrecourse Debt.
“Partners” means the General Partner and the Limited Partners.
“Partnership” means Northern Tier Energy LP, a Delaware limited partnership.
“Partnership Group” means, collectively, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-9
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
“Partnership Interest” means any class or series of equity interest in the Partnership, which shall include any
General Partner Interest and Limited Partner Interests, but shall exclude Derivative Instruments.
“Partnership Minimum Gain” means that amount determined in accordance with the principles of Treasury
Regulation Sections 1.704-2(b)(2) and 1.704-2(d).
“Percentage Interest” means as of any date of determination (a) as to any Unitholder with respect to Units, the
product obtained by multiplying (i) 100% less the percentage applicable to clause (b) below by (ii) the quotient
obtained by dividing (A) the number of Units held by such Unitholder, by (B) the total number of Outstanding
Units and (b) as to the holders of other Partnership Interests issued by the Partnership in accordance with
Section 5.6, the percentage established as a part of such issuance. The Percentage Interest with respect to the
General Partner Interest shall at all times be zero.
“Person” means an individual or a corporation, firm, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture,
trust, unincorporated organization, association, government agency or political subdivision thereof or other
entity.
“Per Unit Capital Amount” means, as of any date of determination, the Capital Account, stated on a per Unit
basis, underlying any class of Units held by a Person other than the General Partner or any Affiliate of the
General Partner who holds Units.
“PIK Common Unit” means a Partnership Interest representing a fractional part of the Partnership Interests of
all Limited Partners, and having the rights and obligations specified with respect to PIK Common Units in this
Agreement. A PIK Common Unit that is convertible into a Common Unit shall not constitute a Common Unit
until such conversion occurs.
“PIK Period” means the period beginning on the date of the closing of the Initial Offering until the date that is
the earlier of (i) December 1, 2017 and (ii) the date on which the Senior Secured Notes have been redeemed,
repurchased, defeased or retired, or the indenture governing the Senior Secured Notes has been amended in
a manner that, as determined by the General Partner, results in such indenture being unlikely to restrict the
ability of the Partnership to pay cash distributions on all Units consistent with the cash distribution policy
adopted by the General Partner pursuant to Section 6.3(a) in connection with the closing of the Initial Offering,
provided, that a restrictive covenant contained in such indenture that requires the Partnership to meet a
specified fixed charge coverage ratio (or similar ratio) in order to make cash distributions shall be deemed not
to restrict the Partnership’s ability to pay cash distributions for purposes of the General Partner’s
determination.
“Pro Rata” means (a) when used with respect to Units or any class thereof, apportioned among all designated
Units in accordance with their relative Percentage Interests and (b) when used with respect to Partners or
Record Holders, apportioned among all Partners or Record Holders in accordance with their relative
Percentage Interests.
“Purchase Date” means the date determined by the General Partner as the date for purchase of all
Outstanding Limited Partner Interests of a certain class (other than Limited Partner Interests owned by the
General Partner and its Affiliates) pursuant to Article XV.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-10
“Quarter” means, unless the context requires otherwise, a fiscal quarter of the Partnership, or, with respect to
the fiscal quarter of the Partnership which includes the Closing Date, the portion of such fiscal quarter after
the Closing Date.
“Rate Eligibility Trigger” is defined in Section 4.8(a)(i).
“Recapture Income” means any gain recognized by the Partnership (computed without regard to any
adjustment required by Section 734 or Section 743 of the Code) upon the disposition of any property or asset
of the Partnership, which gain is characterized as ordinary income because it represents the recapture of
deductions previously taken with respect to such property or asset.
“Record Date” means the date established by the General Partner or otherwise in accordance with this
Agreement for determining (a) the identity of the Record Holders entitled to notice of, or to vote at, any
meeting of Limited Partners or entitled to vote by ballot or give approval of Partnership action in writing
without a meeting or entitled to exercise rights in respect of any lawful action of Limited Partners or (b) the
identity of Record Holders entitled to receive any report or distribution or to participate in any offer.
“Record Holder” means (a) with respect to any class of Partnership Interests for which a Transfer Agent has
been appointed, the Person in whose name a Partnership Interest of such class is registered on the books of
the Transfer Agent as of the closing of business on a particular Business Day, or (b) with respect to other
classes of Partnership Interests, the Person in whose name any such other Partnership Interest is registered
on the books that the General Partner has caused to be kept as of the closing of business on such Business
Day.
“Redeemable Interests” means any Partnership Interests for which a redemption notice has been given, and
has not been withdrawn, pursuant to Section 4.8(a).
“Registration Statement” means the Registration Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-178457) as it
has been or as it may be amended or supplemented from time to time, filed by the Partnership with the
Commission under the Securities Act to register the offering and sale of the Common Units in the Initial
Offering.
“Required Allocations” means any allocation of an item of income, gain, loss or deduction pursuant to
Section 6.1(b)(i), Section 6.1(b)(ii), Section 6.1(b)(iv), Section 6.1(b)(v), Section 6.1(b)(vi), Section 6.1(b)(vii) or
Section 6.1(b)(ix).
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, supplemented or restated from time to time
and any successor to such statute.
“Securities Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, supplemented or
restated from time to time and any successor to such statute.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-11
“Senior Secured Notes” means Northern Tier Energy LLC’s and Northern Tier Finance Corporation’s $290
million 10.5% senior secured notes due 2017.
“Special Approval” means approval by a majority of the members of the Conflicts Committee.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person, (a) a corporation of which more than 50% of the voting
power of shares entitled (without regard to the occurrence of any contingency) to vote in the election of
directors or other governing body of such corporation is owned, directly or indirectly, at the date of
determination, by such Person, by one or more Subsidiaries of such Person or a combination thereof, (b) a
partnership (whether general or limited) in which such Person or a Subsidiary of such Person is, at the date
of determination, a general partner of such partnership, but only if such Person, directly or by one or more
Subsidiaries of such Person, or a combination thereof, controls such partnership on the date of determination
or (c) any other Person in which such Person, one or more Subsidiaries of such Person, or a combination
thereof, directly or indirectly, at the date of determination, has (i) at least a majority ownership interest or
(ii) the power to elect or direct the election of a majority of the directors or other governing body of such
Person.
“Surviving Business Entity” is defined in Section 14.2(b)(ii).
“Trading Day” means, for the purpose of determining the Current Market Price of any class of Limited Partner
Interests, a day on which the principal National Securities Exchange on which such class of Limited Partner
Interests is listed or admitted to trading is open for the transaction of business or, if Limited Partner Interests
of a class are not listed or admitted to trading on any National Securities Exchange, a day on which banking
institutions in New York City generally are open.
“transfer” is defined in Section 4.4(a).
“Transfer Agent” means such bank, trust company or other Person (including the General Partner or one of
its Affiliates) as may be appointed from time to time by the Partnership to act as registrar and transfer agent
for any class of Partnership Interests; provided, that if no Transfer Agent is specifically designated for any
class of Partnership Interests, the General Partner shall act in such capacity.
“Underwriter” means each Person named as an underwriter in Schedule I to the Underwriting Agreement who
purchases Common Units pursuant thereto.
“Underwriters’ Option” means the option to purchase additional Common Units granted to the Underwriters
by the Partnership pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement.
“Underwriting Agreement” means that certain Underwriting Agreement, dated as of                 , 2012, among
the Underwriters, the Partnership, the General Partner and the other parties thereto, providing for the
purchase of Common Units by the Underwriters.
“Unit” means a Partnership Interest that is designated as a “Unit” and shall include Common Units and PIK
Common Units but shall not include the General Partner Interest.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-12
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
“Unitholders” means the holders of Units.
“Unit Majority” means at least a majority of the Outstanding Common Units and PIK Common Units, voting as
a single class.
“Unrealized Gain” attributable to any item of Partnership property means, as of any date of determination, the
excess, if any, of (a) the fair market value of such property as of such date (as determined under
Section 5.5(d)) over (b) the Carrying Value of such property as of such date (prior to any adjustment to be
made pursuant to Section 5.5(d) as of such date).
“Unrealized Loss” attributable to any item of Partnership property means, as of any date of determination, the
excess, if any, of (a) the Carrying Value of such property as of such date (prior to any adjustment to be made
pursuant to Section 5.5(d) as of such date) over (b) the fair market value of such property as of such date (as
determined under Section 5.5(d)).
“Unrestricted Person” means (a) each Indemnitee, (b) each Partner, (c) each Person who is or was a member,
partner, director, officer, employee or agent of any Group Member, a General Partner or any Departing General
Partner or any Affiliate of any Group Member, a General Partner or any Departing General Partner and (d) any
Person the General Partner designates as an “Unrestricted Person” for purposes of this Agreement.
“U.S. GAAP” means United States generally accepted accounting principles, as in effect from time to time,
consistently applied.
“Withdrawal Opinion of Counsel” is defined in Section 11.1(b).
Section 1.2 Construction. Unless the context requires otherwise: (a) any pronoun used in this Agreement shall
include the corresponding masculine, feminine or neuter forms; (b) references to Articles and Sections refer
to Articles and Sections of this Agreement; (c) the terms “include”, “includes”, “including” and words of like
import shall be deemed to be followed by the words “without limitation”; and (d) the terms “hereof”, “herein”
and “hereunder” refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular provision of this Agreement. The
table of contents and headings contained in this Agreement are for reference purposes only, and shall not
affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.
ARTICLE II
ORGANIZATION
Section 2.1 Formation. The General Partner and the Organizational Limited Partner have previously formed
the Partnership as a limited partnership pursuant to the provisions of the Delaware Act. This amendment and
restatement shall become effective on the date of this Agreement. Except as expressly provided to the
contrary in this Agreement, the rights, duties (including fiduciary duties), liabilities and obligations of the
Partners and the administration, dissolution and termination of the Partnership shall be governed by the
Delaware Act.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-13
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 2.2 Name. The name of the Partnership shall be “Northern Tier Energy LP.” The Partnership’s
business may be conducted under any other name or names as determined by the General Partner, including
the name of the General Partner. The words “Limited Partnership,” “L.P.,” “Ltd.” or similar words or letters
shall be included in the Partnership’s name where necessary for the purpose of complying with the laws of
any jurisdiction that so requires. The General Partner may change the name of the Partnership at any time and
from time to time and shall notify the Limited Partners of such change in the next regular communication to
the Limited Partners.
Section 2.3 Registered Office; Registered Agent; Principal Office; Other Offices. Unless and until changed by
the General Partner, the registered office of the Partnership in the State of Delaware shall be located at 1209
Orange Street, Wilmington, Delaware 19801, and the registered agent for service of process on the Partnership
in the State of Delaware at such registered office shall be The Corporation Trust Company. The principal office
of the Partnership shall be located at 38C Grove Street, Suite 100, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877, or such other
place as the General Partner may from time to time designate by notice to the Limited Partners. The
Partnership may maintain offices at such other place or places within or outside the State of Delaware as the
General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate. The address of the General Partner shall be 38C
Grove Street, Suite 100, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877, or such other place as the General Partner may from
time to time designate by notice to the Limited Partners.
Section 2.4 Purpose and Business. The purpose and nature of the business to be conducted by the
Partnership shall be to (a) engage directly in, or enter into or form, hold and dispose of any corporation,
partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or other arrangement to engage indirectly in, any
business activity that is approved by the General Partner, in its sole discretion, and that lawfully may be
conducted by a limited partnership organized pursuant to the Delaware Act and, in connection therewith, to
exercise all of the rights and powers conferred upon the Partnership pursuant to the agreements relating to
such business activity, and (b) do anything necessary or appropriate to the foregoing, including the making of
capital contributions or loans to a Group Member; provided, however, that the General Partner shall not cause
the Partnership to engage, directly or indirectly, in any business activity that the General Partner determines
would be reasonably likely to cause the Partnership to be treated as an association taxable as a corporation or
otherwise taxable as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the
General Partner shall have no duty or obligation to propose or approve, and may, in its sole discretion,
decline to propose or approve, the conduct by the Partnership of any business.
Section 2.5 Powers. The Partnership shall be empowered to do any and all acts and things necessary,
appropriate, proper, advisable, incidental to or convenient for the furtherance and accomplishment of the
purposes and business described in Section 2.4 and for the protection and benefit of the Partnership.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-14
Section 2.6 Term. The term of the Partnership commenced upon the filing of the Certificate of Limited
Partnership in accordance with the Delaware Act and shall continue in existence until the dissolution of the
Partnership in accordance with the provisions of Article XII. The existence of the Partnership as a separate
legal entity shall continue until the cancellation of the Certificate of Limited Partnership as provided in the
Delaware Act.
Section 2.7 Title to Partnership Assets. Title to Partnership assets, whether real, personal or mixed and
whether tangible or intangible, shall be deemed to be owned by the Partnership as an entity, and no Partner,
individually or collectively, shall have any ownership interest in such Partnership assets or any portion
thereof. Title to any or all of the Partnership assets may be held in the name of the Partnership, the General
Partner, one or more of its Affiliates or one or more nominees, as the General Partner may determine. The
General Partner hereby declares and warrants that any Partnership assets for which record title is held in the
name of the General Partner or one or more of its Affiliates or one or more nominees shall be held by the
General Partner or such Affiliate or nominee for the use and benefit of the Partnership in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement; provided, however, that the General Partner shall use reasonable efforts to
cause record title to such assets (other than those assets in respect of which the General Partner determines
that the expense and difficulty of conveyancing makes transfer of record title to the Partnership impracticable)
to be vested in the Partnership as soon as reasonably practicable; provided, further , that, prior to the
withdrawal or removal of the General Partner or as soon thereafter as practicable, the General Partner shall
use reasonable efforts to effect the transfer of record title to the Partnership and, prior to any such transfer,
will provide for the use of such assets in a manner satisfactory to the General Partner. All Partnership assets
shall be recorded as the property of the Partnership in its books and records, irrespective of the name in
which record title to such Partnership assets is held.
ARTICLE III
RIGHTS OF LIMITED PARTNERS
Section 3.1 Limitation of Liability. The Limited Partners shall have no liability under this Agreement except as
expressly provided in this Agreement or the Delaware Act.
Section 3.2 Management of Business. No Limited Partner, in its capacity as such, shall participate in the
operation, management or control (within the meaning of the Delaware Act) of the Partnership’s business,
transact any business in the Partnership’s name or have the power to sign documents for or otherwise bind
the Partnership. All actions taken by any Affiliate of the General Partner or any officer, director, employee,
manager, member, general partner, agent or trustee of the General Partner or any of its Affiliates, or any
officer, director, employee, manager, member, general partner, agent or trustee of a Group Member, in its
capacity as such, shall not be deemed to be participating in the control of the business of the Partnership by
a limited partner of the Partnership (within the meaning of Section 17-303(a) of the Delaware Act) and shall not
affect, impair or eliminate the limitations on the liability of the Limited Partners under this Agreement.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-15
Section 3.3 Outside Activities of the Limited Partners. Subject to the provisions of Section 7.6, which shall
continue to be applicable to the Persons referred to therein, regardless of whether such Persons shall also be
Limited Partners, each Limited Partner shall be entitled to and may have business interests and engage in
business activities in addition to those relating to the Partnership, including business interests and activities
in direct competition with the Partnership Group. Neither the Partnership nor any of the other Partners shall
have any rights by virtue of this Agreement in any business ventures of any Limited Partner.
Section 3.4 Rights of Limited Partners
(a) In addition to other rights provided by this Agreement or by applicable law (other than Section 17-305(a) of
the Delaware Act, the obligations of which are expressly replaced in their entirety by the provisions below),
and except as limited by Section 3.4(b) and (c), each Limited Partner shall have the right, for a purpose that is
reasonably related, as determined by the General Partner, to such Limited Partner’s interest as a Limited
Partner in the Partnership, upon reasonable written demand stating the purpose of such demand and at such
Limited Partner’s own expense, to obtain:
(i) true and full information regarding the status of the business and financial condition of the Partnership
(provided that the requirements of this Section 3.4(a)(i) shall be satisfied to the extent the Limited Partner is
furnished the Partnership’s most recent annual report and any subsequent quarterly or periodic reports
required to be filed (or which would be required to be filed) with the Commission pursuant to Section 13 of
the Securities Exchange Act);
(ii) a current list of the name and last known business, residence or mailing address of each Record Holder;
(iii) a copy of this Agreement and the Certificate of Limited Partnership and all amendments thereto, together
with copies of the executed copies of all powers of attorney pursuant to which this Agreement, the Certificate
of Limited Partnership and all amendments thereto have been executed; and
(iv) such other information regarding the affairs of the Partnership as the General Partner determines is just
and reasonable.
(b) The General Partner may keep confidential from the Limited Partners, for such period of time as the
General Partner deems reasonable, (i) any information that the General Partner reasonably believes to be in
the nature of trade secrets or (ii) other information the disclosure of which the General Partner believes (A) is
not in the best interests of the Partnership Group, (B) could damage the Partnership Group or its business or
(C) that any Group Member is required by law or by agreement with any third party to keep confidential (other
than agreements with Affiliates of the Partnership the primary purpose of which is to circumvent the
obligations set forth in this Section 3.4).
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-16
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement or Section 17-305 of the Delaware Act, each of the
Partners, each other Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest and each other Person bound
by this Agreement hereby agrees to the fullest extent permitted by law that they do not have rights to receive
information from the Partnership or any Indemnitee for the purpose of determining whether to pursue
litigation or assist in pending litigation against the Partnership or any Indemnitee relating to the affairs of the
Partnership except pursuant to the applicable rules of discovery relating to litigation commenced by such
Person.
ARTICLE IV
CERTIFICATES; RECORD HOLDERS; TRANSFER OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS;
REDEMPTION OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS
Section 4.1 Certificates. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, unless the General Partner shall
determine otherwise in respect of some or all of any or all classes of Partnership Interests, Partnership
Interests shall not be evidenced by certificates. Certificates that may be issued shall be executed on behalf of
the Partnership by the Chairman of the Board, President or any Executive Vice President or Vice President
and the Chief Financial Officer or the Secretary or any Assistant Secretary of the General Partner. No
Certificate for a class of Partnership Interests shall be valid for any purpose until it has been countersigned by
the Transfer Agent for such class of Partnership Interests; provided, however, that if the General Partner elects
to cause the Partnership to issue Partnership Interests of such class in global form, the Certificate shall be
valid upon receipt of a certificate from the Transfer Agent certifying that the Partnership Interests have been
duly registered in accordance with the directions of the Partnership. Subject to the requirements of
Section 6.4(e), if Common Units are evidenced by Certificates, on or after the date on which PIK Common
Units are converted into Common Units pursuant to the terms of Section 6.4, the Record Holders of such PIK
Common Units (i) if the PIK Common Units are evidenced by Certificates, may exchange such Certificates for
Certificates evidencing Common Units or (ii) if the PIK Common Units are not evidenced by Certificates, shall
be issued Certificates evidencing Common Units.
Section 4.2 Mutilated, Destroyed, Lost or Stolen Certificates.
(a) If any mutilated Certificate is surrendered to the Transfer Agent, the appropriate officers of the General
Partner on behalf of the Partnership shall execute, and the Transfer Agent shall countersign and deliver in
exchange therefor, a new Certificate evidencing the same number and type of Partnership Interests as the
Certificate so surrendered.
(b) The appropriate officers of the General Partner on behalf of the Partnership shall execute and deliver, and
the Transfer Agent shall countersign, a new Certificate in place of any Certificate previously issued if the
Record Holder of the Certificate:
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-17
(i) makes proof by affidavit, in form and substance satisfactory to the General Partner, that a previously issued
Certificate has been lost, destroyed or stolen;
(ii) requests the issuance of a new Certificate before the General Partner has notice that the Certificate has
been acquired by a purchaser for value in good faith and without notice of an adverse claim;
(iii) if requested by the General Partner, delivers to the General Partner a bond, in form and substance
satisfactory to the General Partner, with surety or sureties and with fixed or open penalty as the General
Partner may direct to indemnify the Partnership, the Partners, the General Partner and the Transfer Agent
against any claim that may be made on account of the alleged loss, destruction or theft of the Certificate; and
(iv) satisfies any other reasonable requirements imposed by the General Partner.
If a Limited Partner fails to notify the General Partner within a reasonable period of time after such Limited
Partner has notice of the loss, destruction or theft of a Certificate, and a transfer of the Limited Partner
Interests represented by the Certificate is registered before the Partnership, the General Partner or the Transfer
Agent receives such notification, the Limited Partner shall be precluded from making any claim against the
Partnership, the General Partner or the Transfer Agent for such transfer or for a new Certificate.
(c) As a condition to the issuance of any new Certificate under this Section 4.2, the General Partner may
require the payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed in
relation thereto and any other expenses (including the fees and expenses of the Transfer Agent) reasonably
connected therewith.
Section 4.3 Record Holders. The Partnership shall be entitled to recognize the Record Holder as the Partner
with respect to any Partnership Interest and, accordingly, shall not be bound to recognize any equitable or
other claim to, or interest in, such Partnership Interest on the part of any other Person, regardless of whether
the Partnership shall have actual or other notice thereof, except as otherwise provided by law or any
applicable rule, regulation, guideline or requirement of any National Securities Exchange on which such
Partnership Interests are listed or admitted to trading. Without limiting the foregoing, when a Person (such as
a broker, dealer, bank, trust company or clearing corporation or an agent of any of the foregoing) is acting as
nominee, agent or in some other representative capacity for another Person in acquiring and/or holding
Partnership Interests, as between the Partnership on the one hand, and such other Persons on the other, such
representative Person shall be (a) the Record Holder of such Partnership Interest and (b) bound by this
Agreement and shall have the rights and obligations of a Partner hereunder as, and to the extent, provided
herein.
Section 4.4 Transfer Generally.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-18
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(a) The term “transfer,” when used in this Agreement with respect to a Partnership Interest, shall mean a
transaction (i) by which the General Partner assigns its General Partner Interest to another Person, and
includes a sale, assignment, gift, pledge, encumbrance, hypothecation, mortgage, exchange or any other
disposition by law or otherwise or (ii) by which the holder of a Limited Partner Interest assigns such Limited
Partner Interest to another Person who is or becomes a Limited Partner, and includes a sale, assignment, gift,
exchange or any other disposition by law or otherwise, excluding a pledge, encumbrance, hypothecation or
mortgage but including any transfer upon foreclosure of any pledge, encumbrance, hypothecation or
mortgage.
(b) No Partnership Interest shall be transferred, in whole or in part, except in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in this Article IV. Any transfer or purported transfer of a Partnership Interest not made in
accordance with this Article IV shall be, to the fullest extent permitted by law, null and void.
(c) Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a disposition by any stockholder,
member, partner or other owner of any Partner of any or all of the shares of stock, membership interests,
partnership interests or other ownership interests in such Partner and the term “transfer” shall not mean any
such disposition.
Section 4.5 Registration and Transfer of Limited Partner Interests.
(a) The General Partner shall keep or cause to be kept on behalf of the Partnership a register in which, subject
to such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe and subject to the provisions of Section 4.5(b), the
Partnership will provide for the registration and transfer of Limited Partner Interests.
(b) The Partnership shall not recognize any transfer of Limited Partner Interests evidenced by Certificates until
the Certificates evidencing such Limited Partner Interests are surrendered for registration of transfer. No
charge shall be imposed by the General Partner for such transfer; provided, that as a condition to the
issuance of any new Certificate under this Section 4.5, the General Partner may require the payment of a sum
sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed with respect thereto. Upon
surrender of a Certificate for registration of transfer of any Limited Partner Interests evidenced by a Certificate,
and subject to the provisions hereof, the appropriate officers of the General Partner on behalf of the
Partnership shall execute and deliver, and in the case of Certificates evidencing Limited Partner Interests, the
Transfer Agent shall countersign and deliver, in the name of the holder or the designated transferee or
transferees, as required pursuant to the holder’s instructions, one or more new Certificates evidencing the
same aggregate number and type of Limited Partner Interests as was evidenced by the Certificate so
surrendered.
(c) Subject to (i) the foregoing provisions of this Section 4.5, (ii) Section 4.3, (iii) Section 4.7, (iv) with respect
to any class or series of Limited Partner Interests, the provisions of any statement of designations or an
amendment to this Agreement establishing such class or series, (v) any contractual provisions binding on
any Limited Partner and (vi) provisions of applicable law including the Securities Act, Limited Partner
Interests shall be freely transferable.
Table of Contents
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-19
Index to Financial Statements
(d) The General Partner and its Affiliates shall have the right at any time to transfer their PIK Common Units
and Common Units to one or more Persons.
Section 4.6 Transfer of the General Partner’s General Partner Interest.
(a) The General Partner may at its option transfer all or any part of its General Partner Interest without
Unitholder approval.
(b) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no transfer by the General Partner of all or any part of its
General Partner Interest to another Person shall be permitted unless (i) the transferee agrees to assume the
rights and duties of the General Partner under this Agreement and to be bound by the provisions of this
Agreement, (ii) the Partnership receives an Opinion of Counsel that such transfer would not result in the loss
of limited liability under the Delaware Act of any Limited Partner or cause the Partnership to be treated as an
association taxable as a corporation or otherwise to be taxed as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes
(to the extent not already so treated or taxed) and (iii) such transferee also agrees to purchase all (or the
appropriate portion thereof, if applicable) of the partnership or membership interest held by the General
Partner as the general partner or managing member, if any, of each other Group Member. In the case of a
transfer pursuant to and in compliance with this Section 4.6, the transferee or successor (as the case may be)
shall, subject to compliance with the terms of Section 10.2, be admitted to the Partnership as the General
Partner effective immediately prior to the transfer of the General Partner Interest, and the business of the
Partnership shall continue without dissolution.
Section 4.7 Restrictions on Transfers.
(a) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Article IV, no transfer of any Partnership Interests shall be
made if such transfer would (i) violate the then applicable federal or state securities laws or rules and
regulations of the Commission, any state securities commission or any other governmental authority with
jurisdiction over such transfer, (ii) terminate the existence or qualification of the Partnership under the laws of
the jurisdiction of its formation, or (iii) cause the Partnership to be treated as an association taxable as a
corporation or otherwise to be taxed as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes (to the extent not
already so treated or taxed).
(b) The General Partner may impose restrictions on the transfer of Partnership Interests if it determines, with
the advice of counsel, that such restrictions are necessary or advisable to (i) avoid a significant risk of the
Partnership becoming taxable as a corporation or otherwise becoming taxable as an entity for U.S. federal
income tax purposes or (ii) preserve the uniformity of the Limited Partner Interests (or any class or classes
thereof). The General Partner may impose such restrictions by amending this Agreement; provided, however,
that any amendment that would result in the delisting or suspension of trading of any class of Limited
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-20
Partner Interests on the principal National Securities Exchange on which such class of Limited Partner
Interests is then listed or admitted to trading must be approved, prior to such amendment being effected, by
the holders of at least a majority of the Outstanding Limited Partner Interests of such class.
(c) Nothing contained in this Agreement, other than Section 4.7(a), shall preclude the settlement of any
transactions involving Partnership Interests entered into through the facilities of any National Securities
Exchange on which such Partnership Interests are listed or admitted to trading.
Section 4.8 Eligibility Certificates; Ineligible Holders.
(a) If at any time the General Partner determines, with the advice of counsel, that:
(i) the U.S. federal income tax status (or lack of proof of the U.S. federal income tax status) of one or more
Limited Partners or their beneficial owners has or is reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the
rates that can be charged to customers by any Group Member with respect to assets that are subject to
regulation by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or similar regulatory body (a “Rate Eligibility
Trigger”); or
(ii) any Group Member is subject to any federal, state or local law or regulation that would create a substantial
risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any property in which the Group Member has an interest based on the
nationality, citizenship or other related status of a Limited Partner (a “Citizenship Eligibility Trigger”);
then, the General Partner may adopt such amendments to this Agreement as it determines to be necessary or
appropriate to (x) in the case of a Rate Eligibility Trigger, obtain such proof of the U.S. federal income tax
status of the Limited Partners and, to the extent relevant, their beneficial owners, as the General Partner
determines to be necessary or appropriate to reduce risk of the occurence of a material adverse effect on the
rates that can be charged to customers by any Group Member or (y) in the case of a Citizenship Eligibility
Trigger, obtain such proof of the nationality, citizenship or other related status of the Limited Partner and, to
the extent relevant, their beneficial owners as the General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate
to eliminate or mitigate a significant risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any properties or interests therein of a
Group Member.
(b) Such amendments may include provisions requiring all Partners to certify as to their (and their beneficial
owners’) status as Eligible Holders upon demand and on a regular basis, as determined by the General
Partner, and may require transferees of Units to so certify prior to being admitted to the Partnership as a
Partner (any such required certificate, an “Eligibility Certificate”).
(c) Such amendments may provide that any Partner who fails to furnish to the General Partner within a
reasonable period requested proof of its (and its beneficial owners’)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-21
status as an Eligible Holder or if upon receipt of such Eligibility Certificate or other requested information the
General Partner determines that a Limited Partner (or its beneficial owner) is not an Eligible Holder (an
“Ineligible Holder”), the Partnership Interests owned by such Limited Partner shall be subject to redemption
in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.9. In addition, the General Partner shall be substituted and
treated as the owner of all Partnership Interests owned by an Ineligible Holder.
(d) The General Partner shall, in exercising voting rights in respect of Partnership Interests held by it on
behalf of Ineligible Holders, cast such votes in the same manner and in the same ratios as the votes of
Partners (including the General Partner and its Affiliates) in respect of Partnership Interests other than those
of Ineligible Holders are cast.
(e) Upon dissolution of the Partnership, an Ineligible Holder shall have no right to receive a distribution in
kind pursuant to Section 12.4 but shall be entitled to the cash equivalent thereof, and the Partnership shall
provide cash in exchange for an assignment of the Ineligible Holder’s share of any distribution in kind. Such
payment and assignment shall be treated for for purposes hereof as a purchase by the Partnership from the
Ineligible Holder of the portion of his Partnership Interest representing his right to receive his share of such
distribution in kind.
(f) At any time after he can and does certify that he has become an Eligible Holder, an Ineligible Holder may,
upon application to the General Partner, request that with respect to any Partnership Interests of such
Ineligible Holder not redeemed pursuant to Section 4.9, such Ineligible Holder be admitted as a Partner, and
upon approval of the General Partner, such Ineligible Holder shall be admitted as a Partner and shall no
longer constitute an Ineligible Holder and the General Partner shall cease to be deemed to be the owner in
respect of such Ineligible Holder’s Partnership Interests.
Section 4.9 Redemption of Partnership Interests of Ineligible Holders.
(a) If at any time a Partner fails to furnish an Eligibility Certificate or other information requested within the
period of time specified in amendments adopted pursuant to Section 4.8 or if upon receipt of such Eligibility
Certificate, the General Partner determines, with the advice of counsel, that a Partner is an Ineligible Holder,
the Partnership may, unless the Partner establishes to the satisfaction of the General Partner that such Partner
is an Eligible Holder or has transferred his Limited Partner Interests to a Person who is an Eligible Holder and
who furnishes an Eligibility Certificate to the General Partner prior to the date fixed for redemption as
provided below, redeem the Partnership Interest of such Partner as follows:
(i) The General Partner shall, not later than the 30th day before the date fixed for redemption, give notice of
redemption to the Partner, at his last address designated on the records of the Partnership or the Transfer
Agent, as applicable, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid. The notice shall be deemed to have
been given when so mailed. The notice shall specify the Redeemable Interests, the date fixed for redemption,
the place of payment, that payment of the redemption price will be made upon
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-22
redemption of the Redeemable Interests (or, if later in the case of Redeemable Interests evidenced by
Certificates, upon surrender of the Certificate evidencing the Redeemable Interests) and that on and after the
date fixed for redemption no further allocations or distributions to which the Partner would otherwise be
entitled in respect of the Redeemable Interests will accrue or be made.
(ii) The aggregate redemption price for Redeemable Interests shall be an amount equal to the Current Market
Price (the date of determination of which shall be the date fixed for redemption) of Partnership Interests of the
class to be so redeemed multiplied by the number of Partnership Interests of each such class included
among the Redeemable Interests. The redemption price shall be paid, as determined by the General Partner,
in cash or by delivery of a promissory note of the Partnership in the principal amount of the redemption price,
bearing interest at the rate of 8% annually and payable in three equal annual installments of principal together
with accrued interest, commencing one year after the redemption date.
(iii) The Partner or his duly authorized representative shall be entitled to receive the payment for the
Redeemable Interests at the place of payment specified in the notice of redemption on the redemption date
(or, if later in the case of Redeemable Interests evidenced by Certificates, upon surrender by or on behalf of
the Partner at the place specified in the notice of redemption, of the Certificate evidencing the Redeemable
Interests, duly endorsed in blank or accompanied by an assignment duly executed in blank).
(iv) After the redemption date, Redeemable Interests shall no longer constitute issued and Outstanding
Limited Partner Interests.
(b) The provisions of this Section 4.8(a) shall also be applicable to Partnership Interests held by a Partner as
nominee of a Person determined to be an Ineligible Holder.
(c) Nothing in this Section 4.8(a) shall prevent the recipient of a notice of redemption from transferring his
Partnership Interest before the redemption date if such transfer is otherwise permitted under this Agreement.
Upon receipt of notice of such a transfer, the General Partner shall withdraw the notice of redemption,
provided the transferee of such Partnership Interest certifies to the satisfaction of the General Partner that he
is an Eligible Holder. If the transferee fails to make such certification, such redemption will be effected from
the transferee on the original redemption date.
ARTICLE V
CAPITAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ISSUANCE OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS
Section 5.1 Organizational Contributions. In connection with the formation of the Partnership under the
Delaware Act, the General Partner has been admitted as the sole General Partner of the Partnership. The
Organizational Limited Partner made an initial Capital
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-23
Contribution to the Partnership in the amount of $1.00 in exchange for a Limited Partner Interest equal to a
100% Percentage Interest and has been admitted as a Limited Partner of the Partnership. As of the Closing
Date, and effective with the admission of another Limited Partner to the Partnership, the interests of the
Organizational Limited Partner will be redeemed as provided in the Contribution Agreement and the initial
cash Capital Contribution of the Organizational Limited Partner will be refunded. One-hundred percent of any
interest or other profit that may have resulted from the investment or other use of such initial cash Capital
Contribution will be allocated and distributed to the Organizational Limited Partner.
Section 5.2 Contributions by the Organizational Limited Partner. On the Closing Date and pursuant to the
Contribution Agreement, the Organizational Limited Partner shall contribute to the Partnership, as a Capital
Contribution, 100% of the membership interests in Northern Tier Energy, LLC in exchange for Common Units,
PIK Common Units and the right to receive the Deferred Issuance and Distribution.
Section 5.3 Contributions by Initial Limited Partners.
(a) On the Closing Date and pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, each Underwriter shall contribute cash
to the Partnership in exchange for the issuance by the Partnership of Common Units to each Underwriter, all
as set forth in the Underwriting Agreement.
(b) Upon the exercise, if any, of the Underwriters’ Option, each Underwriter shall contribute cash to the
Partnership in exchange for the issuance by the Partnership of Common Units to each Underwriter, all as set
forth in the Underwriting Agreement.
(c) No Limited Partner will be required to make any additional Capital Contribution to the Partnership
pursuant to this Agreement.
Section 5.4 Interest and Withdrawal. No interest shall be paid by the Partnership on Capital Contributions. No
Partner shall be entitled to the withdrawal or return of its Capital Contribution, except to the extent, if any, that
distributions made pursuant to this Agreement or upon liquidation of the Partnership may be considered as
such by law and then only to the extent provided for in this Agreement. Except to the extent expressly
provided in this Agreement, no Partner shall have priority over any other Partner either as to the return of
Capital Contributions or as to profits, losses or distributions. Any such return shall be a compromise to
which all Partners agree within the meaning of Section 17-502(b) of the Delaware Act.
Section 5.5 Capital Accounts.
(a) The Partnership shall maintain for each Partner (or a beneficial owner of Partnership Interests held by a
nominee in any case in which the nominee has furnished the identity of such owner to the Partnership in
accordance with Section 6031(c) of the Code or any other method acceptable to the General Partner) owning a
Partnership Interest a separate Capital Account with respect to such Partnership Interest in accordance with
the rules of Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(iv). Such Capital Account shall be increased by (i) the
amount of all Capital Contributions made to the Partnership with respect to such Partnership Interest and
(ii) all items of Partnership income and gain (including income and gain exempt from tax)
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-24
computed in accordance with Section 5.5(b) and allocated with respect to such Partnership Interest pursuant
to Section 6.1, and decreased by (x) the amount of cash or Net Agreed Value of all actual and deemed
distributions of cash or property made with respect to such Partnership Interest and (y) all items of
Partnership deduction and loss computed in accordance with Section 5.5(b) and allocated with respect to
such Partnership Interest pursuant to Section 6.1.
(b) For purposes of computing the amount of any item of income, gain, loss or deduction that is to be
allocated pursuant to Article VI and is to be reflected in the Partners’ Capital Accounts, the determination,
recognition and classification of any such item shall be the same as its determination, recognition and
classification for U.S. federal income tax purposes (including any method of depreciation, cost recovery or
amortization used for that purpose), provided, that:
(i) Solely for purposes of this Section 5.5, the Partnership shall be treated as owning directly its proportionate
share (as determined by the General Partner based upon the provisions of the applicable Group Member
Agreement) of all property owned by (x) any other Group Member that is classified as a partnership for U.S.
federal income tax purposes and (y) any other partnership, limited liability company, unincorporated business
or other entity classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes of which a Group Member is,
directly or indirectly, a partner, member or other equity holder.
(ii) All fees and other expenses incurred by the Partnership to promote the sale of (or to sell) a Partnership
Interest that can neither be deducted nor amortized under Section 709 of the Code, if any, shall, for purposes
of Capital Account maintenance, be treated as an item of deduction at the time such fees and other expenses
are incurred and shall be allocated among the Partners pursuant to Section 6.1.
(iii) Except as otherwise provided in Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(iv)(m), the computation of all
items of income, gain, loss and deduction shall be made without regard to any election under Section 754 of
the Code that may be made by the Partnership and, as to those items described in Section 705(a)(1)(B) or
705(a)(2)(B) of the Code, without regard to the fact that such items are not includable in gross income or are
neither currently deductible nor capitalized for U.S. federal income tax purposes. To the extent an adjustment
to the adjusted tax basis of any Partnership asset pursuant to Section 734(b) or 743(b) of the Code is required,
pursuant to Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(iv)(m), to be taken into account in determining Capital
Accounts, the amount of such adjustment in the Capital Accounts shall be treated as an item of gain or loss.
(iv) Any income, gain or loss attributable to the taxable disposition of any Partnership property shall be
determined as if the adjusted basis of such property as of such date of disposition were equal in amount to
the property’s Carrying Value as of such date.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-25
(v) Any deductions for depreciation, cost recovery or amortization attributable to any Contributed Property or
Adjusted Property shall be determined under the rules prescribed by Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-3(d)(2)
as if the adjusted basis of such property were equal to the Carrying Value of such property immediately
following such adjustment.
(vi) The Gross Liability Value of each Liability of the Partnership described in Treasury Regulation
Section 1.752-7(b)(3)(i) shall be adjusted at such times as provided in this Agreement for an adjustment to
Carrying Values. The amount of any such adjustment shall be treated for purposes hereof as an item of loss
(if the adjustment increases the Carrying Value of such Liability of the Partnership) or an item of gain (if the
adjustment decreases the Carrying Value of such Liability of the Partnership).
(c) (i) A transferee of a Partnership Interest shall succeed to a pro rata portion of the Capital Account of the
transferor relating to the Partnership Interest so transferred.
(ii) Immediately prior to the transfer of a PIK Common Unit or of a PIK Common Unit that has converted into a
Common Unit pursuant to Section 6.4(b) by a holder thereof (other than a transfer to an Affiliate unless the
General Partner elects to have this Section 5.5(c)(ii) apply), the Capital Account maintained for such Person
with respect to its PIK Common Units or converted PIK Common Units will (A) first, be allocated to the PIK
Common Units or converted PIK Common Units to be transferred in an amount equal to the product of (x) the
number of such PIK Common Units or converted PIK Common Units to be transferred and (y) the Per Unit
Capital Amount for a Common Unit, and (B) second, any remaining balance in such Capital Account will be
retained by the transferor, regardless of whether it has retained any PIK Common Units or converted PIK
Common Units. Following any such allocation, the transferor’s Capital Account, if any, maintained with
respect to the retained PIK Common Units or converted PIK Common Units, if any, will have a balance equal
to the amount allocated under clause (B) above, and the transferee’s Capital Account established with respect
to the transferred PIK Common Units or converted PIK Common Units will have a balance equal to the amount
allocated under clause (A).
(d) (i) Consistent with Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(iv)(f), on an issuance of additional Partnership
Interests for cash or Contributed Property or the issuance of Partnership Interests as consideration for the
provision of services, the Carrying Value of each Partnership property immediately prior to such issuance
shall be adjusted upward or downward to reflect any Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss attributable to such
Partnership property, and any such Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss shall be treated, for purposes of
maintaining Capital Accounts, as if it had been recognized on an actual sale of each such property for an
amount equal to its fair market value immediately prior to such issuance and had been allocated among the
Partners at such time pursuant to Section 6.1 in the same manner as any item of gain or loss actually
recognized following an event giving rise to the dissolution of the Partnership would have been allocated;
provided, however, that in the event of an issuance of Partnership
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-26
Interests for a de minimis amount of cash or Contributed Property, or in the event of an issuance of a de
minimis amount of Partnership Interests as consideration for the provision of services, the General Partner
may determine that such adjustments are unnecessary for the proper administration of the Partnership. In
determining such Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss, the aggregate fair market value of all Partnership
property (including cash or cash equivalents) immediately prior to the issuance of additional Partnership
Interests shall be determined by the General Partner using such method of valuation as it may adopt. In
making its determination of the fair market values of individual properties, the General Partner may determine
that it is appropriate to first determine an aggregate value for the Partnership, based on the current trading
price of the Common Units, and taking fully into account the fair market value of the Partnership Interests of
all Partners at such time, and then allocate such aggregate value among the individual properties of the
Partnership (in such manner as it determines appropriate).
(ii) In accordance with Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(iv)(f), immediately prior to any actual or
deemed distribution to a Partner of any Partnership property (other than a distribution of cash that is not in
redemption or retirement of a Partnership Interest), the Carrying Value of all Partnership property shall be
adjusted upward or downward to reflect any Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss attributable to such
Partnership property, and any such Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss shall be treated, for purposes of
maintaining Capital Accounts, as if it had been recognized on an actual sale of each such property
immediately prior to such distribution for an amount equal to its fair market value, and had been allocated
among the Partners, at such time, pursuant to Section 6.1 in the same manner as any item of gain or loss
actually recognized following an event giving rise to the dissolution of the Partnership would have been
allocated. In determining such Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss the aggregate fair market value of all
Partnership property (including cash or cash equivalents) immediately prior to a distribution shall (A) in the
case of an actual or deemed distribution other than a distribution made pursuant to Section 12.4, be
determined in the same manner as that provided in Section 5.5(d)(i) or (B) in the case of a liquidating
distribution pursuant to Section 12.4, be determined by the Liquidator using such method of valuation as it
may adopt.
Section 5.6 Issuances of Additional Partnership Interests and Derivative Instruments.
(a) The Partnership may issue additional Partnership Interests and Derivative Instruments for any Partnership
purpose at any time and from time to time to such Persons for such consideration and on such terms and
conditions as the General Partner shall determine, all without the approval of any Limited Partners.
(b) Each additional Partnership Interest authorized to be issued by the Partnership pursuant to Section 5.6(a)
may be issued in one or more classes, or one or more series of any such classes, with such designations,
preferences, rights, powers and duties (which may be senior to existing classes and series of Partnership
Interests), as shall be fixed by the General Partner, including (i) the right to share in Partnership profits and
losses or items thereof; (ii) the right to
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-27
share in Partnership distributions; (iii) the rights upon dissolution and liquidation of the Partnership;
(iv) whether, and the terms and conditions upon which, the Partnership may or shall be required to redeem
the Partnership Interest (including sinking fund provisions); (v) whether such Partnership Interest is issued
with the privilege of conversion or exchange and, if so, the terms and conditions of such conversion or
exchange; (vi) the terms and conditions upon which each Partnership Interest will be issued, evidenced by
certificates and assigned or transferred; (vii) the method for determining the Percentage Interest as to such
Partnership Interest; and (viii) the right, if any, of each such Partnership Interest to vote on Partnership
matters, including matters relating to the relative rights, preferences and privileges of such Partnership
Interest.
(c) The General Partner shall take all actions that it determines to be necessary or appropriate in connection
with (i) each issuance of Partnership Interests and Derivative Instruments pursuant to this Section 5.6,
including Common Units issued in connection with the Deferred Issuance and Distribution, (ii) the issuance of
Common Units pursuant to Section 6.4 and PIK Common Units, (iii) reflecting admission of such additional
Limited Partners in the books and records of the Partnership as the Record Holder of such Limited Partner
Interest and (iv) all additional issuances of Partnership Interests. The General Partner shall determine the
relative rights, powers and duties of the holders of the Units or other Partnership Interests being so issued.
The General Partner shall do all things necessary to comply with the Delaware Act and is authorized and
directed to do all things that it determines to be necessary or appropriate in connection with any future
issuance of Partnership Interests, including compliance with any statute, rule, regulation or guideline of any
federal, state or other governmental agency or any National Securities Exchange on which the Units or other
Partnership Interests are listed or admitted to trading.
(d) No fractional Units shall be issued by the Partnership; provided, however, the foregoing shall not apply to
PIK Common Units distributable in respect of each quarter pursuant to Section 6.4(a). For purposes of
Common Units issuable upon the conversion of the PIK Common Units pursuant to Section 6.4(b), (i) if more
than one PIK Common Unit shall be surrendered for conversion at one time by or for the same Unitholder, the
number of Common Units issuable upon conversion of those PIK Common Units shall be computed on the
basis of the aggregate number of PIK Common Units so surrendered and (ii) any fractional Common Units
issuable upon the conversion of the PIK Common Units shall be rounded to the nearest whole Common Unit
(and a 0.5 Common Unit shall be rounded to the next higher Common Unit).
Section 5.7 Limited Preemptive Right. Except as provided in this Section 5.7 or as otherwise provided in a
separate agreement by the Partnership, no Person shall have any preemptive, preferential or other similar
right with respect to the issuance of any Partnership Interest, whether unissued, held in the treasury or
hereafter created. The General Partner shall have the right, which it may from time to time assign in whole or
in part to any of its Affiliates, to purchase Partnership Interests from the Partnership whenever, and on the
same terms that, the Partnership issues Partnership Interests to Persons other than the General Partner and
its Affiliates, to the extent necessary to maintain the Percentage Interests of the General Partner and its
Affiliates equal to that which existed immediately prior to the issuance of such Partnership Interests.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-28
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 5.8 Splits and Combinations.
(a) Subject to Section 5.8(d), the Partnership may make a Pro Rata distribution of Partnership Interests to all
Record Holders or may effect a subdivision or combination of Partnership Interests so long as, after any such
event, each Partner shall have the same Percentage Interest in the Partnership as before such event.
(b) Whenever such a distribution, subdivision or combination of Partnership Interests is declared, the General
Partner shall select a Record Date as of which the distribution, subdivision or combination shall be effective
and shall send notice thereof at least 20 days prior to such Record Date to each Record Holder as of a date not
less than 10 days prior to the date of such notice. The General Partner also may cause a firm of independent
public accountants selected by it to calculate the number of Partnership Interests to be held by each Record
Holder after giving effect to such distribution, subdivision or combination. The General Partner shall be
entitled to rely on any certificate provided by such firm as conclusive evidence of the accuracy of such
calculation.
(c) Promptly following any such distribution, subdivision or combination, the Partnership may issue
Certificates to the Record Holders of Partnership Interests as of the applicable Record Date representing the
new number of Partnership Interests held by such Record Holders, or the General Partner may adopt such
other procedures that it determines to be necessary or appropriate to reflect such changes. If any such
combination results in a smaller total number of Partnership Interests Outstanding, the Partnership shall
require, as a condition to the delivery to a Record Holder of such new Certificate, the surrender of any
Certificate held by such Record Holder immediately prior to such Record Date.
(d) Except as set forth in Section 5.6(d), the Partnership shall not issue fractional Units upon any distribution,
subdivision or combination of Units. If a distribution, subdivision or combination of Units would result in the
issuance of fractional Units but for the provisions of Section 5.6(d) and this Section 5.8(d), each fractional Unit
shall be rounded to the nearest whole Unit (and a 0.5 Unit shall be rounded to the next higher Unit).
Section 5.9 Fully Paid and Non-Assessable Nature of Limited Partner Interests. All Limited Partner Interests
issued pursuant to, and in accordance with the requirements of, this Article V shall be fully paid and non-
assessable Limited Partner Interests in the Partnership, except as such non-assessability may be affected by
Section 17-607 or 17-804 of the Delaware Act.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-29
ARTICLE VI
ALLOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
Section 6.1 Allocations for Capital Account Purposes. For purposes of maintaining the Capital Accounts and
in determining the rights of the Partners among themselves, the Partnership’s items of income, gain, loss and
deduction (computed in accordance with Section 5.5(b)) for each taxable period shall be allocated among the
Partners as provided herein below.
(a) Net Income and Net Loss. Net Income or Net Loss for each taxable period (including a pro rata part of each
item of income, gain, loss and deduction taken into account in computing Net Income or Net Loss for such
taxable period) shall be allocated to the Unitholders on a Pro Rata basis.
(b) Special Allocations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 6.1, the following special
allocations shall be made for each taxable period:
(i) Partnership Minimum Gain Chargeback. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 6.1, if there is
a net decrease in Partnership Minimum Gain during any Partnership taxable period, each Partner shall be
allocated items of Partnership income and gain for such period (and, if necessary, subsequent periods) in the
manner and amounts provided in Treasury Regulation Sections 1.704-2(f)(6), 1.704-2(g)(2) and 1.704-2(j)(2)(i), or
any successor provision. For purposes of this Section 6.1(b), each Partner’s Adjusted Capital Account
balance shall be determined, and the allocation of income or gain required hereunder shall be effected, prior
to the application of any other allocations pursuant to this Section 6.1(b) with respect to such taxable period
(other than an allocation pursuant to Section 6.1(b)(vi) and Section 6.1(b)(vii)). This Section 6.1(b)(i) is
intended to comply with the Partnership Minimum Gain chargeback requirement in Treasury Regulation
Section 1.704-2(f) and shall be interpreted consistently therewith.
(ii) Chargeback of Partner Nonrecourse Debt Minimum Gain. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
Section 6.1 (other than Section 6.1(b)(i)), except as provided in Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-2(i)(4), if
there is a net decrease in Partner Nonrecourse Debt Minimum Gain during any Partnership taxable period, any
Partner with a share of Partner Nonrecourse Debt Minimum Gain at the beginning of such taxable period shall
be allocated items of Partnership income and gain for such period (and, if necessary, subsequent periods) in
the manner and amounts provided in Treasury Regulation Sections 1.704-2(i)(4) and 1.704-2(j)(2)(ii), or any
successor provisions. For purposes of this Section 6.1(b), each Partner’s Adjusted Capital Account balance
shall be determined, and the allocation of income or gain required hereunder shall be effected, prior to the
application of any other allocations pursuant to this Section 6.1(b), other than Section 6.1(b)(i) and other than
an allocation pursuant to Section 6.1(b)(vi) and Section 6.1(b)(vii), with respect to such taxable period. This
Section
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-30
6.1(b)(ii) is intended to comply with the chargeback of items of income and gain requirement in Treasury
Regulation Section 1.704-2(i)(4) and shall be interpreted consistently therewith.
(iii) Priority Allocations. If the amount of cash or the Net Agreed Value of any property distributed (except cash
or property distributed pursuant to Section 12.4) with respect to a Unit exceeds the amount of cash or the Net
Agreed Value of property distributed with respect to another Unit (the amount of the excess, an “Excess
Distribution” and the Unit with respect to which the greater distribution is paid, an “Excess Distribution
Unit”), then there shall be allocated gross income and gain to each Unitholder receiving an Excess
Distribution with respect to the Excess Distribution Unit until the aggregate amount of such items allocated
with respect to such Excess Distribution Unit pursuant to this Section 6.1(b)(iii) for the current taxable period
and all previous taxable periods is equal to the amount of the Excess Distribution.
(iv) Qualified Income Offset. In the event any Partner unexpectedly receives any adjustments, allocations or
distributions described in Treasury Regulation Sections 1.704-1(b)(2)(ii)(d)(4), 1.704-1(b)(2)(ii)(d)(5), or 1.704-
1(b)(2)(ii)(d)(6), items of Partnership gross income and gain shall be specially allocated to such Partner in an
amount and manner sufficient to eliminate, to the extent required by the Treasury Regulations promulgated
under Section 704(b) of the Code, the deficit balance, if any, in its Adjusted Capital Account created by such
adjustments, allocations or distributions as quickly as possible; provided, that an allocation pursuant to this
Section 6.1(b)(iv) shall be made only if and to the extent that such Partner would have a deficit balance in its
Adjusted Capital Account after all other allocations provided for in this Section 6.1 have been tentatively made
as if this Section 6.1(b)(iv) were not in this Agreement.
(v) Gross Income Allocation. In the event any Partner has a deficit balance in its Capital Account at the end of
any taxable period in excess of the sum of (A) the amount such Partner is required to restore pursuant to the
provisions of this Agreement and (B) the amount such Partner is deemed obligated to restore pursuant to
Treasury Regulation Sections 1.704-2(g) and 1.704-2(i)(5), such Partner shall be specially allocated items of
Partnership gross income and gain in the amount of such excess as quickly as possible; provided, that an
allocation pursuant to this Section 6.1(b)(v) shall be made only if and to the extent that such Partner would
have a deficit balance in its Capital Account after all other allocations provided for in this Section 6.1 have
been tentatively made as if Section 6.1(b)(iv) and this Section 6.1(b)(v) were not in this Agreement.
(vi) Nonrecourse Deductions. Nonrecourse Deductions for any taxable period shall be allocated to the Partners
Pro Rata. If the General Partner determines that the Partnership’s Nonrecourse Deductions should be
allocated in a different ratio to satisfy the safe harbor requirements of the Treasury Regulations promulgated
under Section 704(b) of the Code, the General Partner is authorized to revise the prescribed ratio to the
numerically closest ratio that does satisfy such requirements.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-31
(vii) Partner Nonrecourse Deductions. Partner Nonrecourse Deductions for any taxable period shall be
allocated 100% to the Partner that bears the Economic Risk of Loss with respect to the Partner Nonrecourse
Debt to which such Partner Nonrecourse Deductions are attributable in accordance with Treasury Regulation
Section 1.704-2(i). If more than one Partner bears the Economic Risk of Loss with respect to a Partner
Nonrecourse Debt, the Partner Nonrecourse Deductions attributable thereto shall be allocated between or
among such Partners in accordance with the ratios in which they share such Economic Risk of Loss.
(viii) Nonrecourse Liabilities. For purposes of Treasury Regulation Section 1.752-3(a)(3), the Partners agree
that Nonrecourse Liabilities of the Partnership in excess of the sum of (A) the amount of Partnership Minimum
Gain and (B) the total amount of Nonrecourse Built-in Gain shall be allocated among the Partners Pro Rata.
(ix) Code Section 754 Adjustments. To the extent an adjustment to the adjusted tax basis of any Partnership
asset pursuant to Section 734(b) or 743(b) of the Code is required, pursuant to Treasury Regulation
Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(iv)(m), to be taken into account in determining Capital Accounts as a result of a
distribution to a Partner in complete liquidation of such Partner’s interest in the Partnership, the amount of
such adjustment to the Capital Accounts shall be treated as an item of gain (if the adjustment increases the
basis of the asset) or loss (if the adjustment decreases such basis) taken into account pursuant to Section 5.5,
and such item of gain or loss shall be specially allocated to the Partners in a manner consistent with the
manner in which their Capital Accounts are required to be adjusted pursuant to such Section of the Treasury
Regulations.
(x) Economic Uniformity; Changes in Law. For the proper administration of the Partnership and for the
preservation of uniformity of the Limited Partner Interests (or any class or classes thereof), the General
Partner shall (i) adopt such conventions as it deems appropriate in determining the amount of depreciation,
amortization and cost recovery deductions; (ii) make special allocations of income, gain, loss, deduction,
Unrealized Gain or Unrealized Loss; and (iii) amend the provisions of this Agreement as appropriate (x) to
reflect the proposal or promulgation of Treasury Regulations under Section 704(b) or Section 704(c) of the
Code or (y) otherwise to preserve or achieve uniformity of the Limited Partner Interests (or any class or
classes thereof). The General Partner may adopt such conventions, make such allocations and make such
amendments to this Agreement as provided in this Section 6.1(b)(x) only if such conventions, allocations or
amendments would not have a material adverse effect on the Partners, the holders of any class or classes of
Outstanding Limited Partner Interests or the Partnership.
(xi) Curative Allocation.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-32
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 6.1, other than the Required Allocations, the Required
Allocations shall be taken into account in making the Agreed Allocations so that, to the extent possible, the
net amount of items of gross income, gain, loss and deduction allocated to each Partner pursuant to the
Required Allocations and the Agreed Allocations, together, shall be equal to the net amount of such items that
would have been allocated to each such Partner under the Agreed Allocations had the Required Allocations
and the related Curative Allocation not otherwise been provided in this Section 6.1. In exercising its discretion
under this Section 6.1(b)(xi)(A), the General Partner may take into account future Required Allocations that,
although not yet made, are likely to offset other Required Allocations previously made. Allocations pursuant
to this Section 6.1(b)(xi)(A) shall only be made with respect to Required Allocations to the extent the General
Partner determines that such allocations will otherwise be inconsistent with the economic agreement among
the Partners.
(B) The General Partner shall, with respect to each taxable period, (1) apply the provisions of Section 6.1(b)(xi)
(A) in whatever order is most likely to minimize the economic distortions that might otherwise result from the
Required Allocations, and (2) divide all allocations pursuant to Section 6.1(b)(xi)(A) among the Partners in a
manner that is likely to minimize such economic distortions.
Section 6.2 Allocations for Tax Purposes.
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, each item of income, gain, loss
and deduction shall be allocated among the Partners in the same manner as its correlative item of “book”
income, gain, loss or deduction is allocated pursuant to Section 6.1.
(b) In an attempt to eliminate Book-Tax Disparities attributable to a Contributed Property or Adjusted Property,
items of income, gain, loss, depreciation, amortization and cost recovery deduction shall be allocated for U.S.
federal income tax purposes among the Partners in the manner provided under Section 704(c) of the Code,
and the Treasury Regulations promulgated under Section 704(b) and 704(c) of the Code, as determined
appropriate by the General Partner (taking into account the General Partner’s discretion under Section 6.1(b)
(x)); provided, that the General Partner shall apply the principles of Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-3(d) in
all events.
(c) The General Partner may determine to depreciate or amortize the portion of an adjustment under
Section 743(b) of the Code attributable to unrealized appreciation in any Adjusted Property (to the extent of the
unamortized Book-Tax Disparity) using a predetermined rate derived from the depreciation or amortization
method and useful life applied to the unamortized Book-Tax Disparity of such property, despite any
inconsistency of such approach with Treasury Regulation Section 1.167(c)-l(a)(6) or any successor regulations
thereto. If the General Partner determines that such reporting position cannot reasonably be taken, the
General
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-33
Partner may adopt depreciation and amortization conventions under which all purchasers acquiring Limited
Partner Interests in the same month would receive depreciation and amortization deductions, based upon the
same applicable rate as if they had purchased a direct interest in the Partnership’s property. If the General
Partner chooses not to utilize such aggregate method, the General Partner may use any other depreciation
and amortization conventions to preserve the uniformity of the intrinsic tax characteristics of any Limited
Partner Interests, so long as such conventions would not have a material adverse effect on the Limited
Partners or the Record Holders of any class or classes of Limited Partner Interests.
(d) In accordance with Treasury Regulation Sections 1.1245-1(e) and 1.1250-1(f), any gain allocated to the
Partners upon the sale or other taxable disposition of any Partnership asset shall, to the extent possible, after
taking into account other required allocations of gain pursuant to this Section 6.2, be characterized as
Recapture Income in the same proportions and to the same extent as such Partners (or their predecessors in
interest) have been allocated any deductions directly or indirectly giving rise to the treatment of such gains as
Recapture Income.
(e) All items of income, gain, loss, deduction and credit recognized by the Partnership for U.S. federal income
tax purposes and allocated to the Partners in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be determined
without regard to any election under Section 754 of the Code that may be made by the Partnership; provided,
however, that such allocations, once made, shall be adjusted (in the manner determined by the General
Partner) to take into account those adjustments permitted or required by Sections 734 and 743 of the Code.
(f) Each item of Partnership income, gain, loss and deduction shall, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, be
determined for each Quarter and prorated on a monthly basis and shall be allocated to the Partners as of the
opening of the National Securities Exchange on which Partnership Interests are listed or admitted to trading
on the first Business Day of each month; provided, however, such items for the period beginning on the
Closing Date and ending on the last day of the month in which the Underwriters’ Option is exercised in full or
the expiration of the Underwriters’ Option occurs shall be allocated to the Partners as of the opening of the
National Securities Exchange on which Partnership Interests are listed or admitted to trading on the first
Business Day of the next succeeding month; and provided, further, that gain or loss on a sale or other
disposition of any assets of the Partnership or any other extraordinary item of income, gain, loss or deduction
as determined by the General Partner, shall be allocated to the Partners as of the opening of the National
Securities Exchange on which Partnership Interests are listed or admitted to trading on the first Business Day
of the month in which such item is recognized for federal income tax purposes. The General Partner may
revise, alter or otherwise modify such methods of allocation to the extent permitted or required by Section 706
of the Code and the regulations or rulings promulgated thereunder.
(g) Allocations that would otherwise be made to a Limited Partner under the provisions of this Article VI shall
instead be made to the beneficial owner of Limited Partner Interests held by a nominee in any case in which
the nominee has furnished the identity of such owner to the Partnership in accordance with Section 6031(c) of
the Code or any other method determined by the General Partner.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-34
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 6.3 Distributions; Distributions to Record Holders.
(a) The General Partner may adopt a cash distribution policy, which it may change from time to time without
amendment to this Agreement. Subject to Section 6.4, distributions, if any, will be made as and when
declared by the General Partner and will be made, by the Partnership to the Unitholders, Pro Rata.
(b) Notwithstanding Section 6.3(a), in the event of the dissolution and liquidation of the Partnership, all
Partnership assets shall be applied and distributed solely in accordance with, and subject to the terms and
conditions of, Section 12.4.
(c) Each distribution in respect of a Partnership Interest shall be paid by the Partnership, directly or through
any Transfer Agent or through any other Person or agent, only to the Record Holder of such Partnership
Interest as of the Record Date set for such distribution. Such payment shall constitute full payment and
satisfaction of the Partnership’s liability in respect of such payment, regardless of any claim of any Person
who may have an interest in such payment by reason of an assignment or otherwise.
(d) All distributions made by the Partnership, under this Agreement or otherwise, shall be subject to Sections
17-607 and 17-804 of the Delaware Act.
Section 6.4 Special Provisions Relating to the PIK Common Units.
(a) In lieu of any cash distributions pursuant to Section 6.3, any distributions in respect of a PIK Common
Unit held by a Unitholder in respect of any Quarter during the PIK Period shall be made in a number of PIK
Common Units totaling: (x) the cash or cash equivalents that would otherwise be distributed in respect of
such PIK Common Unit over (y) the volume-weighted average price on the National Securities Exchange on
which the Common Units are traded for the 10 days immediately preceding the ex-dividend date for the
associated distribution in respect of the Common Units during such Quarter. Distributions of PIK Common
Units will be treated for all purposes of this Agreement as if the cash or cash equivalent of such PIK Common
Unit had been distributed to the holder of such PIK Common Units and thereafter recontributed by such
holder to the Partnership.
(b) All of the Outstanding PIK Common Units shall automatically convert into Common Units on a one-for-one
basis on the first Business Day following the end of the PIK Period.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, all the then Outstanding PIK Common Units may
convert into Common Units on a one-for-one basis as set forth in, and pursuant to the terms, of Section 11.4.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-35
(d) Except as otherwise provided in this Article VI, the holder of a PIK Common Unit shall have all of the
rights and obligations of a Unitholder holding Common Units. Immediately upon the conversion of PIK
Common Units into Common Units pursuant to Section 6.4, a Unitholder holding PIK Common Units shall
possess all of the rights and obligations of a Unitholder holding Common Units hereunder with respect to
such converted PIK Common Units; provided, however, that such converted PIK Common Units shall remain
subject to the provisions of Sections 6.1(b)(x).
(e) A Unitholder holding a PIK Common Unit that has converted into a Common Unit pursuant to
Section 6.4(b), shall not be issued a Common Unit Certificate pursuant to Section 4.1, if the Common Units
are evidenced by Certificates, and shall not be permitted to transfer such Common Unit to a Person that is not
an Affiliate of the holder, until such time as the General Partner determines, based on advice of counsel, that
each such Common Unit should have, as a substantive matter, like intrinsic economic and federal income tax
characteristics, in all material respects, to the intrinsic economic and federal income tax characteristics of a
Common Unit sold in the Initial Offering. In connection with the condition imposed by this Section 6.4(e), the
General Partner may take whatever steps are required to provide economic uniformity to such Common Units
in preparation for a transfer of such Common Units; provided, however, that no such steps may be taken that
would have a material adverse effect on the Unitholders holding Common Units.
MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF BUSINESS
Section 7.1 Management.
(a) The General Partner shall conduct, direct and manage all activities of the Partnership. Except as otherwise
expressly provided in this Agreement, but without limitation on the ability of the General Partner to delegate
its rights and power to other Persons, all management powers over the business and affairs of the
Partnership shall be exclusively vested in the General Partner, and no other Partner shall have any
management power over the business and affairs of the Partnership. In addition to the powers now or
hereafter granted to a general partner of a limited partnership under applicable law or that are granted to the
General Partner under any other provision of this Agreement, the General Partner, subject to Section 7.4, shall
have full power and authority to do all things and on such terms as it determines to be necessary or
appropriate to conduct the business of the Partnership, to exercise all powers set forth in Section 2.5 and to
effectuate the purposes set forth in Section 2.4, including the following:
(i) the making of any expenditures, the lending or borrowing of money, the assumption or guarantee of, or
other contracting for, indebtedness and other liabilities, the issuance of evidences of indebtedness, including
indebtedness that is convertible or exchangeable into Partnership Interests, and the incurring of any other
obligations;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-36
(ii) the making of tax, regulatory and other filings, or rendering of periodic or other reports to governmental or
other agencies having jurisdiction over the business or assets of the Partnership;
(iii) the acquisition, disposition, mortgage, pledge, encumbrance, hypothecation or exchange of any or all of
the assets of the Partnership or the merger or other combination of the Partnership with or into another
Person (the matters described in this clause (iii) being subject, however, to any prior approval that may be
required by Section 7.4 or Article XIV);
(iv) the use of the assets of the Partnership (including cash on hand) for any purpose consistent with the
terms of this Agreement, including the financing of the conduct of the operations of the Partnership Group;
the lending of funds to other Persons (including other Group Members); the repayment or guarantee of
obligations of any Group Member; and the making of capital contributions to any Group Member;
(v) the negotiation, execution and performance of any contracts, conveyances or other instruments (including
instruments that limit the liability of the Partnership under contractual arrangements to all or particular assets
of the Partnership, with the other party to the contract to have no recourse against the General Partner or its
assets other than its interest in the Partnership, even if the same results in the terms of the transaction being
less favorable to the Partnership than would otherwise be the case);
(vi) the distribution of Partnership cash or cash equivalents or PIK Common Units, as the case may be;
(vii) the selection, employment, retention and dismissal of employees (including employees having titles such
as “president,” “vice president,” “secretary” and “treasurer”) and agents, outside attorneys, accountants,
consultants and contractors of the General Partner or the Partnership Group and the determination of their
compensation and other terms of employment or hiring;
(viii) the maintenance of insurance for the benefit of the Partnership Group, the Partners and Indemnitees;
(ix) the formation of, or acquisition of an interest in, and the contribution of property and the making of loans
to, any further limited or general partnerships, joint ventures, corporations, limited liability companies or
other Persons (including the acquisition of interests in, and the contributions of property to, any Group
Member from time to time);
(x) the control of any matters affecting the rights and obligations of the Partnership, including the bringing
and defending of actions at law or in equity and otherwise engaging in the conduct of litigation, arbitration or
mediation and the incurring of legal expense and the settlement of claims and litigation;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-37
(xi) the indemnification of any Person against liabilities and contingencies to the extent permitted by law;
(xii) the entering into of listing agreements with any National Securities Exchange and the delisting of some
or all of the Limited Partner Interests from, or requesting that trading be suspended on, any such exchange;
(xiii) the purchase, sale or other acquisition or disposition of Partnership Interests, or the issuance of
Derivative Instruments;
(xiv) the undertaking of any action in connection with the Partnership’s participation in the management of
any Group Member; and
(xv) the entering into of agreements with any of its Affiliates to render services to a Group Member or to itself
in the discharge of its duties as General Partner of the Partnership.
(b) Each of the Partners and each other Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest and each
other Person who is otherwise bound by this Agreement hereby (i) approves, ratifies and confirms the
execution, delivery and performance by the parties thereto of this Agreement, the Underwriting Agreement, the
Contribution Agreement and the other agreements described in or filed as exhibits to the Registration
Statement that are related to the transactions contemplated by the Registration Statement (in the case of each
agreement other than this Agreement, without giving effect to any amendments, supplements or restatements
after the date hereof); (ii) agrees that the General Partner (on its own behalf or on behalf of the Partnership) is
authorized to execute, deliver and perform the agreements referred to in clause (i) of this sentence and the
other agreements, acts, transactions and matters described in or contemplated by the Registration Statement
on behalf of the Partnership without any further act, approval or vote of the Partners, the other Persons who
acquire a Partnership Interest and the Persons who are otherwise bound by this Agreement; and (iii) agrees
that the execution, delivery or performance by the General Partner, any Group Member or any Affiliate of any
of them of this Agreement or any agreement authorized or permitted under this Agreement (including the
exercise by the General Partner or any Affiliate of the General Partner of the rights accorded pursuant to
Article XV) shall not constitute a breach by the General Partner of any fiduciary or other duty existing at law,
in equity or otherwise that the General Partner may owe the Partnership, the Limited Partners, the other
Persons who acquire an interest in a Partnership Interest or the Persons who are otherwise bound by this
Agreement.
Section 7.2 Replacement of Fiduciary Duties.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, to the extent that any provision of this Agreement
purports or is interpreted (a) to have the effect of replacing, restricting or eliminating the duties that might
otherwise, as a result of Delaware or other applicable law, be owed by the General Partner or any other
Indemnitee to the Partnership, the Limited Partners, any other Person who acquires an interest in a
Partnership Interest or any other Person who is
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-38
bound by this Agreement, or (b) to constitute a waiver or consent by the Partnership, the Limited Partners,
any other Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest or any other Person who is bound by this
Agreement to any such replacement or restriction, such provision shall be deemed to have been approved by
the Partnership, all the Partners, each other Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest and
each other Person who is bound by this Agreement.
Section 7.3 Certificate of Limited Partnership. The General Partner has caused the Certificate of Limited
Partnership to be filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware as required by the Delaware Act.
The General Partner shall use all reasonable efforts to cause to be filed such other certificates or documents
that the General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate for the formation, continuation,
qualification and operation of a limited partnership (or a partnership in which the limited partners have
limited liability) in the State of Delaware or any other state in which the Partnership may elect to do business
or own property. To the extent the General Partner determines such action to be necessary or appropriate, the
General Partner shall file amendments to and restatements of the Certificate of Limited Partnership and do all
things to maintain the Partnership as a limited partnership (or a partnership or other entity in which the
limited partners have limited liability) under the laws of the State of Delaware or of any other state in which
the Partnership may elect to do business or own property. Subject to the terms of Section 3.4(a), the General
Partner shall not be required, before or after filing, to deliver or mail a copy of the Certificate of Limited
Partnership, any qualification document or any amendment thereto to any Partner.
Section 7.4 Restrictions on the General Partner’s Authority. Except as provided in Article XII and Article XIV,
the General Partner may not sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the assets of the
Partnership Group, taken as a whole, in a single transaction or a series of related transactions without the
approval of a Unit Majority; provided, however, that this provision shall not preclude or limit the General
Partner’s ability to mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or grant a security interest in all or substantially all of the
assets of the Partnership Group and shall not apply to any forced sale of any or all of the assets of the
Partnership Group pursuant to the foreclosure of, or other realization upon, any such encumbrance.
Section 7.5 Reimbursement of the General Partner.
(a) The General Partner shall be reimbursed on a monthly basis, or such other basis as the General Partner
may determine, for (i) all direct and indirect expenses it incurs or payments it makes on behalf of the
Partnership Group (including salary, bonus, incentive compensation and other amounts paid to any Person
(including Affiliates of the General Partner), to perform services for the Partnership Group or for the General
Partner in the discharge of its duties to the Partnership Group), and (ii) all other expenses reasonably
allocable to the Partnership Group or otherwise incurred by the General Partner in connection with operating
the Partnership Group’s business (including expenses allocated to the General Partner by its Affiliates). The
General Partner shall determine the expenses that are allocable to
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-39
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
any member of the Partnership Group. Reimbursements pursuant to this Section 7.5 shall be in addition to
any reimbursement to the General Partner as a result of indemnification pursuant to Section 7.7. The General
Partner and its Affiliates may charge any member of the Partnership Group a management fee to the extent
necessary to allow the Partnership Group to reduce the amount of any state franchise or income tax or any tax
based upon revenues or gross margin of any member of the Partnership Group if the tax benefit produced by
the payment for such management fee exceeds the amount of such fee.
(b) The General Partner, without the approval of the Limited Partners (who shall have no right to vote in
respect thereof), may propose and adopt on behalf of the Partnership benefit plans, programs and practices
(including plans, programs and practices involving the issuance of Partnership Interests), or cause the
Partnership to issue Partnership Interests in connection with, or pursuant to, any benefit plan, program or
practice maintained or sponsored by the General Partner or any of its Affiliates, in each case for the benefit of
employees, officers, consultants and directors of the General Partner or its Affiliates, in respect of services
performed, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of the Partnership Group. The Partnership agrees to issue and
sell to the General Partner or any of its Affiliates any Partnership Interests that the General Partner or such
Affiliates are obligated to provide to any employees, officers, consultants and directors pursuant to any such
benefit plans, programs or practices. Expenses incurred by the General Partner in connection with any such
plans, programs and practices (including the net cost to the General Partner or such Affiliates of Partnership
Interests purchased by the General Partner or such Affiliates, from the Partnership or otherwise, to fulfill
awards under such plans, programs and practices) shall be reimbursed in accordance with Section 7.5(a). Any
and all obligations of the General Partner under any benefit plans, programs or practices adopted by the
General Partner as permitted by this Section 7.5(b) shall constitute obligations of the General Partner
hereunder and shall be assumed by any successor General Partner approved pursuant to Section 11.1 or
Section 11.2 or the transferee of or successor to all of the General Partner’s General Partner Interest pursuant
to Section 4.6.
Section 7.6 Outside Activities.
(a) The General Partner, for so long as it is the General Partner of the Partnership shall not engage in any
business or activity or incur any debts or liabilities except in connection with or incidental to (A) its
performance as general partner or managing member, if any, of one or more Group Members or as described
in or contemplated by the Registration Statement, or (B) the acquiring, owning or disposing of debt securities
or equity interests in any Group Member.
(b) Each Unrestricted Person (other than the General Partner) shall have the right to engage in businesses of
every type and description and other activities for profit and to engage in and possess an interest in other
business ventures of any and every type or description, whether in businesses engaged in or anticipated to be
engaged in by any Group Member, independently or with others, including business interests and activities in
direct competition with the business
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-40
and activities of any Group Member. No such business interest or activity shall constitute a breach of this
Agreement, any fiduciary or other duty existing at law, in equity or otherwise, or obligation of any type
whatsoever to the Partnership or other Group Member, any Partner, any Person who acquires an interest in a
Partnership Interest or any Person who is otherwise bound by this Agreement; provided such Unrestricted
Person does not engage in such business or activity as a result of or using confidential or proprietary
information provided by or on behalf of the Partnership to such Unrestricted Person.
(c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, the doctrine of corporate opportunity, or any
analogous doctrine, shall not apply to any Unrestricted Person (including the General Partner). No
Unrestricted Person (including the General Partner) who acquires knowledge of a potential transaction,
agreement, arrangement or other matter that may be an opportunity for the Partnership, shall have any duty to
communicate or offer such opportunity to any Group Member, and such Unrestricted Person (other than the
General Partner which shall be subject to Section 7.6(a)) shall not be liable to the Partnership or any other
Group Member, any Partner, any person who acquires a Partnership Interest or any other Person who is
otherwise bound by this Agreement for breach of any fiduciary or other duty existing at law, in equity or
otherwise by reason of the fact that such Unrestricted Person (including the General Partner) pursues or
acquires such opportunity for itself, directs such opportunity to another Person or does not communicate
such opportunity or information to any Group Member.
(d) The General Partner and each of its Affiliates may acquire Units or other Partnership Interests in addition
to those acquired on the Closing Date and, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement, shall be
entitled to exercise, at their option, all rights relating to all Units or other Partnership Interests acquired by
them. The term “Affiliates” when used in this Section 7.6(d) with respect to the General Partner shall not
include any Group Member.
Section 7.7 Indemnification.
(a) To the fullest extent permitted by law, all Indemnitees shall be indemnified and held harmless by the
Partnership from and against any and all losses, claims, damages, liabilities, joint or several, expenses
(including legal fees and expenses), judgments, fines, penalties, interest, settlements or other amounts
arising from any and all threatened, pending or completed claims, demands, actions, suits or proceedings,
whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, and whether formal or informal and including appeals,
in which any Indemnitee may be involved, or is threatened to be involved, as a party or otherwise, by reason
of its status as an Indemnitee and acting (or refraining to act) in such capacity; provided, that the Indemnitee
shall not be indemnified and held harmless if there has been a final and non-appealable judgment entered by
a court of competent jurisdiction determining that, in respect of the matter for which the Indemnitee is
seeking indemnification pursuant to this Agreement, the Indemnitee acted in bad faith or, in the case of a
criminal matter, acted with knowledge that the Indemnitee’s conduct was unlawful. Any indemnification
pursuant to this Section 7.7 shall be made only out of the assets of the Partnership, it being agreed that the
General Partner shall not be personally liable for such indemnification and shall have no obligation to
contribute or loan any monies or property to the Partnership to enable it to effectuate such indemnification.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-41
(b) To the fullest extent permitted by law, expenses (including legal fees and expenses) incurred by an
Indemnitee who is indemnified pursuant to Section 7.7(a) in appearing at, participating in or defending any
claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding shall, from time to time, be advanced by the Partnership prior to a
final and non-appealable judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction determining that, in respect of
the matter for which the Indemnitee is seeking indemnification pursuant to this Section 7.7, the Indemnitee is
not entitled to be indemnified upon receipt by the Partnership of any undertaking by or on behalf of the
Indemnitee to repay such amount if it shall be ultimately determined that the Indemnitee is not entitled to be
indemnified as authorized by this Section 7.7.
(c) The indemnification provided by this Section 7.7 shall be in addition to any other rights to which an
Indemnitee may be entitled under any agreement, pursuant to any vote of the holders of Outstanding Limited
Partner Interests, as a matter of law, in equity or otherwise, both as to actions in the Indemnitee’s capacity as
an Indemnitee and as to actions in any other capacity, and shall continue as to an Indemnitee who has ceased
to serve in such capacity and shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, successors, assigns and administrators of
the Indemnitee.
(d) The Partnership may purchase and maintain (or reimburse the General Partner or its Affiliates for the cost
of) insurance, on behalf of an Indemnitee and such other Persons as the General Partner shall determine,
against any liability that may be asserted against, or expense that may be incurred by, such Indemnitee in
connection with the Partnership’s activities or such Indemnitee’s activities on behalf of the Partnership,
regardless of whether the Partnership would have the power to indemnify such Indemnitee against such
liability under the provisions of this Agreement.
(e) For purposes of this Section 7.7, the Partnership shall be deemed to have requested an Indemnitee to
serve as fiduciary of an employee benefit plan whenever the performance by it of its duties to the Partnership
also imposes duties on, or otherwise involves services by, it to the plan or participants or beneficiaries of the
plan; excise taxes assessed on an Indemnitee with respect to an employee benefit plan pursuant to applicable
law shall constitute “fines” within the meaning of Section 7.7(a); and action taken or omitted by an Indemnitee
with respect to any employee benefit plan in the performance of its duties for a purpose reasonably believed
by it to be in the best interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the plan shall be deemed to be for a
purpose that is in the best interests of the Partnership.
(f) In no event may an Indemnitee subject the Limited Partners to personal liability by reason of the
indemnification provisions set forth in this Agreement.
(g) An Indemnitee shall not be denied indemnification in whole or in part under this Section 7.7 because the
Indemnitee had an interest in the transaction with respect to which the indemnification applies if the
transaction was otherwise permitted by the terms of this Agreement.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-42
(h) The provisions of this Section 7.7 are for the benefit of the Indemnitees and their heirs, successors,
assigns, executors and administrators and shall not be deemed to create any rights for the benefit of any
other Persons.
(i) No amendment, modification or repeal of this Section 7.7 or any provision hereof shall in any manner
terminate, reduce or impair the right of any past, present or future Indemnitee to be indemnified by the
Partnership, nor the obligations of the Partnership to indemnify any such Indemnitee under and in
accordance with the provisions of this Section 7.7 as in effect immediately prior to such amendment,
modification or repeal with respect to claims arising from or relating to matters occurring, in whole or in part,
prior to such amendment, modification or repeal, regardless of when such claims may arise or be asserted.
Section 7.8 Liability of Indemnitees.
(a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Agreement, no Indemnitee shall be liable for
monetary damages to the Partnership, the Partners or any other Persons who have acquired interests in a
Partnership Interest or is otherwise bound by this Agreement, for losses sustained or liabilities incurred as a
result of any act or omission of an Indemnitee unless there has been a final and non-appealable judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction determining that, in respect of the matter in question, the
Indemnitee acted in bad faith or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with knowledge that the Indemnitee’s
conduct was unlawful. The Partners, any other Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest or
any other Person who is bound by this Agreement, each on their own behalf and on behalf of the Partnership,
waives any and all rights to claim punitive damages or damages based upon the federal, state or local income
taxes paid or payable by any such Partner or other Person.
(b) The General Partner may exercise any of the powers granted to it by this Agreement and perform any of the
duties imposed upon it hereunder either directly or by or through its agents, and the General Partner shall not
be responsible for any misconduct or negligence on the part of any such agent appointed by the General
Partner in good faith.
(c) To the extent that, at law or in equity, an Indemnitee has duties (including fiduciary duties) and liabilities
relating thereto to the Partnership, the Partners, any Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest
or is otherwise bound by this Agreement, the General Partner and any other Indemnitee acting in connection
with the Partnership’s business or affairs shall not be liable, to the fullest extent permitted by law, to the
Partnership, the Partners, any Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest or is otherwise bound
by this Agreement, for its reliance on the provisions of this Agreement.
(d) Any amendment, modification or repeal of this Section 7.8 or any provision hereof shall be prospective
only and shall not in any way affect the limitations on the liability of the Indemnitees under this Section 7.8 as
in effect immediately prior to such amendment, modification or repeal with respect to claims arising from or
relating to matters occurring, in whole or in part, prior to such amendment, modification or repeal, regardless
of when such claims may arise or be asserted.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-43
Section 7.9 Standards of Conduct and Modification of Duties.
(a) Whenever the General Partner, the Board of Directors or any committee of the Board of Directors (including
the Conflicts Committee), makes a determination or takes or declines to take any other action, or any Affiliates
of the General Partner cause the General Partner to do so, in its capacity as the general partner of the
Partnership as opposed to in its individual capacity, whether under this Agreement, any Group Member
Agreement or any other agreement contemplated hereby or otherwise, then, unless another express standard
is provided for in this Agreement, the General Partner, the Board of Directors, such committee or such
Affiliates causing the General Partner to do so, shall make such determination or take or decline to take such
other action in good faith and shall not be subject to any higher standard contemplated hereby or under the
Delaware Act or any other law, rule or regulation or at equity. A determination, other action or failure to act by
the General Partner, the Board of Directors of the General Partner or any committee thereof (including the
Conflicts Committee) will be deemed to be in good faith unless the General Partner, the Board of Directors of
the General Partner or any committee thereof (including the Conflicts Committee) believed such
determination, other action or failure to act was adverse to the interests of the Partnership. In any proceeding
brought by the Partnership, any Limited Partner, or any Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership
Interest or any other Person who is bound by this Agreement challenging such action, determination or
failure to act, the Person bringing or prosecuting such proceeding shall have the burden of proving that such
determination, action or failure to act was not in good faith.
(b) Whenever the General Partner makes a determination or takes or declines to take any other action, or any
of its Affiliates causes it to do so, in its individual capacity as opposed to in its capacity as the general partner
of the Partnership, whether under this Agreement or any other agreement contemplated hereby or otherwise,
then the General Partner, or such Affiliates causing it to do so, are entitled, to the fullest extent permitted by
law, to make such determination or to take or decline to take such other action free of any fiduciary duty or
other duty existing at law, in equity or otherwise or obligation whatsoever to the Partnership, any Limited
Partner, any other Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest or any other Person who
otherwise is bound by this Agreement, and the General Partner, or such Affiliates causing it to do so, shall
not, to the fullest extent permitted by law, be required to act in good faith or pursuant to any other standard
imposed by this Agreement or any other agreement contemplated hereby or under the Delaware Act or any
other law, rule or regulation or at equity. By way of illustration and not of limitation, whenever the phrases,
“at the option of the General Partner,” “in its sole discretion” or some variation of those phrases, are used in
this Agreement, it indicates that the General Partner is acting in its individual capacity. For the avoidance of
doubt, whenever the General Partner votes or transfers its Partnership Interests, or refrains from voting or
transferring its Partnership Interests, it shall be acting in its individual capacity.
(c) Whenever a potential conflict of interest exists or arises between the General Partner or any Affiliates, on
the one hand, and the Partnership, any Group Member or any Partner, any other Person who acquires an
interest in a Partnership Interest or any other Person
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-44
who is bound by this Agreement on the other hand, the General Partner may in its discretion submit any
resolution or course of action with respect to such conflict of interest for (i) Special Approval or (ii) approval
by the vote of a majority of the Common Units (excluding Common Units owned by the General Partner and
its Affiliates). If such course of action or resolution receives Special Approval or approval of a majority of the
Common Units (excluding Common Units owned by the General Partner and its Affiliates), then such course
of action or resolution shall be conclusively deemed approved by the Partnership, all the Partners, each
Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest and each other Person who is bound by this
Agreement, and shall not constitute a breach of this Agreement, of any Group Member Agreement, of any
agreement contemplated herein or therein, or of any fiduciary or other duty existing at law, in equity or
otherwise or obligation of any type whatsoever.
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, the General Partner and its Affiliates or any
other Indemnitee shall have no duty or obligation, express or implied, to (i) sell or otherwise dispose of any
asset of the Partnership Group other than in the ordinary course of business or (ii) permit any Group Member
to use any facilities or assets of the General Partner and its Affiliates, except as may be provided in contracts
entered into from time to time specifically dealing with such use. Any determination by the General Partner or
any of its Affiliates to enter into such contracts shall be in its sole discretion.
(e) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, the General Partner may, in its sole discretion,
cause any Group Member to take any and all actions (including raising necessary funds through borrowings
or the issuance of additional Partnership Interests) necessary to redeem, repurchase, defease or retire the
Senior Secured Notes such that the PIK Period is terminated, and any such action taken by the General
Partner shall not constitute a breach of this Agreement, of any Group Member Agreement, of any agreement
contemplated herein or therein, or of any fiduciary or other duty existing at law, in equity or otherwise or
obligation of any type whatsoever.
(f) The Partners, and each Person who acquires an interest in a Partnership Interest or is otherwise bound by
this Agreement, hereby authorize the General Partner, on behalf of the Partnership as a partner or member of
a Group Member, to approve actions by the general partner or managing member of such Group Member
similar to those actions permitted to be taken by the General Partner pursuant to this Section 7.9.
Section 7.10 Other Matters Concerning the General Partner and Indemnitees.
(a) The General Partner and any other Indemnitee may rely upon, and shall be protected in acting or refraining
from acting upon, any resolution, certificate, statement, instrument, opinion, report, notice, request, consent,
order, bond, debenture or other paper or document believed by it to be genuine and to have been signed or
presented by the proper party or parties.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-45
(b) The General Partner and any other Indemnitee may consult with legal counsel, accountants, appraisers,
management consultants, investment bankers and other consultants and advisers selected by it, and any act
taken or omitted in reliance upon the advice or opinion (including an Opinion of Counsel) of such Persons as
to matters that the General Partner reasonably believes to be within such Person’s professional or expert
competence shall be conclusively presumed to have been done or omitted in good faith and in accordance
with such advice or opinion.
(c) The General Partner shall have the right, in respect of any of its powers or obligations hereunder, to act
through any of its duly authorized officers, a duly appointed attorney or attorneys-in-fact or the duly
authorized officers of any Group Member.
Section 7.11 Purchase or Sale of Partnership Interests. The General Partner may cause the Partnership to
purchase or otherwise acquire Partnership Interests. As long as Partnership Interests are held by any Group
Member, such Partnership Interests shall not be considered Outstanding for any purpose, except as otherwise
provided herein. The General Partner or any Affiliate of the General Partner may also purchase or otherwise
acquire and sell or otherwise dispose of Partnership Interests for its own account, subject to the provisions of
Articles IV and X; provided that, the purchase by any Group Member of PIK Common Units during the PIK
Period shall require Special Approval.
Section 7.12 Reliance by Third Parties. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, any
Person dealing with the Partnership shall be entitled to assume that the General Partner and any officer of the
General Partner authorized by the General Partner to act on behalf of and in the name of the Partnership has
full power and authority to encumber, sell or otherwise use in any manner any and all assets of the
Partnership and to enter into any authorized contracts on behalf of the Partnership, and such Person shall be
entitled to deal with the General Partner or any such officer as if it were the Partnership’s sole party in
interest, both legally and beneficially. Each Limited Partner hereby waives, to the fullest extent permitted by
law, any and all defenses or other remedies that may be available against such Person to contest, negate or
disaffirm any action of the General Partner or any such officer in connection with any such dealing. In no
event shall any Person dealing with the General Partner or any such officer or its representatives be obligated
to ascertain that the terms of this Agreement have been complied with or to inquire into the necessity or
expedience of any act or action of the General Partner or any such officer or its representatives. Each and
every certificate, document or other instrument executed on behalf of the Partnership by the General Partner
or its representatives shall be conclusive evidence in favor of any and every Person relying thereon or
claiming thereunder that (a) at the time of the execution and delivery of such certificate, document or
instrument, this Agreement was in full force and effect, (b) the Person executing and delivering such
certificate, document or instrument was duly authorized and empowered to do so for and on behalf of the
Partnership and (c) such certificate, document or instrument was duly executed and delivered in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this Agreement and is binding upon the Partnership.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-46
ARTICLE VIII
BOOKS, RECORDS, ACCOUNTING AND REPORTS
Section 8.1 Records and Accounting. The General Partner shall keep or cause to be kept at the principal office
of the Partnership appropriate books and records with respect to the Partnership’s business, including all
books and records necessary to provide to the Limited Partners any information required to be provided
pursuant to Section 3.4(a). Any books and records maintained by or on behalf of the Partnership in the regular
course of its business, including the record of the Record Holders of Units or other Partnership Interests,
books of account and records of Partnership proceedings, may be kept on, or be in the form of, computer
disks, hard drives, magnetic tape, photographs, micrographics or any other information storage device;
provided, that the books and records so maintained are convertible into clearly legible written form within a
reasonable period of time. The books of the Partnership shall be maintained, for financial reporting purposes,
on an accrual basis in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Section 8.2 Fiscal Year. The fiscal year of the Partnership shall be a fiscal year ending December 31.
Section 8.3 Reports.
(a) As soon as practicable, but in no event later than 105 days after the close of each fiscal year of the
Partnership, the General Partner shall cause to be mailed or made available, by any reasonable means, to
each Record Holder of a Unit or other Partnership Interest as of a date selected by the General Partner, an
annual report containing financial statements of the Partnership for such fiscal year of the Partnership,
presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, including a balance sheet and statements of operations, Partnership
equity and cash flows, such statements to be audited by a firm of independent public accountants selected by
the General Partner and such other information as may be required by applicable law, regulation or rule of
any National Securities Exchange on which the Units are listed or admitted to trading, or as the General
Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate.
(b) As soon as practicable, but in no event later than 50 days after the close of each Quarter except the last
Quarter of each fiscal year, the General Partner shall cause to be mailed or made available, by any reasonable
means to each Record Holder of a Unit or other Partnership Interest, as of a date selected by the General
Partner, a report containing unaudited financial statements of the Partnership and such other information as
may be required by applicable law, regulation or rule of any National Securities Exchange on which the Units
are listed or admitted to trading, or as the General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate.
(c) The General Partner shall be deemed to have made a report available to each Record Holder as required by
this Section 8.3 if it has either (i) filed such report with the Commission via its Electronic Data Gathering,
Analysis and Retrieval system and such report is publicly available on such system or (ii) made such report
available on any publicly available website maintained by the Partnership.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-47
ARTICLE IX
TAX MATTERS
Section 9.1 Tax Returns and Information. The Partnership shall timely file all returns of the Partnership that
are required for federal, state and local income tax purposes on the basis of the accrual method and the
taxable period or years that it is required by law to adopt, from time to time, as determined by the General
Partner. In the event the Partnership is required to use a taxable period other than a year ending on
December 31, the General Partner shall use reasonable efforts to change the taxable period of the Partnership
to a year ending on December 31. The tax information reasonably required by Record Holders for federal, state
and local income tax reporting purposes with respect to a taxable period shall be furnished to them within 90
days of the close of the calendar year in which the Partnership’s taxable period ends. The classification,
realization and recognition of income, gain, losses and deductions and other items shall be on the accrual
method of accounting for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Section 9.2 Tax Elections.
(a) The Partnership shall make the election under Section 754 of the Code in accordance with applicable
regulations thereunder, subject to the reservation of the right to seek to revoke any such election upon the
General Partner’s determination that such revocation is in the best interests of the Limited Partners.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein contained, for the purposes of computing the adjustments under
Section 743(b) of the Code, the General Partner shall be authorized (but not required) to adopt a convention
whereby the price paid by a transferee of a Limited Partner Interest will be deemed to be the lowest quoted
closing price of the Limited Partner Interests on any National Securities Exchange on which such Limited
Partner Interests are listed or admitted to trading during the calendar month in which such transfer is deemed
to occur pursuant to Section 6.2(f) without regard to the actual price paid by such transferee.
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, the General Partner shall determine whether the Partnership should
make any other elections permitted by the Code.
Section 9.3 Tax Controversies. Subject to the provisions hereof, the General Partner is designated as the Tax
Matters Partner (as defined in the Code) and is authorized and required to represent the Partnership (at the
Partnership’s expense) in connection with all examinations of the Partnership’s affairs by tax authorities,
including resulting administrative and judicial proceedings, and to expend Partnership funds for professional
services and costs associated therewith. Each Partner agrees to cooperate with the General Partner and to do
or refrain from doing any or all things reasonably required by the General Partner to conduct such
proceedings.
Section 9.4 Withholding; Tax Payments.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-48
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(a) The General Partner may treat taxes paid by the Partnership on behalf of, all or less than all of the
Partners, either as a distribution of cash to such Partners or as a general expense of the Partnership, as
determined appropriate under the circumstances by the General Partner.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, the General Partner is authorized to take any
action that may be required to cause the Partnership and other Group Members to comply with any
withholding requirements established under the Code or any other federal, state or local law including
pursuant to Sections 1441, 1442, 1445 and 1446 of the Code. To the extent that the Partnership is required or
elects to withhold and pay over to any taxing authority any amount resulting from the allocation or
distribution of income or from a distribution to any Partner (including by reason of Section 1446 of the Code),
the General Partner may treat the amount withheld as a distribution of cash pursuant to Section 6.3 in the
amount of such withholding from such Partner.
ARTICLE X
ADMISSION OF PARTNERS
Section 10.1 Admission of Limited Partners.
(a) A Person shall be admitted as a Limited Partner and shall become bound by the terms of this Agreement if
such Person purchases or otherwise lawfully acquires any Limited Partner Interest and becomes the Record
Holder of such Limited Partner Interests in accordance with the provisions of Article IV or Article V hereof.
Upon the issuance by the Partnership of Common Units and PIK Common Units to the Organizational Limited
Partner and the Underwriters as described in Article V in connection with the Initial Offering, such parties will
be automatically admitted to the Partnership as Initial Limited Partners in respect of the Common Units or PIK
Common Units issued to them.
(b) By acceptance of the transfer of any Limited Partner Interests in accordance with Article IV or the
acceptance of any Limited Partner Interests issued pursuant to Article V or pursuant to a merger or
consolidation or conversion pursuant to Article XIV, and except as provided in Section 4.8, each transferee of,
or other such Person acquiring, a Limited Partner Interest (including any nominee holder or an agent or
representative acquiring such Limited Partner Interests for the account of another Person) (i) shall be admitted
to the Partnership as a Limited Partner with respect to the Limited Partner Interests so transferred or issued to
such Person when any such transfer or admission is reflected in the books and records of the Partnership
and such Limited Partner becomes the Record Holder of the Limited Partner Interests so transferred, (ii) shall
become bound, and shall be deemed to have agreed to be bound, by the terms of this Agreement,
(iii) represents that the transferee or other recipient has the capacity, power and authority to enter into this
Agreement and (iv) makes the consents, acknowledgements and waivers contained in this Agreement, all with
or without execution of this Agreement by such Person. The transfer of any Limited Partner Interests and the
admission
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-49
of any new Limited Partner shall not constitute an amendment to this Agreement. A Person may become a
Limited Partner or Record Holder of a Limited Partner Interest without the consent or approval of any of the
Partners. A Person may not become a Limited Partner without acquiring a Limited Partner Interest and until
such Person is reflected in the books and records of the Partnership as the Record Holder of such Limited
Partner Interest. The rights and obligations of a Person who is an Ineligible Holder shall be determined in
accordance with Section 4.8.
(c) The name and mailing address of each Record Holder shall be listed on the books and records of the
Partnership maintained for such purpose by the Partnership or the Transfer Agent. The General Partner shall
update the books and records of the Partnership from time to time as necessary to reflect accurately the
information therein (or shall cause the Transfer Agent to do so, as applicable). A Limited Partner Interest may
be represented by a Certificate, as provided in Section 4.1.
(d) Any transfer of a Limited Partner Interest shall not entitle the transferee to share in the profits and losses,
to receive distributions, to receive allocations of income, gain, loss, deduction or credit or any similar item or
to any other rights to which the transferor was entitled until the transferee becomes a Limited Partner
pursuant to Section 10.1(a) and (b)
Section 10.2 Admission of Successor General Partner. A successor General Partner approved pursuant to
Section 11.1 or Section 11.2 or the transferee of or successor to all of the General Partner Interest pursuant to
Section 4.6 who is proposed to be admitted as a successor General Partner shall be admitted to the
Partnership as the General Partner, effective immediately prior to the withdrawal or removal of the
predecessor or transferring General Partner, pursuant to Section 11.1 or 11.2 or the transfer of the General
Partner Interest pursuant to Section 4.6, provided, however, that no such successor shall be admitted to the
Partnership until compliance with the terms of Section 4.6 has occurred and such successor has executed
and delivered such other documents or instruments as may be required to effect such admission. Any such
successor shall, subject to the terms hereof, carry on the business of the members of the Partnership Group
without dissolution.
Section 10.3 Amendment of Agreement and Certificate of Limited Partnership. To effect the admission to the
Partnership of any Partner, the General Partner shall take all steps necessary or appropriate under the
Delaware Act to amend the records of the Partnership to reflect such admission and, if necessary, to prepare
as soon as practicable an amendment to this Agreement and, if required by law, the General Partner shall
prepare and file an amendment to the Certificate of Limited Partnership.
ARTICLE XI
WITHDRAWAL OR REMOVAL OF PARTNERS
Section 11.1 Withdrawal of the General Partner.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-50
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(a) The General Partner shall be deemed to have withdrawn from the Partnership upon the occurrence of any
one of the following events (each such event herein referred to as an “Event of Withdrawal”);
(i) The General Partner voluntarily withdraws from the Partnership by giving written notice to the other
Partners;
(ii) The General Partner transfers all of its General Partner Interest pursuant to Section 4.6;
(iii) The General Partner is removed pursuant to Section 11.2;
(iv) The General Partner (A) makes a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; (B) files a voluntary
bankruptcy petition for relief under Chapter 7 of the United States Bankruptcy Code; (C) files a petition or
answer seeking for itself a liquidation, dissolution or similar relief (but not a reorganization) under any law;
(D) files an answer or other pleading admitting or failing to contest the material allegations of a petition filed
against the General Partner in a proceeding of the type described in clauses (A)-(C) of this Section 11.1(a)(iv);
or (E) seeks, consents to or acquiesces in the appointment of a trustee (but not a debtor-in-possession),
receiver or liquidator of the General Partner or of all or any substantial part of its properties;
(v) A final and non-appealable order of relief under Chapter 7 of the United States Bankruptcy Code is entered
by a court with appropriate jurisdiction pursuant to a voluntary or involuntary petition by or against the
General Partner; or
(vi) (A) in the event the General Partner is a corporation, a certificate of dissolution or its equivalent is filed for
the General Partner, or 90 days expire after the date of notice to the General Partner of revocation of its charter
without a reinstatement of its charter, under the laws of its state of incorporation; (B) in the event the General
Partner is a partnership or a limited liability company, the dissolution and commencement of winding up of
the General Partner; (C) in the event the General Partner is acting in such capacity by virtue of being a trustee
of a trust, the termination of the trust; (D) in the event the General Partner is a natural person, his death or
adjudication of incompetency; and (E) otherwise in the event of the termination of the General Partner.
If an Event of Withdrawal specified in Section 11.1(a)(iv), (v) or (vi)(A), (B), (C) or (E) occurs, the withdrawing
General Partner shall give notice to the Limited Partners within 30 days after such occurrence. The Partners
hereby agree that only the Events of Withdrawal described in this Section 11.1 shall result in the withdrawal of
the General Partner from the Partnership.
(b) Withdrawal of the General Partner from the Partnership upon the occurrence of an Event of Withdrawal
shall not constitute a breach of this Agreement under the following circumstances: (i) at any time during the
period beginning on the Closing Date and ending at
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-51
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
11:59 pm, prevailing Eastern Time, on September 30, 2022, the General Partner voluntarily withdraws by
giving at least 90 days’ advance notice of its intention to withdraw to the Limited Partners; provided, that prior
to the effective date of such withdrawal, the withdrawal is approved by Unitholders holding at least a majority
of the Outstanding Units (excluding Units held by the General Partner and its Affiliates) and the General
Partner delivers to the Partnership an Opinion of Counsel (“Withdrawal Opinion of Counsel”) that such
withdrawal (following the selection of the successor General Partner) would not result in the loss of the
limited liability under the Delaware Act of any Limited Partner or cause any Group Member to be treated as an
association taxable as a corporation or otherwise to be taxed as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes
(to the extent not already so treated or taxed); (ii) at any time after 11:59 pm, prevailing Eastern Time, on
September 30, 2022, the General Partner voluntarily withdraws by giving at least 90 days’ advance notice to
the Unitholders, such withdrawal to take effect on the date specified in such notice; (iii) at any time that the
General Partner ceases to be the General Partner pursuant to Section 11.1(a)(ii) or is removed pursuant to
Section 11.2; or (iv) notwithstanding clause (i) of this sentence, at any time that the General Partner voluntarily
withdraws by giving at least 90 days’ advance notice of its intention to withdraw to the Limited Partners, such
withdrawal to take effect on the date specified in the notice, if at the time such notice is given one Person and
its Affiliates (other than the General Partner and its Affiliates) own beneficially or of record or control at least
50% of the Outstanding Units. The withdrawal of the General Partner from the Partnership upon the
occurrence of an Event of Withdrawal shall also constitute the withdrawal of the General Partner as general
partner or managing member, if any, to the extent applicable, of the other Group Members. If the General
Partner gives a notice of withdrawal pursuant to Section 11.1(a)(i), a Unit Majority, may, prior to the effective
date of such withdrawal, elect a successor General Partner. The Person so elected as successor General
Partner shall automatically become the successor general partner or managing member, to the extent
applicable, of the other Group Members of which the General Partner is a general partner or a managing
member. If, prior to the effective date of the General Partner’s withdrawal pursuant to Section 11.1(a)(i), a
successor is not selected by the Unitholders as provided herein or the Partnership does not receive a
Withdrawal Opinion of Counsel, the Partnership shall be dissolved in accordance with Section 12.1 unless the
business of the Partnership is continued pursuant to Section 12.2. Any successor General Partner elected in
accordance with the terms of this Section 11.1 shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10.2.
Section 11.2 Removal of the General Partner. The General Partner may be removed if such removal is
approved by the Unitholders holding at least 66 2/3% of the Outstanding Units (including Units held by the
General Partner and its Affiliates) voting as a single class. Any such action by such holders for removal of the
General Partner must also provide for the election of a successor General Partner by the Unitholders holding
a Unit Majority (including Units held by the General Partner and its Affiliates). Such removal shall be effective
immediately following the admission of a successor General Partner pursuant to Section 10.2. The removal of
the General Partner shall also automatically constitute the removal of the General Partner as general partner
or managing member, to the extent applicable, of the other Group Members of which the General Partner is a
general partner or a managing member. If a Person is elected as a successor General Partner in accordance
with the terms of this Section 11.2, such Person shall, upon
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-52
admission pursuant to Section 10.2, automatically become a successor general partner or managing member,
to the extent applicable, of the other Group Members of which the General Partner is a general partner or a
managing member. The right of the holders of Outstanding Units to remove the General Partner shall not exist
or be exercised unless the Partnership has received an opinion opining as to the matters covered by a
Withdrawal Opinion of Counsel. Any successor General Partner elected in accordance with the terms of this
Section 11.2 shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10.2.
Section 11.3 Interest of Departing General Partner. In the event the General Partner withdraws or is removed,
upon the admission of a successor General Partner, the General Partner Interest of the Departing General
Partner shall be cancelled.
Section 11.4 Conversion of PIK Common Units. Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement, if the
General Partner is removed as general partner of the Partnership under circumstances where Cause does not
exist, the PIK Common Units held by any Person will immediately and automatically convert into Common
Units on a one-for-one basis, provided (i) neither such Person nor any of its Affiliates voted any of its Units in
favor of the removal and (ii) such Person is not an Affiliate of the successor General Partner.
Section 11.5 Withdrawal of Limited Partners. No Limited Partner shall have any right to withdraw from the
Partnership; provided, however, that when a transferee of a Limited Partner’s Limited Partner Interest
becomes a Record Holder of the Limited Partner Interest so transferred, such transferring Limited Partner
shall cease to be a Limited Partner with respect to the Limited Partner Interest so transferred.
ARTICLE XII
DISSOLUTION AND LIQUIDATION
Section 12.1 Dissolution. The Partnership shall not be dissolved by the admission of additional Limited
Partners or by the admission of a successor General Partner in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.
Upon the removal or withdrawal of the General Partner, if a successor General Partner is elected pursuant to
Section 11.1, 11.2 or 12.2, the Partnership shall not be dissolved and such successor General Partner is
hereby authorized to, and shall, continue the business of the Partnership. Subject to Section 12.2, the
Partnership shall dissolve, and its affairs shall be wound up, upon:
(a) an Event of Withdrawal of the General Partner as provided in Section 11.1(a) (other than Section 11.1(a)(ii)),
unless a successor is elected and such successor is admitted to the Partnership pursuant to this Agreement;
(b) an election to dissolve the Partnership by the General Partner that is approved by a Unit Majority;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-53
(c) the entry of a decree of judicial dissolution of the Partnership pursuant to the provisions of the Delaware
Act; or
(d) at any time there are no Limited Partners, unless the Partnership is continued without dissolution in
accordance with the Delaware Act.
Section 12.2 Continuation of the Business of the Partnership After Dissolution. Upon (a) an Event of
Withdrawal caused by the withdrawal or removal of the General Partner as provided in Section 11.1(a)(i) or
(iii) and the failure of the Partners to select a successor to such Departing General Partner pursuant to
Section 11.1 or Section 11.2, then within 90 days thereafter, or (b) an event constituting an Event of
Withdrawal as defined in Section 11.1(a)(iv), (v) or (vi), then, to the maximum extent permitted by law, within
180 days thereafter, a Unit Majority may elect to continue the business of the Partnership on the same terms
and conditions set forth in this Agreement by appointing as a successor General Partner a Person approved
by a Unit Majority. Unless such an election is made within the applicable time period as set forth above, the
Partnership shall conduct only activities necessary to wind up its affairs. If such an election is so made, then:
(i) the Partnership shall continue without dissolution unless earlier dissolved in accordance with this Article
XII;
(ii) if the successor General Partner is not the former General Partner, then the interest of the former General
Partner shall be treated in the manner provided in Section 11.3; and
(iii) the successor General Partner shall be admitted to the Partnership as General Partner, effective as of the
Event of Withdrawal, by agreeing in writing to be bound by this Agreement;
provided, that the right of a Unit Majority to approve a successor General Partner and to continue the
business of the Partnership shall not exist and may not be exercised unless the Partnership has received an
Opinion of Counsel that (x) the exercise of the right would not result in the loss of limited liability under the
Delaware Act of any Limited Partner and (y) neither the Partnership nor any Group Member would be treated
as an association taxable as a corporation or otherwise be taxable as an entity for U.S. federal income tax
purposes upon the exercise of such right to continue (to the extent not already so treated or taxed).
Section 12.3 Liquidator. Upon dissolution of the Partnership, unless the business of the Partnership is
continued pursuant to Section 12.2, the General Partner shall select one or more Persons to act as Liquidator.
The Liquidator (if other than the General Partner) shall be entitled to receive such compensation for its
services as may be approved by holders of at least a Unit Majority. The Liquidator (if other than the General
Partner) shall agree not to resign at any time without 15 days’ prior notice and may be removed at any time,
with or without cause, by notice of removal approved by holders of at least a Unit Majority. Upon dissolution,
removal or resignation of the Liquidator, a successor and substitute Liquidator (who shall have and succeed
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-54
to all rights, powers and duties of the original Liquidator) shall within 30 days thereafter be approved by
holders of at least a Unit Majority. The right to approve a successor or substitute Liquidator in the manner
provided herein shall be deemed to refer also to any such successor or substitute Liquidator approved in the
manner herein provided. Except as expressly provided in this Article XII, the Liquidator approved in the
manner provided herein shall have and may exercise, without further authorization or consent of any of the
parties hereto, all of the powers conferred upon the General Partner under the terms of this Agreement (but
subject to all of the applicable limitations, contractual and otherwise, upon the exercise of such powers, other
than the limitation on sale set forth in Section 7.4) necessary or appropriate to carry out the duties and
functions of the Liquidator hereunder for and during the period of time required to complete the winding up
and liquidation of the Partnership as provided for herein.
Section 12.4 Liquidation. The Liquidator shall proceed to dispose of the assets of the Partnership, discharge
its liabilities, and otherwise wind up its affairs in such manner and over such period as determined by the
Liquidator, subject to Section 17-804 of the Delaware Act and the following:
(a) The assets may be disposed of by public or private sale or by distribution in kind to one or more Partners
on such terms as the Liquidator and such Partner or Partners may agree. If any property is distributed in kind,
the Partner receiving the property shall be deemed for purposes of Section 12.4(c) to have received cash equal
to its fair market value; and contemporaneously therewith, appropriate cash distributions must be made to the
other Partners. The Liquidator may defer liquidation or distribution of the Partnership’s assets for a
reasonable time if it determines that an immediate sale or distribution of all or some of the Partnership’s
assets would be impractical or would cause undue loss to the Partners. The Liquidator may distribute the
Partnership’s assets, in whole or in part, in kind if it determines that a sale would be impractical or would
cause undue loss to the Partners.
(b) Liabilities of the Partnership include amounts owed to the Liquidator as compensation for serving in such
capacity (subject to the terms of Section 12.3) and amounts to Partners otherwise than in respect of their
distribution rights under Article VI. With respect to any liability that is contingent, conditional or unmatured
or is otherwise not yet due and payable, the Liquidator shall either settle such claim for such amount as it
thinks appropriate or establish a reserve of cash or other assets to provide for its payment. When paid, any
unused portion of the reserve shall be distributed as additional liquidation proceeds.
(c) All property and all cash in excess of that required to discharge liabilities as provided in Section 12.4(b)
shall be distributed to the Partners in accordance with, and to the extent of, the positive balances in their
respective Capital Accounts, as determined after taking into account all Capital Account adjustments (other
than those made by reason of distributions pursuant to this Section 12.4(c)) for the taxable period of the
Partnership during which the liquidation of the Partnership occurs (with such date of occurrence being
determined pursuant to Treasury Regulation Section 1.704-1(b)(2)(ii)(g)), and such distribution shall be made
by the end of such taxable period (or, if later, within 90 days after said date of such occurrence).
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-55
Section 12.5 Cancellation of Certificate of Limited Partnership. Upon the completion of the distribution of
Partnership cash and property as provided in Section 12.4 in connection with the liquidation of the
Partnership, the Certificate of Limited Partnership and all qualifications of the Partnership as a foreign limited
partnership in jurisdictions other than the State of Delaware shall be canceled and such other actions as may
be necessary to terminate the Partnership shall be taken.
Section 12.6 Return of Contributions. The General Partner shall not be personally liable for, and shall have no
obligation to contribute or loan any monies or property to the Partnership to enable it to effectuate, the return
of the Capital Contributions of the Limited Partners or Unitholders, or any portion thereof, it being expressly
understood that any such return shall be made solely from Partnership assets.
Section 12.7 Waiver of Partition. To the maximum extent permitted by law, each Partner hereby waives any
right to partition of the Partnership property.
Section 12.8 Capital Account Restoration. No Limited Partner shall have any obligation to restore any negative
balance in its Capital Account upon liquidation of the Partnership. The General Partner shall be obligated to
restore any negative balance in its Capital Account upon liquidation of its interest in the Partnership by the
end of the taxable period of the Partnership during which such liquidation occurs, or, if later, within 90 days
after the date of such liquidation.
ARTICLE XIII
AMENDMENT OF PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT; MEETINGS; RECORD DATE
Section 13.1 Amendments to be Adopted Solely by the General Partner. Each Partner agrees that the General
Partner, without the approval of any other Partner, may amend any provision of this Agreement and execute,
swear to, acknowledge, deliver, file and record whatever documents may be required in connection therewith,
to reflect:
(a) a change in the name of the Partnership, the location of the principal place of business of the Partnership,
the registered agent of the Partnership or the registered office of the Partnership;
(b) admission, substitution, withdrawal or removal of Partners in accordance with this Agreement;
(c) a change that the General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate to qualify or continue the
qualification of the Partnership as a limited partnership or a partnership in which the Limited Partners have
limited liability under the laws of any state or to ensure that the Group Members will not be treated as
associations taxable as corporations or otherwise taxed as entities for U.S. federal income tax purposes;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-56
(d) a change that the General Partner determines (i) does not adversely affect the Limited Partners (including
any particular class of Partnership Interests as compared to other classes of Partnership Interests) in any
material respect, (ii) to be necessary or appropriate to (A) satisfy any requirements, conditions or guidelines
contained in any opinion, directive, order, ruling or regulation of any federal or state agency or judicial
authority or contained in any federal or state statute (including the Delaware Act) or (B) facilitate the trading of
the Units (including the division of any class or classes of Outstanding Units into different classes to facilitate
uniformity of tax consequences within such classes of Units) or comply with any rule, regulation, guideline or
requirement of any National Securities Exchange on which the Units are or will be listed or admitted to
trading, (iii) to be necessary or appropriate in connection with action taken by the General Partner pursuant to
Section 5.8 or (iv) is required to effect the intent expressed in the Registration Statement or the intent of the
provisions of this Agreement or is otherwise contemplated by this Agreement;
(e) a change in the fiscal year or taxable period of the Partnership and any other changes that the General
Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate as a result of a change in the fiscal year or taxable period
of the Partnership including, if the General Partner shall so determine, a change in the definition of “Quarter”
and the dates on which distributions are to be made by the Partnership;
(f) an amendment that is necessary, in the Opinion of Counsel, to prevent the Partnership, or the General
Partner or its directors, officers, trustees or agents from in any manner being subjected to the provisions of
the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended, or “plan
asset” regulations adopted under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended,
regardless of whether such are substantially similar to plan asset regulations currently applied or proposed
by the United States Department of Labor;
(g) an amendment that the General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate in connection with the
creation, authorization or issuance of any class or series of Partnership Interests or Derivative Instruments
pursuant to Section 5.6;
(h) any amendment expressly permitted in this Agreement to be made by the General Partner acting alone;
(i) an amendment effected, necessitated or contemplated by a Merger Agreement approved in accordance with
Section 14.3;
(j) an amendment that the General Partner determines to be necessary or appropriate to reflect and account for
the formation by the Partnership of, or investment by the Partnership in, any corporation, partnership, joint
venture, limited liability company or other entity, in connection with the conduct by the Partnership of
activities permitted by the terms of Section 2.4 or 7.1(a);
(k) a merger, conveyance or conversion pursuant to Section 14.3(d); or
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-57
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(l) any other amendments substantially similar to the foregoing.
Section 13.2 Amendment Procedures. Amendments to this Agreement may be proposed only by the General
Partner. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the General Partner shall have no duty or obligation to propose
or approve any amendment to this Agreement and may decline to do so in its sole discretion, and, in
declining to propose or approve an amendment, to the fullest extent permitted by law shall not be required to
act in good faith or pursuant to any other standard imposed by this Agreement, any Group Member
Agreement, any other agreement contemplated hereby or under the Delaware Act or any other law, rule or
regulation or at equity. An amendment shall be effective upon its approval by the General Partner and, except
as otherwise provided by Section 13.1 or 13.3, a Unit Majority, unless a greater or different percentage is
required under this Agreement or by Delaware law. Each proposed amendment that requires the approval of
the holders of a specified percentage of Outstanding Units shall be set forth in a writing that contains the text
of the proposed amendment. If such an amendment is proposed, the General Partner shall seek the written
approval of the requisite percentage of Outstanding Units or call a meeting of the Unitholders to consider and
vote on such proposed amendment. The General Partner shall notify all Record Holders upon final adoption
of any amendments. The General Partner shall be deemed to have notified all Record Holders as required by
this Section 13.2 if it has either (i) filed such amendment with the Commission via its Electronic Data
Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval system and such amendment is publicly available on such system or
(ii) made such amendment available on the Partnership’s website.
Section 13.3 Amendment Requirements.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.1 and Section 13.2, no provision of this Agreement (other
than Section 11.2 or Section 13.4) that establishes a percentage of Outstanding Units (including Units deemed
owned by the General Partner) or requires a vote or approval of Partners (or a subset of Partners) holding a
specified Percentage Interest required to take any action shall be amended, altered, changed, repealed or
rescinded in any respect that would have the effect of in the case of any provision of this Agreement reducing
such percentage, unless such amendment is approved by the written consent or the affirmative vote of
holders of Outstanding Units whose aggregate Outstanding Units constitute not less than the voting
requirement sought to be reduced or the affirmative vote of Partners whose aggregate Percentage Interests
constitute not less than the voting requirement sought to be reduced, as applicable.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.1 and Section 13.2, no amendment to this Agreement may
(i) enlarge the obligations of (including requiring any holder of a class of Partnership Interests to make
additional Capital Contributions to the Partnership) any Limited Partner without its consent, unless such shall
be deemed to have occurred as a result of an amendment approved pursuant to Section 13.3(c), or (ii) enlarge
the obligations of, restrict, change or modify in any way any action by or rights of, or reduce in any way the
amounts distributable, reimbursable or otherwise payable to, the General Partner or any of its Affiliates
without its consent, which consent may be given or withheld at its option.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-58
(c) Except as provided in Section 14.3 or Section 13.1, any amendment that would have a material adverse
effect on the rights or preferences of any class of Partnership Interests in relation to other classes of
Partnership Interests must be approved by the holders of not less than a majority of the Outstanding
Partnership Interests of the class affected. If the General Partner determines an amendment does not satisfy
the requirements of Section 13.1(d)(i) because it adversely affects one or more classes of Partnership
Interests, as compared to other classes of Partnership Interests, in any material respect, such amendment
shall only be required to be approved by the adversely affected class or classes.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, except for amendments pursuant to Section 13.1
and except as otherwise provided by Section 14.3(b), no amendments shall become effective without the
approval of the holders of at least 90% of the Percentage Interests of all Limited Partners voting as a single
class unless the Partnership obtains an Opinion of Counsel to the effect that such amendment will not affect
the limited liability of any Limited Partner under applicable partnership law of the state under whose laws the
Partnership is organized.
(e) Except as provided in Section 13.1, this Section 13.3 shall only be amended with the approval of Partners
(including the General Partner and its Affiliates) holding at least 90% of the Percentage Interests of all Limited
Partners.
Section 13.4 Special Meetings. All acts of Limited Partners to be taken pursuant to this Agreement shall be
taken in the manner provided in this Article XIII. Special meetings of the Limited Partners may be called by
the General Partner or by Limited Partners owning 20% or more of the Outstanding Units of the class or
classes for which a meeting is proposed. Limited Partners shall call a special meeting by delivering to the
General Partner one or more requests in writing stating that the signing Limited Partners wish to call a
special meeting and indicating the general or specific purposes for which the special meeting is to be called.
Within 60 days after receipt of such a call from Limited Partners or within such greater time as may be
reasonably necessary for the Partnership to comply with any statutes, rules, regulations, listing agreements
or similar requirements governing the holding of a meeting or the solicitation of proxies for use at such a
meeting, the General Partner shall send a notice of the meeting to the Limited Partners either directly or
indirectly through the Transfer Agent. A meeting shall be held at a time and place determined by the General
Partner on a date not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days after the time notice of the meeting is given as
provided in Section 16.1. Limited Partners shall not vote on matters that would cause the Limited Partners to
be deemed to be taking part in the management and control of the business and affairs of the Partnership so
as to jeopardize the Limited Partners’ limited liability under the Delaware Act or the law of any other state in
which the Partnership is qualified to do business.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-59
Section 13.5 Notice of a Meeting. Notice of a meeting called pursuant to Section 13.4 shall be given to the
Record Holders of the class or classes of Units for which a meeting is proposed in writing by mail or other
means of written communication in accordance with Section 16.1. The notice shall be deemed to have been
given at the time when deposited in the mail or sent by other means of written communication.
Section 13.6 Record Date. For purposes of determining the Limited Partners entitled to notice of or to vote at a
meeting of the Limited Partners or to give approvals without a meeting as provided in Section 13.11 the
General Partner may set a Record Date, which shall not be less than 10 nor more than 60 days before (a) the
date of the meeting (unless such requirement conflicts with any rule, regulation, guideline or requirement of
any National Securities Exchange on which the Units are listed or admitted to trading or U.S. federal
securities laws, in which case the rule, regulation, guideline or requirement of such National Securities
Exchange or U.S. federal securities laws shall govern) or (b) in the event that approvals are sought without a
meeting, the date by which Limited Partners are requested in writing by the General Partner to give such
approvals. If the General Partner does not set a Record Date, then (a) the Record Date for determining the
Limited Partners entitled to notice of or to vote at a meeting of the Limited Partners shall be the close of
business on the day next preceding the day on which notice is given, and (b) the Record Date for determining
the Limited Partners entitled to give approvals without a meeting shall be the date the first written approval is
deposited with the Partnership in care of the General Partner in accordance with Section 13.11.
Section 13.7 Adjournment. When a meeting is adjourned to another time or place, notice need not be given of
the adjourned meeting and a new Record Date need not be fixed, if the time and place thereof are announced
at the meeting at which the adjournment is taken, unless such adjournment shall be for more than 45 days. At
the adjourned meeting, the Partnership may transact any business which might have been transacted at the
original meeting. If the adjournment is for more than 45 days or if a new Record Date is fixed for the
adjourned meeting, a notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given in accordance with this Article XIII.
Section 13.8 Waiver of Notice; Approval of Meeting; Approval of Minutes. The transaction of business at any
meeting of Limited Partners, however called and noticed, and whenever held, shall be as valid as if it had
occurred at a meeting duly held after regular call and notice, if a quorum is present either in person or by
proxy. Attendance of a Limited Partner at a meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice of the meeting, except
when the Limited Partner attends the meeting for the express purpose of objecting, at the beginning of the
meeting, to the transaction of any business because the meeting is not lawfully called or convened; and
except that attendance at a meeting is not a waiver of any right to disapprove the consideration of matters
required to be included in the notice of the meeting, but not so included, if the disapproval is expressly made
at the meeting.
Section 13.9 Quorum and Voting. The holders of a majority, by Percentage Interest, of Partnership Interests of
the class or classes for which a meeting has been called (including Partnership Interests deemed owned by
the General Partner) represented in person or by proxy
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-60
shall constitute a quorum at a meeting of Partners of such class or classes unless any such action by the
Partners requires approval by holders of a greater Percentage Interest, in which case the quorum shall be
such greater Percentage Interest. At any meeting of the Partners duly called and held in accordance with this
Agreement at which a quorum is present, the act of Partners holding Partnership Interests that, in the
aggregate, represent a majority of the Percentage Interest of those present in person or by proxy at such
meeting shall be deemed to constitute the act of all Partners, unless a greater or different percentage is
required with respect to such action under the provisions of this Agreement, in which case the act of the
Partners holding Partnership Interests that in the aggregate represent at least such greater or different
percentage shall be required; provided, however, that if, as a matter of law or amendment to this Agreement,
approval by plurality vote of Partners (or any class thereof) is required to approve any action, no minimum
quorum shall be required. The Partners present at a duly called or held meeting at which a quorum is present
may continue to transact business until adjournment, notwithstanding the withdrawal of enough Partners to
leave less than a quorum, if any action taken (other than adjournment) is approved by Partners holding the
required Percentage Interest specified in this Agreement. In the absence of a quorum any meeting of Partners
may be adjourned from time to time by the affirmative vote of Partners with at least a majority, by Percentage
Interest, of the Partnership Interests entitled to vote at such meeting (including Partnership Interests deemed
owned by the General Partner) represented either in person or by proxy, but no other business may be
transacted, except as provided in Section 13.7.
Section 13.10 Conduct of a Meeting. The General Partner shall have full power and authority concerning the
manner of conducting any meeting of the Limited Partners or solicitation of approvals in writing, including
the determination of Persons entitled to vote, the existence of a quorum, the satisfaction of the requirements
of Section 13.4, the conduct of voting, the validity and effect of any proxies and the determination of any
controversies, votes or challenges arising in connection with or during the meeting or voting. The General
Partner shall designate a Person to serve as chairman of any meeting and shall further designate a Person to
take the minutes of any meeting. All minutes shall be kept with the records of the Partnership maintained by
the General Partner. The General Partner may make such other regulations consistent with applicable law and
this Agreement as it may deem advisable concerning the conduct of any meeting of the Limited Partners or
solicitation of approvals in writing, including regulations in regard to the appointment of proxies, the
appointment and duties of inspectors of votes and approvals, the submission and examination of proxies and
other evidence of the right to vote, and the revocation of approvals in writing.
Section 13.11 Action Without a Meeting. If authorized by the General Partner, any action that may be taken at a
meeting of the Limited Partners may be taken without a meeting, without a vote and without prior notice, if an
approval in writing setting forth the action so taken is signed by Limited Partners owning not less than the
minimum percentage, by Percentage Interest, of the Partnership Interests of the class or classes for which a
meeting has been called (including Partnership Interests deemed owned by the General Partner), as the case
may be, that would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all the Limited
Partners entitled to vote at such meeting were present and voted (unless such provision conflicts
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-61
with any rule, regulation, guideline or requirement of any National Securities Exchange on which the Units are
listed or admitted to trading, in which case the rule, regulation, guideline or requirement of such National
Securities Exchange shall govern). Prompt notice of the taking of action without a meeting shall be given to
the Limited Partners who have not approved in writing. The General Partner may specify that any written
ballot submitted to Limited Partners for the purpose of taking any action without a meeting shall be returned
to the Partnership within the time period, which shall be not less than 20 days, specified by the General
Partner. If a ballot returned to the Partnership does not vote all of the Partnership Interests held by the
Limited Partners, the Partnership shall be deemed to have failed to receive a ballot for the Partnership
Interests that were not voted. If approval of the taking of any action by the Limited Partners is solicited by any
Person other than by or on behalf of the General Partner, the written approvals shall have no force and effect
unless and until (a) they are deposited with the Partnership in care of the General Partner and (b) an Opinion
of Counsel is delivered to the General Partner to the effect that the exercise of such right and the action
proposed to be taken with respect to any particular matter (i) will not cause the Limited Partners to be deemed
to be taking part in the management and control of the business and affairs of the Partnership so as to
jeopardize the Limited Partners’ limited liability, and (ii) is otherwise permissible under the state statutes then
governing the rights, duties and liabilities of the Partnership and the Partners. Nothing contained in this
Section 13.11 shall be deemed to require the General Partner to solicit all Limited Partners in connection with
a matter approved by the holders of the requisite percentage of Partnership Interests acting by written consent
without a meeting.
Section 13.12 Right to Vote and Related Matters.
(a) Only those Record Holders of the Outstanding Partnership Interests on the Record Date set pursuant to
Section 13.6 shall be entitled to notice of, and to vote at, a meeting of Limited Partners or to act with respect
to matters as to which the holders of the Outstanding Partnership Interests have the right to vote or to act. All
references in this Agreement to votes of, or other acts that may be taken by, the Outstanding Partnership
Interests shall be deemed to be references to the votes or acts of the Record Holders of such Outstanding
Partnership Interests.
(b) With respect to Partnership Interests that are held for a Person’s account by another Person (such as a
broker, dealer, bank, trust company or clearing corporation, or an agent of any of the foregoing), in whose
name such Partnership Interests are registered, such other Person shall, in exercising the voting rights in
respect of such Partnership Interests on any matter, and unless the arrangement between such Persons
provides otherwise, vote such Partnership Interests in favor of, and at the direction of, the Person who is the
beneficial owner, and the Partnership shall be entitled to assume it is so acting without further inquiry. The
provisions of this Section 13.12(a) (as well as all other provisions of this Agreement) are subject to the
provisions of Section 4.3.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
A-62
ARTICLE XIV
MERGER OR CONSOLIDATION
Section 14.1 Authority. The Partnership may merge or consolidate with or into one or more corporations,
limited liability companies, statutory trusts or associations, real estate investment trusts, common law trusts
or unincorporated businesses, including a partnership (whether general or limited (including a limited
liability partnership)) or convert into any such entity, whether such entity is formed under the laws of the State
of Delaware or any other state of the United States of America, pursuant to a written plan of merger or
consolidation (“Merger Agreement”) in accordance with this Article XIV.
Section 14.2 Procedure for Merger or Consolidation.
(a) Merger or consolidation of the Partnership pursuant to this Article XIV requires the prior consent of the
General Partner, provided, however, that, to the fullest extent permitted by law, the General Partner shall have
no duty or obligation to consent to any merger or consolidation of the Partnership and may decline to do so
free of any fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever to the Partnership, any Limited Partner and, in declining to
consent to a merger or consolidation, shall not be required to act in good faith or pursuant to any other
standard imposed by this Agreement, any other agreement contemplated hereby or under the Delaware Act or
any other law, rule or regulation or at equity.
(b) If the General Partner shall determine to consent to the merger or consolidation, the General Partner shall
approve the Merger Agreement, which shall set forth:
(i) the name and jurisdiction of formation or organization of each of the business entities proposing to merge
or consolidate;
(ii) the name and jurisdiction of formation or organization of the business entity that is to survive the
proposed merger or consolidation (the “Surviving Business Entity”);
(iii) the terms and conditions of the proposed merger or consolidation;
(iv) the manner and basis of exchanging or converting the equity interests of each constituent business entity
for, or into, cash, property or interests, rights, securities or obligations of the Surviving Business Entity; and
(i) if any interests, securities or rights of any constituent business entity are not to be exchanged or converted
solely for, or into, cash, property or interests, rights, securities or obligations of the Surviving Business
Entity, then the cash, property or interests, rights, securities or obligations of any general or limited
partnership, corporation, trust, limited liability company, unincorporated business or other entity (other than
the Surviving Business Entity) which the holders of such interests, securities or rights are to receive in
exchange for, or upon conversion of their interests, securities or rights, and (ii) in the case of equity interests
represented by
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-63
certificates, upon the surrender of such certificates, which cash, property or interests, rights, securities or
obligations of the Surviving Business Entity or any general or limited partnership, corporation, trust, limited
liability company, unincorporated business or other entity (other than the Surviving Business Entity), or
evidences thereof, are to be delivered;
(v) a statement of any changes in the constituent documents or the adoption of new constituent documents
(the articles or certificate of incorporation, articles of trust, declaration of trust, certificate or agreement of
limited partnership, certificate of formation or limited liability company agreement or other similar charter or
governing document) of the Surviving Business Entity to be effected by such merger or consolidation;
(vi) the effective time of the merger, which may be the date of the filing of the certificate of merger pursuant to
Section 14.4 or a later date specified in or determinable in accordance with the Merger Agreement (provided,
that if the effective time of the merger is to be later than the date of the filing of such certificate of merger, the
effective time shall be fixed at a date or time certain and stated in the certificate of merger); and
(vii) such other provisions with respect to the proposed merger or consolidation that the General Partner
determines to be necessary or appropriate.
Section 14.3 Approval by Limited Partners.
(a) Except as provided in Section 14.3(d) and Section 14.3(e), the General Partner, upon its approval of the
Merger Agreement shall direct that the Merger Agreement and the merger or consolidation contemplated
thereby, as applicable, be submitted to a vote of Limited Partners, whether at a special meeting or by written
consent, in either case in accordance with the requirements of Article XIII. A copy or a summary of the Merger
Agreement, as the case may be, shall be included in or enclosed with the notice of a special meeting or the
written consent.
(b) Except as provided in Sections 14.3(d) and 14.3(e), the Merger Agreement shall be approved upon
receiving the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of a Unit Majority unless the Merger Agreement
contains any provision that, if contained in an amendment to this Agreement, the provisions of this
Agreement or the Delaware Act would require for its approval the vote or consent of a greater percentage of
the Outstanding Units or of any class of Limited Partners, in which case such greater percentage vote or
consent shall be required for approval of the Merger Agreement.
(c) Except as provided in Sections 14.3(d) and 14.3(e), after such approval by vote or consent of the Limited
Partners, and at any time prior to the filing of the certificate of merger pursuant to Section 14.4, the merger or
consolidation may be abandoned pursuant to provisions therefor, if any, set forth in the Merger Agreement.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-64
(d) Notwithstanding anything else contained in this Article XIV or in this Agreement, the General Partner is
permitted, without Limited Partner approval, to convert the Partnership or any Group Member into a new
limited liability entity, to merge the Partnership or any Group Member into, or convey all of the Partnership’s
assets to, another limited liability entity that shall be newly formed and shall have no assets, liabilities or
operations at the time of such merger or conveyance other than those it receives from the Partnership or other
Group Member if (i) the General Partner has received an Opinion of Counsel that the merger or conveyance,
as the case may be, would not result in the loss of the limited liability under the Delaware Act of any Limited
Partner or cause the Partnership or any Group Member to be treated as an association taxable as a
corporation or otherwise to be taxed as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes (to the extent not
already treated as such), (ii) the sole purpose of such merger, or conveyance is to effect a mere change in the
legal form of the Partnership into another limited liability entity and (iii) the General Partner determines that
the governing instruments of the new entity provide the Limited Partners and the General Partner with
substantially the same rights and obligations as are herein contained.
(e) Additionally, notwithstanding anything else contained in this Article XIV or in this Agreement, the General
Partner is permitted, without Limited Partner approval, to merge or consolidate the Partnership with or into
another entity if (A) the General Partner has received an Opinion of Counsel that the merger or consolidation,
as the case may be, would not result in the loss of the limited liability under the Delaware Act of any Limited
Partner or cause the Partnership or any Group Member to be treated as an association taxable as a
corporation or otherwise to be taxed as an entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes (to the extent not
already treated as such), (B) the merger or consolidation would not result in an amendment to this Agreement,
other than any amendments that could be adopted pursuant to Section 13.1, (C) the Partnership is the
Surviving Business Entity in such merger or consolidation, (D) each Partnership Interest outstanding
immediately prior to the effective date of the merger or consolidation is to be an identical Partnership Interest
of the Partnership after the effective date of the merger or consolidation, and (E) the number of Partnership
Interests to be issued by the Partnership in such merger or consolidation does not exceed 20% of the
Partnership Interests Outstanding immediately prior to the effective date of such merger or consolidation.
(f) Pursuant to Section 17-211(g) of the Delaware Act, an agreement of merger or consolidation approved in
accordance with this Article XIV may (a) effect any amendment to this Agreement or (b) effect the adoption of a
new partnership agreement for the Partnership if it is the Surviving Business Entity. Any such amendment or
adoption made pursuant to this Section 14.3 shall be effective at the effective time or date of the merger or
consolidation.
Section 14.4 Certificate of Merger. Upon the required approval by the General Partner and the Unitholders of a
Merger Agreement, a certificate of merger shall be executed and filed with the Secretary of State of the State of
Delaware in conformity with the requirements of the Delaware Act.
Section 14.5 Effect of Merger or Consolidation.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-65
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(a) At the effective time of the certificate of merger:
(i) all of the rights, privileges and powers of each of the business entities that has merged or consolidated,
and all property, real, personal and mixed, and all debts due to any of those business entities and all other
things and causes of action belonging to each of those business entities, shall be vested in the Surviving
Business Entity and after the merger or consolidation shall be the property of the Surviving Business Entity to
the extent they were of each constituent business entity;
(ii) the title to any real property vested by deed or otherwise in any of those constituent business entities shall
not revert and is not in any way impaired because of the merger or consolidation;
(iii) all rights of creditors and all liens on or security interests in property of any of those constituent business
entities shall be preserved unimpaired; and
(iv) all debts, liabilities and duties of those constituent business entities shall attach to the Surviving
Business Entity and may be enforced against it to the same extent as if the debts, liabilities and duties had
been incurred or contracted by it.
ARTICLE XV
RIGHT TO ACQUIRE LIMITED PARTNER INTERESTS
Section 15.1 Right to Acquire Limited Partner Interests.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, if at any time the General Partner and its Affiliates
hold more than 80% of the total Limited Partner Interests of any class then Outstanding, the General Partner
shall then have the right, which right it may assign and transfer in whole or in part to the Partnership or any
Affiliate of the General Partner, exercisable in its sole discretion, to purchase all, but not less than all, of such
Limited Partner Interests of such class then Outstanding held by Persons other than the General Partner and
its Affiliates, at the greater of (x) the Current Market Price as of the date three days prior to the date that the
notice described in Section 15.1(b) is mailed and (y) the highest price paid by the General Partner or any of its
Affiliates for any such Limited Partner Interest of such class purchased during the 90-day period preceding
the date that the notice described in Section 15.1(b) is mailed. For purposes of this Section 15.1, Common
Units and PIK Common Units shall be treated as a single class of Limited Partner Interests.
(b) If the General Partner, any Affiliate of the General Partner or the Partnership elects to exercise the right to
purchase Limited Partner Interests granted pursuant to Section 15.1(a), the General Partner shall deliver to the
Transfer Agent notice of such election to purchase (the “Notice of Election to Purchase”) and shall cause the
Transfer Agent to mail a copy of such Notice of Election to Purchase to the Record Holders of Limited Partner
Interests of such class (as of a Record Date selected by the General Partner) at least 10, but not more than 60,
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-66
days prior to the Purchase Date. Such Notice of Election to Purchase shall also be filed and distributed as
may be required by the Commission or any National Securities Exchange on which such Limited Partner
Interests are listed. The Notice of Election to Purchase shall specify the Purchase Date and the price
(determined in accordance with Section 15.1(a)) at which Limited Partner Interests will be purchased and state
that the General Partner, its Affiliate or the Partnership, as the case may be, elects to purchase such Limited
Partner Interests, upon surrender of Certificates representing such Limited Partner Interests in the case of
Limited Partner Interests evidenced by Certificates, in exchange for payment, at such office or offices of the
Transfer Agent as the Transfer Agent may specify, or as may be required by any National Securities Exchange
on which such Limited Partner Interests are listed or admitted to trading. Any such Notice of Election to
Purchase mailed to a Record Holder of Limited Partner Interests at his address as reflected in the records of
the Transfer Agent shall be conclusively presumed to have been given regardless of whether the owner
receives such notice. On or prior to the Purchase Date, the General Partner, its Affiliate or the Partnership, as
the case may be, shall deposit with the Transfer Agent cash in an amount sufficient to pay the aggregate
purchase price of all of such Limited Partner Interests to be purchased in accordance with this Section 15.1. If
the Notice of Election to Purchase shall have been duly given as aforesaid at least 10 days prior to the
Purchase Date, and if on or prior to the Purchase Date the deposit described in the preceding sentence has
been made for the benefit of the holders of Limited Partner Interests subject to purchase as provided herein,
then from and after the Purchase Date, notwithstanding that any Certificate shall not have been surrendered
for purchase, all rights of the holders of such Limited Partner Interests shall thereupon cease, except the right
to receive the purchase price (determined in accordance with Section 15.1(a)) for Limited Partner Interests
therefor, without interest, upon surrender to the Transfer Agent of the Certificates representing such Limited
Partner Interests in the case of Limited Partner Interests evidenced by Certificates, and such Limited Partner
Interests shall thereupon be deemed to be transferred to the General Partner, its Affiliate or the Partnership, as
the case may be, on the record books of the Transfer Agent and the Partnership, and the General Partner or
any Affiliate of the General Partner, or the Partnership, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the owner
of all such Limited Partner Interests from and after the Purchase Date and shall have all rights as the owner of
such Limited Partner Interests.
ARTICLE XVI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 16.1 Addresses and Notices; Written Communications.
(a) Any notice, demand, request, report or proxy materials required or permitted to be given or made to a
Partner under this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be deemed given or made when delivered in
person or when sent by first class United States mail or by other means of written communication to the
Partner at the address described below. Any notice, payment or report to be given or made to a Partner
hereunder shall be deemed conclusively to have been given or made, and the obligation to give such notice
or report or to make such payment shall be deemed conclusively to have been fully satisfied, upon sending of
such notice, payment or report
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-67
to the Record Holder of such Partnership Interests at his address as shown on the records of the Transfer
Agent or as otherwise shown on the records of the Partnership, regardless of any claim of any Person who
may have an interest in such Partnership Interests by reason of any assignment or otherwise. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, if (i) a Partner shall consent to receiving notices, demands, requests, reports or proxy materials
via electronic mail or by the Internet or (ii) the rules of the Commission shall permit any report or proxy
materials to be delivered electronically or made available via the Internet, any such notice, demand, request,
report or proxy materials shall be deemed given or made when delivered or made available via such mode of
delivery. An affidavit or certificate of making of any notice, payment or report in accordance with the
provisions of this Section 16.1 executed by the General Partner, the Transfer Agent or the mailing
organization shall be prima facie evidence of the giving or making of such notice, payment or report. If any
notice, payment or report given or made in accordance with the provisions of this Section 16.1 is returned
marked to indicate that such notice, payment or report was unable to be delivered, such notice, payment or
report and, in the case of notices, payments or reports returned by the United States Postal Service (or other
physical mail delivery mail service outside the United States of America), any subsequent notices, payments
and reports shall be deemed to have been duly given or made without further mailing (until such time as such
Record Holder or another Person notifies the Transfer Agent or the Partnership of a change in his address) or
other delivery if they are available for the Partner at the principal office of the Partnership for a period of one
year from the date of the giving or making of such notice, payment or report to the other Partners. Any notice
to the Partnership shall be deemed given if received by the General Partner at the principal office of the
Partnership designated pursuant to Section 2.3. The General Partner may rely and shall be protected in
relying on any notice or other document from a Partner or other Person if believed by it to be genuine.
(b) The terms “in writing”, “written communications,” “written notice” and words of similar import shall be
deemed satisfied under this Agreement by use of e-mail and other forms of electronic communication.
Section 16.2 Further Action. The parties shall execute and deliver all documents, provide all information and
take or refrain from taking action as may be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this
Agreement.
Section 16.3 Binding Effect. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties
hereto and their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, legal representatives and permitted assigns.
Section 16.4 Integration. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement among the parties hereto pertaining
to the subject matter hereof and supersedes all prior agreements and understandings pertaining thereto.
Section 16.5 Creditors. None of the provisions of this Agreement shall be for the benefit of, or shall be
enforceable by, any creditor of the Partnership.
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-68
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Section 16.6 Waiver. No failure by any party to insist upon the strict performance of any covenant, duty,
agreement or condition of this Agreement or to exercise any right or remedy consequent upon a breach
thereof shall constitute waiver of any such breach of any other covenant, duty, agreement or condition.
Section 16.7 Third-Party Beneficiaries. Each Partner agrees that (a) any Indemnitee shall be entitled to assert
rights and remedies hereunder as a third-party beneficiary hereto with respect to those provisions of this
Agreement affording a right, benefit or privilege to such Indemnitee and (b) any Unrestricted Person shall be
entitled to assert rights and remedies hereunder as a third-party beneficiary hereto with respect to those
provisions of this Agreement affording a right, benefit or privilege to such Unrestricted Person.
Section 16.8 Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, all of which together shall
constitute an agreement binding on all the parties hereto, notwithstanding that all such parties are not
signatories to the original or the same counterpart. Each party shall become bound by this Agreement
immediately upon affixing its signature hereto or, in the case of a Person acquiring a Limited Partner Interest,
pursuant to Section 10.1(a) without execution hereof.
Section 16.9 Applicable Law; Forum, Venue and Jurisdiction.
(a) This Agreement shall be construed in accordance with and governed by the laws of the State of Delaware,
without regard to the principles of conflicts of law.
(b) Each of the Partners and each Person holding any beneficial interest in the Partnership (whether through a
broker, dealer, bank, trust company or clearing corporation or an agent of any of the foregoing or otherwise):
(i) irrevocably agrees that any claims, suits, actions or proceedings (A) arising out of or relating in any way to
this Agreement (including any claims, suits or actions to interpret, apply or enforce the provisions of this
Agreement or the duties, obligations or liabilities among Partners or of Partners to the Partnership, or the
rights or powers of, or restrictions on, the Partners or the Partnership), (B) brought in a derivative manner on
behalf of the Partnership, (C) asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any director, officer, or
other employee of the Partnership or the General Partner, or owed by the General Partner, to the Partnership
or the Partners, (D) asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the Delaware Act or (E) asserting a
claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine shall be exclusively brought in the Court of Chancery of the
State of Delaware, in each case regardless of whether such claims, suits, actions or proceedings sound in
contract, tort, fraud or otherwise, are based on common law, statutory, equitable, legal or other grounds, or
are derivative or direct claims;
(ii) irrevocably submits to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware in
connection with any such claim, suit, action or proceeding;
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-69
(iii) agrees not to, and waives any right to, assert in any such claim, suit, action or proceeding that (A) it is not
personally subject to the jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware or of any other court to
which proceedings in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware may be appealed, (B) such claim, suit,
action or proceeding is brought in an inconvenient forum, or (C) the venue of such claim, suit, action or
proceeding is improper;
(iv) expressly waives any requirement for the posting of a bond by a party bringing such claim, suit, action or
proceeding; and
(v) consents to process being served in any such claim, suit, action or proceeding by mailing, certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy thereof to such party at the address in effect for notices hereunder, and
agrees that such services shall constitute good and sufficient service of process and notice thereof; provided,
nothing in clause (v) hereof shall affect or limit any right to serve process in any other manner permitted by
law.
Section 16.10 Invalidity of Provisions. If any provision or part of a provision of this Agreement is or becomes
for any reason, invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect, the validity, legality and enforceability of the
remaining provisions and part thereof contained herein shall not be affected thereby and this Agreement
shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, be reformed and construed as if such invalid, illegal or
unenforceable provision, or part of a provision, had never been contained herein, and such provision or part
reformed so that it would be valid, legal and enforceable to the maximum extent possible.
Section 16.11 Consent of Partners. Each Partner hereby expressly consents and agrees that, whenever in this
Agreement it is specified that an action may be taken upon the affirmative vote or consent of less than all of
the Partners, such action may be so taken upon the concurrence of less than all of the Partners and each
Partner shall be bound by the results of such action.
Section 16.12 Facsimile Signatures. The use of facsimile signatures affixed in the name and on behalf of the
transfer agent and registrar of the Partnership on Certificates representing Units is expressly permitted by this
Agreement.
[REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.]
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-70
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the date first written above.
GENERAL PARTNER:
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY GP LLC
By:
Name:
Title:
ORGANIZATIONAL LIMITED PARTNER:
NORTHERN TIER HOLDINGS LLC
By:
Name:
Title:
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
SIGNATURE PAGE
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FIRST AMENDED AND RESTATED AGREEMENT OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
A-71
EXHIBIT A
to the First Amended and Restated
Agreement of Limited Partnership of
Northern Tier Energy LP
Certificate Evidencing Common Units
Representing Limited Partner Interests in
Northern Tier Energy LP
No.
Common Units
In accordance with Section 4.1 of the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of
Northern Tier Energy LP, as amended, supplemented or restated from time to time (the “Partnership
Agreement”), Northern Tier Energy LP, a Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), hereby certifies
that                                      (the “Holder”) is the registered owner of              Common Units representing
limited partner interests in the Partnership (the “Common Units”) transferable on the books of the
Partnership, in person or by duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of this Certificate properly endorsed.
The rights, preferences and limitations of the Common Units are set forth in, and this Certificate and the
Common Units represented hereby are issued and shall in all respects be subject to the terms and provisions
of, the Partnership Agreement. Copies of the Partnership Agreement are on file at, and will be furnished
without charge on delivery of written request to the Partnership at, the principal office of the Partnership
located 38C Grove Street, Suite 100, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877. Capitalized terms used herein but not
defined shall have the meanings given them in the Partnership Agreement.
THE HOLDER OF THIS SECURITY ACKNOWLEDGES FOR THE BENEFIT OF NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
THAT THIS SECURITY MAY NOT BE SOLD, OFFERED, RESOLD, PLEDGED OR OTHERWISE TRANSFERRED
IF SUCH TRANSFER WOULD (A) VIOLATE THE THEN APPLICABLE FEDERAL OR STATE SECURITIES LAWS
OR RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION, ANY STATE
SECURITIES COMMISSION OR ANY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY WITH JURISDICTION OVER SUCH
TRANSFER, (B) TERMINATE THE EXISTENCE OR QUALIFICATION OF NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP UNDER
THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE, OR (C) CAUSE NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP TO BE TREATED
AS AN ASSOCIATION TAXABLE AS A CORPORATION OR OTHERWISE TO BE TAXED AS AN ENTITY FOR
FEDERAL INCOME TAX PURPOSES (TO THE EXTENT NOT ALREADY SO TREATED OR TAXED). NORTHERN
TIER ENERGY GP LLC (THE “GENERAL PARTNER”), THE GENERAL PARTNER OF NORTHERN TIER ENERGY
LP, MAY IMPOSE ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON THE TRANSFER OF THIS SECURITY IF IT RECEIVES AN
OPINION OF COUNSEL THAT SUCH RESTRICTIONS ARE NECESSARY TO AVOID A SIGNIFICANT RISK OF
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP BECOMING TAXABLE AS A CORPORATION OR OTHERWISE BECOMING
TAXABLE AS AN ENTITY FOR U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX PURPOSES. THIS SECURITY MAY BE SUBJECT
TO ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON ITS TRANSFER PROVIDED IN THE PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT.
COPIES OF SUCH AGREEMENT MAY BE OBTAINED AT NO COST BY WRITTEN REQUEST MADE BY
A-72
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
THE HOLDER OF RECORD OF THIS SECURITY TO THE SECRETARY OF THE GENERAL PARTNER AT THE
PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICES OF THE PARTNERSHIP. THE RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH ABOVE SHALL
NOT PRECLUDE THE SETTLEMENT OF ANY TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING THIS SECURITY ENTERED INTO
THROUGH THE FACILITIES OF ANY NATIONAL SECURITIES EXCHANGE ON WHICH THIS SECURITY IS
LISTED OR ADMITTED TO TRADING.
The Holder, by accepting this Certificate, (i) shall be admitted to the Partnership as a Limited Partner with
respect to the Limited Partner Interests so transferred to such person when any such transfer or admission is
reflected on the books and records of the Partnership and such Limited Partner becomes the Record Holder of
the Limited Partner Interests so transferred, (ii) shall become bound by the terms of the Partnership
Agreement, (iii) represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to enter into the
Partnership Agreement and (iv) makes the consents, acknowledgements and waivers contained in the
Partnership Agreement, with or without the execution of the Partnership Agreement by the Holder.
This Certificate shall not be valid for any purpose unless it has been countersigned and registered by the
Transfer Agent and Registrar.
Dated:
Northern Tier Energy LP
Countersigned and Registered by:
By:
Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
American Stock Transfer and Trust Company, N.A.,
As Transfer Agent and Registrar
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
By:
Name:
Title:
By:
Name:
Title:
A-73
[Reverse of Certificate]
ABBREVIATIONS
The following abbreviations, when used in the inscription on the face of this Certificate, shall be construed as
follows according to applicable laws or regulations:
TEN COM - as tenants in common
UNIF GIFT/TRANSFERS MIN ACT
TEN ENT -   as tenants by the entireties
__________ Custodian _________
JT TEN -       as joint tenants with right of survivorship and
not as tenants in common
(Cust)                                              (Minor)
Under Uniform Gifts/Transfers to CD Minors Act (State)
Additional abbreviations, though not in the above list, may also be used.
Additional abbreviations, though not in the above list, may also be used.
ASSIGNMENT OF COMMON UNITS OF
NORTHERN TIER ENERGY LP
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,              hereby assigns, conveys, sells and transfers unto
(Please print or typewrite name and address of assignee)
(Please insert Social Security or other identifying
number of assignee)
Common Units representing limited partner interests evidenced by this Certificate, subject to the Partnership
Agreement, and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint              as its attorney-in-fact with full power of
substitution to transfer the same on the books of Northern Tier Energy LP
Date:
NOTE: The signature to any endorsement hereon must
correspond with the name as written upon the face of
this Certificate in every particular. without alteration,
enlargement or change.
THE SIGNATURE(S) MUST BE GUARANTEED BY AN
ELIGIBLE GUARANTOR INSTITUTION (BANKS,
STOCKBROKERS, SAVINGS AND LOAN
ASSOCIATIONS AND CREDIT UNIONS WITH
MEMBERSHIP IN AN APPROVED SIGNATURE
GUARANTEE MEDALLION PROGRAM), PURSUANT TO
S.E.C. RULE 17Ad-15
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(Signature)
(Signature)
A-74
APPENDIX B
GLOSSARY OF INDUSTRY TERMS USED IN THIS PROSPECTUS
The terms defined in this section are used throughout this prospectus:
“3:2:1 crack spread” refers to the approximate refining margin resulting from processing three barrels of
crude oil to produce two barrels of gasoline and one barrel of distillate;
“Barrel” refers to common unit of measure in the oil industry, which equates to 42 gallons;
“Barrels per stream day” as defined by the EIA, represents the maximum number of barrels of input that a
distillation facility can process within a 24-hour period when running at full capacity under optimal crude and
product slate conditions with no allowance for downtime.
“Blendstocks” refers to various compounds that are combined with gasoline or diesel from the crude oil
refining process to make finished gasoline and diesel; these may include natural gasoline, fluid catalytic
cracking unit or FCCU gasoline, ethanol, reformate or butane, among others;
“Bpd” refers to an abbreviation for barrels per calendar day, which is defined by the EIA as the amount of
input that a distillation facility can process under usual operating conditions reduced for regular limitations
that may delay, interrupt, or slow down production such as downtime due to such conditions as mechanical
problems, repairs, and slowdowns;
“Catalyst” refers to a substance that alters, accelerates, or instigates chemical changes, but is neither
produced, consumed nor altered in the process;
“Coke” refers to a coal-like substance that is produced during the refining process;
“Complexity” refers to the number, type and capacity of processing units at a refinery, measured by the
Nelson index, which is often used as a measure of a refinery’s ability to process lower cost crude oils into
higher value light refined products, including transportation fuels, such as gasoline and distillates;
“Crack spread” refers to a simplified calculation that measures the difference between the price for light
products and crude oil;
“Distillates” refers to primarily diesel, kerosene and jet fuel;
“Ethanol” refers to a clear, colorless, flammable oxygenated hydrocarbon. Ethanol is typically produced
chemically from ethylene, or biologically from fermentation of various sugars from carbohydrates found in
agricultural crops and cellulosic residues from crops or wood. It is used in the United States as a gasoline
octane enhancer and oxygenate;
“Feedstocks” refers to petroleum products, such as crude oil, that are processed and blended into refined
products;
“Group 3 3:2:1 crack spread” refers to the 3:2:1 crack spread calculated using the market value of PADD II
Group 3 conventional gasoline and ultra low sulfur diesel against the market value of NYMEX WTI;
“Light products” refers to the group of refined products with lower boiling temperatures, including gasoline
and distillates;
“Mechanical availability” refers to to unit rate capacity less lost capacity due to unplanned downtime less
downtime due to planned maintenance divided by unit rated capacity less downtime due to planned
maintenance.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
B-1
“OSHA Recordable Rate” means the injury frequency rate reported by the Company to OSHA, which is equal
to the number of recordable injures in a particular period multiplied by 200,000 and divided by the total hours
worked in such period, including both employees and contractors;
“PADD II” refers to the Petroleum Administration for Defense District II region of the United States, which
covers the following states: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Wisconsin;
“Refined products” refers to petroleum products, such as gasoline, diesel and jet fuel, which are produced by
a refinery;
“Sour crude oil” refers to a crude oil that is relatively high in sulfur content, requiring additional processing
to remove the sulfur. Sour crude oil is typically less expensive than sweet crude oil;
“Sweet crude oil” refers to a crude oil that is relatively low in sulfur content, requiring less processing to
remove the sulfur. Sweet crude oil is typically more expensive than sour crude oil;
“Throughput” refers to the volume processed through a unit or a refinery;
“Turnaround” refers to a periodically required standard procedure to refurbish and maintain a refinery that
involves the shutdown and inspection of major processing units and occurs every three to four years on
industry average;
“Upper Great Plains” refers to a portion of PADD II region and includes Minnesota, North Dakota, South
Dakota and Wisconsin;
“WTI” refers to West Texas Intermediate crude oil, a light, sweet crude oil, characterized by an American
Petroleum Institute gravity, or API gravity, between 39 and 41 and a sulfur content of approximately 0.4 weight
percent that is used as a benchmark for other crude oils; and
“Yield” refers to the percentage of refined products that is produced from crude oil and other feedstocks.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
B-2
Common Units
Representing Limited Partner Interests
Northern Tier Energy LP
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Barclays
BofA Merrill Lynch
Credit Suisse
Deutsche Bank Securities
UBS Investment Bank
J.P. Morgan                                         Macquarie Capital
Through and including                     , 2012 (the 25th day after the date of this prospectus), all dealers effecting
transactions in these securities, whether or not participating in this offering, may be required to deliver a
prospectus. This is in addition to a dealer’s obligation to deliver a prospectus when acting as an underwriter
and with respect to an unsold allotment or subscription.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
ITEM 13. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution
The following table sets forth an itemized statement of the amounts of all expenses (excluding the
underwriting discount and the success fee payable to ACON Management and TPG Management) payable by
us in connection with the registration of the common units offered hereby. With the exception of the SEC
registration fee, FINRA filing fee and NYSE listing fee), the amounts set forth below are estimates.
SEC registration fee
FINRA filing fee
NYSE listing fee
Accountants’ fees and expenses
Legal fees and expenses
Printing and engraving expenses
Transfer agent and registrar fees
Miscellaneous
Total
*
To be provided by amendment.
$22,920  
  20,500  
 
*  
*  
 
*  
 
 
*  
  3,500  
*  
 
   
 
*  
$
ITEM 14. Indemnification of Directors and Officers
The section of the prospectus entitled “The Partnership Agreement—Indemnification” is incorporated herein
by reference and discloses that we will generally indemnify our executive officers and the directors and
officers of our general partner and our sponsors to the fullest extent permitted by law against all losses,
claims, damages or similar events. Subject to any terms, conditions or restrictions set forth in the amended
and restated partnership agreement, Section 17-108 of the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act
empowers a Delaware limited partnership to indemnify and hold harmless any partner or other person from
and against all claims and demands whatsoever.
Section 18-108 of the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act provides that a Delaware limited liability
company may indemnify and hold harmless any member or manager or other person from and against any
and all claims and demands whatsoever. The limited liability company agreement of Northern Tier Energy GP
LLC, our general partner, provides for the indemnification of its directors and officers against liabilities they
incur in their capacities as such. The Registrant may enter into indemnity agreements with each of its current
directors and officers to give these directors and officers additional contractual assurances regarding the
scope of the indemnification set forth in the Registrar’s limited liability company agreement and to provide
additional procedural protections.
The underwriting agreement that we expect to enter into with the underwriters, to be filed as Exhibit 1.1 to this
registration statement, will contain indemnification and contribution provisions.
ITEM 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
On October 24, 2011, Northern Tier Energy, Inc. issued 100 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per
share, to Northern Tier Investors, LLC for $1.00. The issuance of such shares of common stock was not
registered under the Securities Act, because the shares were offered and sold in a transaction exempt from
registration under Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
II-1
On June 6, 2012, Northern Tier Energy, Inc. issued 10 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, to
Northern Tier Energy GP LLC, for $0.10. The issuance of such shares of common stock were not registered
under the Securities Act, because the shares were offered and sold in a transaction exempt from registration
under Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On June 6, 2012, in connection with our conversion from Northern Tier Energy Inc. to Northern Tier Energy
LP, we issued (i) 100% of our limited partner interests to Northern Tier Holdings LLC and (ii) a non-economic
general partner interest to Northern Tier Energy GP LLC. The issuance of such partnership interests was not
registered under the Securities Act, because the interests were offered and sold in a transaction exempt from
registration under Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
ITEM 16. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a)
Exhibits
Exhibit
Number     
 
1.1      
  **2.1
**2.2
**2.3
**2.4
3.1      
3.2
**4.1
*5.1      
 
 
8.1      
  10.1      
  10.2      
 **10.3
**10.4
Description
Form of Underwriting Agreement.
Formation Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among Marathon Petroleum Company LP,
Speedway SuperAmerica LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC Contribution Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among
Marathon Petroleum Company LP, St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
Northern Tier Retail LLC Contribution Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among Speedway
SuperAmerica LLC, Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
Northern Tier Bakery LLC Contribution Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among Speedway
SuperAmerica LLC, SuperMom’s LLC, Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
Certificate of Limited Partnership of Northern Tier Energy LP.
Form of First Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement of Northern Tier Energy LP
(included as Appendix A to the Prospectus).
Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2010, by and among Northern Tier Energy LLC, Northern Tier
Finance Corporation, the subsidiary guarantors parties thereto and Deutsche Bank Trust Company
Americas.
Opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. as to the legality of the securities being registered.
Opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. relating to tax matters.
Form of Transaction Agreement.
Form of Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement.
Credit Agreement, dated December 1, 2010, by and among the financial institutions party thereto, J.P.
Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., Bank of America, N.A., Macquarie Capital (USA) Inc., Royal Bank of
Canada and SunTrust Bank, St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC, Northern Tier Bakery LLC, Northern Tier
Retail LLC, SuperAmerica Franchising LLC, Northern Tier Energy LLC and each other subsidiary of
Northern Tier Energy LLC from time to time party thereto (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to
the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on December 13, 2011).
Employment Agreement between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Mario Rodriguez (Incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on December 13, 2011).
II-2
Description
Employment Agreement between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Hank Kuchta (Incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.7 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on December 13, 2011).
Separation Agreement and Release of Claims, dated November 2, 2011 between Northern Tier Energy
LLC and Neal Murphy.
Offer Letter between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Dave Bonczek, dated February 7, 2011
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Exhibit
Number     
  **10.5
10.6
**10.7
Offer Letter between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Dave Bonczek, dated February 7, 2011
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on
December 13, 2011).
10.8       Offer Letter between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Greg Mullins, dated December 1, 2010.
Amended and Restated Management Services Agreement, dated as of January 1, 2012, by and among
Northern Tier Energy, LLC, TPG VI Management, LLC and ACON Funds Management L.L.C.
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on
February 10, 2012).
10.10     Form of Long-Term Incentive Plan of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC.
**10.12
Amended and Restated Crude Oil Supply Agreement dated March 29, 2012, by and between J.P.
Morgan Commodities Canada Corporation and St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC. (Incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.9 of Amendment No. 2 to Northern Tier Energy LLC’s Registration Statement on
Form S-4 filed on April 20, 2012).
Settlement Agreement and Release dated May 4, 2012, by and between Northern Tier Energy LLC and
Marathon Petroleum Company LP. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to the Registration
Statement on Form S-1 filed on May 7, 2012.)
21.1       List of subsidiaries of Northern Tier Energy LP.
23.1       Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (pertaining to Northern Tier Energy LLC).
23.2
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (pertaining to St. Paul Park Refinery and Retail Marketing
Business).
*23.3       Consent of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. (included in Exhibit 5.1).
23.4       Consent of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. (included in Exhibit 8.1).
24.1       Power of Attorney (included on the signature page of the initial filing of this registration statement).
To be filed by amendment.
Previously filed.
Certain portions have been omitted pursuant to a pending confidential treatment request. Omitted information
has been separately filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
**10.9
†**10.11
*
**
†
ITEM 17. Undertakings
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to provide to the underwriters at the closing specified in the
underwriting agreement certificates in such denominations and registered in such names as required by the
underwriters to permit prompt delivery to each purchaser.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors,
officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the
registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such
indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In
the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
II-3
the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the
registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or
controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion
of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that:
(1) For purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act, the information omitted from the form
of prospectus filed as part of this registration statement in reliance upon Rule 430A and contained in a form of
prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(1) or (4) or 497(h) under the Securities Act shall be
deemed to be part of this registration statement as of the time it was declared effective.
(2) For the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each post-effective amendment that
contains a form of prospectus shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide
offering thereof.
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this Registration
Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Ridgefield,
State of Connecticut, on June 29, 2012.
Northern Tier Energy LP
By:  Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
By:  /s/ PETER T. GELFMAN
Peter T. Gelfman
Vice President, General Counsel and
Secretary of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below appoints Peter T. Gelfman and David Bonczek, and each of
them, any of whom may act without the joinder of the other, as his true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and
agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place and stead, in any
and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments (including post-effective amendments) to this Registration
Statement and any Registration Statement (including any amendment thereto) for this offering that is to be
effective upon filing pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the
same, with all exhibits thereto, and all other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, granting unto said attorneys-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and
perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done, as fully to all intents and purposes
as he might or would do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents
or any of them or their or his substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ MARIO E. RODRIGUEZ
Mario E. Rodriguez
/s/ DAVID BONCZEK
David Bonczek
Title
Chief Executive Officer and Director of
Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
(Principal Executive Officer)
Chief Financial Officer of Northern Tier
Energy GP LLC
(Principal Financial Officer and Principal
Accounting Officer)
Date
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
/s/ HANK KUCHTA
President, Chief Operating Officer and
/s/ HANK KUCHTA
Hank Kuchta
/s/ DAN F. SMITH
Dan F. Smith
/s/ BERNARD W. ARONSON
Bernard W. Aronson
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Signature
/s/ JONATHAN GINNS
Jonathan Ginns
/s/ THOMAS HOFMANN
Thomas Hofmann
/s/ SCOTT D. JOSEY
Scott D. Josey
/s/ ERIC LIAW
Eric Liaw
/s/ MICHAEL MACDOUGALL
Michael MacDougall
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
President, Chief Operating Officer and
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
June 29, 2012
Director and Chairman of Northern Tier
Energy GP LLC
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
Title
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
Director of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
Date
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
Exhibit
Number     
 
1.1      
  **2.1
**2.2
**2.3
**2.4
3.1      
3.2
**4.1
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Description
Form of Underwriting Agreement.
Formation Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among Marathon Petroleum Company LP,
Speedway SuperAmerica LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC Contribution Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among
Marathon Petroleum Company LP, St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
Northern Tier Retail LLC Contribution Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among Speedway
SuperAmerica LLC, Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
Northern Tier Bakery LLC Contribution Agreement, dated October 6, 2010, by and among Speedway
SuperAmerica LLC, SuperMom’s LLC, Northern Tier Retail LLC and Northern Tier Investors, LLC.
Certificate of Limited Partnership of Northern Tier Energy LP.
Form of First Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement of Northern Tier Energy LP
(included as Appendix A to the Prospectus).
Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2010, by and among Northern Tier Energy LLC, Northern Tier
Finance Corporation, the subsidiary guarantors parties thereto and Deutsche Bank Trust Company
Americas.
Opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. as to the legality of the securities being registered.
Opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. relating to tax matters.
Form of Transaction Agreement.
Form of Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement.
Credit Agreement, dated December 1, 2010, by and among the financial institutions party thereto, J.P.
Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., Bank of America, N.A., Macquarie Capital (USA) Inc., Royal Bank of
Canada and SunTrust Bank, St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC, Northern Tier Bakery LLC, Northern Tier
Retail LLC, SuperAmerica Franchising LLC, Northern Tier Energy LLC and each other subsidiary of
Northern Tier Energy LLC from time to time party thereto (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to
the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on December 13, 2011).
Employment Agreement between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Mario Rodriguez (Incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on December 13, 2011).
Employment Agreement between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Hank Kuchta (Incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.7 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on December 13, 2011).
Separation Agreement and Release of Claims, dated November 2, 2011 between Northern Tier Energy
LLC and Neal Murphy.
Offer Letter between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Dave Bonczek, dated February 7, 2011
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on
December 13, 2011).
*5.1      
 
 
8.1      
  10.1      
  10.2      
 **10.3
**10.4
**10.5
10.6
**10.7
Exhibit Index - i
Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Exhibit
Number     
10.8    
**10.9
10.10    
 
 †**10.11
**10.12
21.1      
23.1      
23.2
*23.3      
23.4      
24.1
*
**
†
Description
Offer Letter between Northern Tier Energy LLC and Greg Mullins, dated December 1, 2010.
Amended and Restated Management Services Agreement, dated as of January 1, 2012, by and among
Northern Tier Energy, LLC, TPG VI Management, LLC and ACON Funds Management L.L.C.
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to the Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed on
February 10, 2012).
Form of Long-Term Incentive Plan of Northern Tier Energy GP LLC.
Amended and Restated Crude Oil Supply Agreement dated March 29, 2012, by and between J.P.
Morgan Commodities Canada Corporation and St. Paul Park Refining Co. LLC. (Incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.9 of Amendment No. 2 to Northern Tier Energy LLC’s Registration Statement on
Form S-4 filed on April 20, 2012).
Settlement Agreement and Release dated May 4, 2012, by and between Northern Tier Energy LLC and
Marathon Petroleum Company LP. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to the Registration
Statement on Form S-1 filed on May 7, 2012.)
List of subsidiaries of Northern Tier Energy LP.
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (pertaining to Northern Tier Energy LLC).
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (pertaining to St. Paul Park Refinery and Retail Marketing
Business).
Consent of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. (included in Exhibit 5.1).
Consent of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. (included in Exhibit 8.1).
Power of Attorney (included on the signature page of the initial filing of this registration statement).
To be filed by amendment.
Previously filed.
Certain portions have been omitted pursuant to a pending confidential treatment request. Omitted information
has been separately filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Exhibit Index - ii