
EX-10.2 3 ernq22016exhibit102.htm EXHIBIT 10.2 Exhibit
ZENITH BANK PLC
 HEAD OFFICE
June 17, 2016
The Managing Director
Erin Petroleum Nigeria Limited
Formerly Camac Petroleum Limited
Camac House, Plot 1649, Olosa Street
Victoria Island, Lagos
Emai: okezie.odimuko@camacenergy.com
Phone:08034294673
Dear Sir
OFFER OF CREDIT FACILITY
We are pleased to advise that the Board and Management of Zenith Bank Plc has approved a
review of the credit facility earlier availed vide over Offer Letter dated July 21, 2014 to your
company as requested under the following terms and conditions:
Zenith Bank Pic ("Zenith")
Lender
Borrower Erin Petroleum Nigeria Limited ("EPNL")
Type of
Facility
Initial
Amount
Term Loan
US$100,000,000.00 (One Hundred Million Dollars)
New
Amount
Purpose
US$92,367,295.33 (Ninety-two Million, Three Hundred and Sixty· seven Thousand,
Two Hundred and Ninety-five Dollars, Thirty· three Cents) to be booked in Dollar and
Naira tranches as follows:
(i) N1,528,133,618.25 (One Billion, Five Hundred and Twenty​ eight Million, One
Hundred and Thirty-three Thousand, Six Hundred and Eighteen Naira, Twenty-five
Kobo)
(ii) US$84,375,000.00 (Eighty-fourMillion, Three Hundred and Seventy-five Thousand
Dollars)
To restructure the existing term loan facility earlier availed to finance the development
of OML 120 and OML 121.
April 1, 2016
Effective
Date
Expiry
Date
MoratoriumTwelve (12) months moratorium on Principal only effective April 01, 2016.
February 2021
Pricing
Staggered
Fee
Payment
Structure:
 
 
Repayment
Terms
(1) Interest Rate (Naira): 22.75% per annum
(2) Interest Rate (Dollar): LIBOR + 9% per annum, subject to a floor of 9.5% per
annum.)
(3) Default Interest: Default interest will be applicable on all overdue amounts at floor
rate plus margin of 2.00% per annum
(4) Fee: (i) Restructure Fee: 0.75% flat, payable in line with agreed staggered fee
payment structure below.
(ii) Advisory Fee: 0. 25% flat, payable in line with agreed staggered fee payment
structure below.
(iii) Loan Service Fee (Periodic): 0.5% flat payable in line with agreed staggered fee
payment structure below and subsequently as a lump sum payment on every
anniversary on the outstanding balance until the facility is fully repaid.
(i) 50% upon acceptance of offer
(ii} 25% on September 30, 2016
(iii) 25% on December 30, 2016
(1) Sculpting of Principal repayment to align with Cashflow as follows:
(i) June 2017 to December 2017- 5% per quarter
(ii) January 2018 to December 2018 - 5.5% per quarter
(iii) January 2019 to December 2019- 6% per quarter
(iv) January 2020 to December 2020-7.5% per quarter (v) February 2021-9% per
quarter
(2) Principal repayment shall be made quarterly after moratorium and interest
payment to remain quarterly during and after moratorium period.
PrepaymentPrepayment is allowed without penalty.
Repayment
Source
(i) Proceeds of sales of crude oil produced from OMLs 120 and 121 (Oil Fields OYO
7, 8 and 9) being financed by Zenith.
(ii) Revenue from other sources of cash available to EPNL and Erin Energy
Incorporated.
Security(1) Legal charge over Allied Energy Plc's interest in OMLs 120 and 121.
(2) All Asset Debenture over fixed and floating assets, present and future chargeable
assets of EPNL.
(3) Pledge over all the shares of the shareholders of EPNL (to be extended to any new
shares issued in the event of share capital increases) to Zenith.
(4) Assignment of EPNL's and Allied Energy's rights under all commercial contracts
relating to OMLs 120 and 121 including sale and purchase agreements, offtake
agreements and crude handling agreements.
(5) Irrevocable domiciliation agreement between EPNL and offtakers that all proceeds in
respect of the offtake agreements for OMLs 120 and 121 will be domiciled with Zenith
Bank.
(6) Irrevocable undertaking by Camac/AIIied Group to open all NXPs in respect of crude
oil lifting from OML 120/121 ( OYO 7, 8 and 9) being financed throughout the tenor of the
facility with Zenith and to route all proceeds of crude oil sales from OYO 7 & 8 to its
account with Zenith.
(7) Assignment of rights over Hedge, Insurance (including license non-renewal risk
insurance) and all reinsurance contracts including Performance Guarantees by any EPC
related to project execution and activities on OML 120 and 121 to Zenith.
(8) First charge over all EPNL and Allied Energy accounts, receivables, rights and
interests, with respect to OML 120 and 121.
(9) Security Assignment by EPNL and Allied Energy of all rights under the Hedging
Arrangements entered into in relation to the facility to Zenith Bank.
(10) Corporate Guarantee of Allied Energy Plc.
(11) Corporate Guarantee of Erin Energy Corporation, the parent company of Camac
Petroleum Limited.
(12) An undertaking from Allied Energy committing to domicile the proceeds from the
sale of crude oil and processing of all NXPs through its account with Zenith.
(13) Comfort letter from Camac (Erin) Energy Holdings Limited to ensure that its
subsidiary (Allied Energy Plc) domiciles the crude oil proceeds with Zenith and ensure
performance of obligations under the facility agreement.
Creation of Accounts
The following Reserve Accounts will be opened in the name of EPNL:
1.Collection Accounts for Crude and Gas.
2.Tax, Petroleum Profit Tax and Royalties.
3.Cash calls and OPEX
4.Debt Service Accounts
5.Debt Service Reserve Account
6.CAPEX
7.General Corporate Purpose Account
8.Hedge Proceeds Account
9.Cash Sweep Account with Zenith Bank
Special Condition:
•Cash Sweep
100% Cash Sweep of cash flow available for distribution after funding of Reserve Accounts.
• Hedge:
Execution of the Hedge Policy and International Swaps and Derivative Association Agreement
(ISDA) prior to the completion of this restructuring with Zenith Capital appointed as Hedge
Advisors. All cost associated with instituting an acceptable Hedge will be for the account of
EPNL.
Execution of other Hedge Documents within 60 days of this restructuring to ensure activation of
an appropriate hedge once an acceptable strike price is attained.
1.
2.
•Offtake Agreement
EPNL/Erin Energy Incorporated is to submit a duly executed copy of medium or long term Offtake
Agreement between EPNL/Erin Energy Incorporated and its crude oil and/or gas offtakers
expressly domiciling proceeds of sale of crude and/or gas through Camac/Erin account with
Zenith.
•DSRA:
DSRA funding shall initially be for one (1) quarter of interest, but will increase to two (2) quarters
once oil price is at or above $55 per barrel
Conditions Precedent:
1.
Acceptance of offer evidenced by signing and returning the attached copy of this Offer Letter by
authorized signatories of EPNL.
2.Submission of Board Resolution of EPNL authorizing and accepting usage of the facility.
3.
(i)
Submission of a duly executed (under seal) Board Resolution of Allied Energy Plc authorizing
the following:
The use of its OMLs 120 and 121 as collateral for this facility. All the documents required for
perfection and creation of legal charge shall be executed accordingly.
That all proceeds of crude oil export from OMLs 120 and 121 shall be domiciled with Zenith
and transferred to the account of EPNL with Zenith towards liquidation of the maturing
instalments of this facility.
Receipt of a Letter from EPNL stating its current indebtedness to other lenders with the
following details:
(ii)
4.
(i)Facility Limits/Obtained (ii) Current Outstanding balance (iii) Collateral Pledged.
5.
Receipt of duly executed Board Resolution of EPNL consenting to take over the liabilities and
obligations of Camac Petroleum Limited under the facility granted by Zenith.
6.Execution of Term Loan agreement between EPNL and Zenith.
7.Execution of legal charge by Allied Energy Plc on its interest in OMLs 120 and 121.
8.Creation of All Asset Debenture over the fixed and floating assets of EPNL.
9.
Execution of pledge over all the shares of EPNL (to be extended to any new shares issued in
the event of share capital increases.
10.
Submission of a duly executed medium or long term Offtake Agreement between Camac/Erin
and its crude oil and gas offtakers expressly domiciling proceeds of sale of crude and/or gas
through Camac/Erin Account with Zenith Bank.
11.Execution of an acceptable Hedge policy and ISDA.
12.
Execution of assignment of EPNL and Allied Energy Pic's rights under all commercial
contracts relating to OMLs 120 and 121 including sale and Purchase Agreements, Offtake
Agreements and crude handling agreements.
Receipt of an irrevocable undertaking by EPNL and/or Allied Energy Pic to open all NXP in
respect of crude oil lifting from OMLs 120 and 121 (OYO 7, 8 and 9) throughout the tenor of the
facility with Zenith and to route all proceeds of crude oil sales from OMLs 120 and 121 (OYO
7, 8 and 9) to its account with Zenith.
Execution of pledge over EPNL accounts, receivables, rights and interests, but only to the
extent that its relates to OMLs 120 and 121.
Execution of first charge on EPNL account with Zenith, warehousing the proceeds of crude oil
sales on OMLs 120 and 121.
13.
14.
15.
16.Receipt of duly executed standard Corporate Guarantee of Allied Energy Plc.
17.
18.
Receipt of duly executed standard notarized Corporate Guarantee of Erin Energy
Incorporated, the parent company of EPNL.
EPNL shall undertake to provide the Naira equivalent of the foreign exchange or that its
account with Zenith should be debited for the Naira equivalent of principal and interest in the
event that payment from crude exported is delayed on due date of repayment or at the time of
expiration of the facility.
19.Execution of all other necessary security documents.
Other Conditions:
EPNL shall submit a copy of its quarterly management accounts within sixty (60) days of the
end of each quarter and audited accounts within one hundred and twenty (120) days of the end
of the financial year.
This offer is made subject to availability of funds and to the rules and regulations governing
banking business as enunciated by the Central Bank of Nigeria from time to time.
In line with Central Bank of Nigeria ("CBW) directive, Zenith shall disclose information relating
to this facility to CBN Licensed Credit Bureaus.
EPNL shall be required to take out a comprehensive insurance policy with a reputable
insurance company acceptable to Zenith against fire and any other form of peril on OMLs 120
and 121 with Zenith noted as the first loss payee.
EPNL shall use its best efforts to ensure that contractors/subcontractors associated with this
project open/maintain accounts with Zenith wherein funds shall subsequently be disbursed.
Zenith reserves the right to review the terms and conditions of this facility. EPNL shall be
notified of any decision taken in this respect, as it does not diminish the bank's control.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
EPNL shall submit on an annual basis an independent reserves and technical report covering
OMLs 120 and 121 prepared by an Independent Technical Consultant, acceptable to Zenith.
EPNL shall submit documents relating to EPNL's acquisition of the remaining economic
8.interest in OMLs 120 and 121 from Allied Energy.
9.
10.
11.
12.
In the event of a contemplated sale of shares, issuance of additional share capital,
amalgamation of business or any other change that would result in any change of ownership of
the company, or a substantial share capital of the company being taken over by a new owner,
the prior consent of Zenith must be obtained in writing, otherwise the facility shall become
immediately due and payable.
EPNL shall submit Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) and other required regulatory permits from DPR as at when
required.
EPNL shall not incur additional borrowings for further expansion of OMLs 120 and 121
without the written consent of Zenith. Zenith shall have right of first refusal.
EPNL shall carry out periodic reserve redetermination audit to ascertain changes in borrowing
base.
Zenith reserves the right to securitize,syndicate or sell its interest in this credit facility based
on its global risk/liquidity management objectives during the period of the facility.
All legal fees, out-of-pocket expenses, taxes or commissions including cost of recovery of the
facility in the event of default shall be for the account of EPNL.
13.
14.
Kindly indicate your understanding and acceptance of the above terms and conditions by signing
this offer letter, and returning same to us on or before July 1, 2016.
Please note that Zenith reserves the right to regard this offer as lapsed if it is not accepted on or
before the above date.
Yours faithfully
ZENITH BANK PLC
The offer of US$92,367,295.33 (Ninety-two Million, Three Hundred and Sixty-seven Thousand,
Two Hundred and Ninety-five Dollars,Thirty-three Cents) Term Loan, together with all the terms
and conditions has been read and is hereby accepted on behalf of Erin Petroleum Nigeria
Limited by: