
FORM 51-102F3
MATERIAL CHANGE REPORT
Item 1.
Name and Address of Company
West Melville Metals Inc.
Suite 1430 - 800 West Pender Street
Vancouver, BC  V6C 2V6 
 
Date of Material Change
August 15, 2016
Item 2.
Item 3.
News Release
The news release was disseminated through Marketwired on August 15, 2016.
Item 4.
Summary of Material Change
West Melville announced option to joint venture agreement to acquire the Wels Property 
in Western Yukon and a proposed $2.0M Financing.
Item 5.
Full Description of Material Change
5.1
Full Description of Material Change
(“West Melville” or the “Company”) (TSX-V: WMM) announced that it has signed a definitive agreement 
with Gorilla Minerals Corp. (“Gorilla”), an unlisted reporting issuer, (the “Option Agreement”) to acquire
a 90% joint venture interest (subject to an existing 3% NSR) in certain mineral property interests located 
in the Yukon Territory and generally referred to as the “Wels Property”  (the “Wels Property”). The
Company also announced that, in conjunction with the Option Agreement, it will undertake a non-
brokered private placement financing of up to $2,000,000.
The Wels Property consists of two separate claim blocks totalling 239 quartz claims (4,995.88 hectares), 
located 50 kilometers east of Beaver Creek and 180 kilometers south of Dawson City in west-central
Yukon; and is 20 kilometres east of the Snag airstrip which is serviced by an all-weather road.  It hosts a
newly discovered reduced intrusion related gold mineralizing system, similar in age and style to Kinross’s 
Fort Knox deposit in Alaska and Victoria Gold’s Eagle Gold Project, Yukon.
The Option Agreement calls for West Melville to make cash payments aggregating $350,000 staged over 
24 months, and issue 3.0 million West Melville common shares (“WMM Shares”) staged over a 30-month
period. The Option Agreement does not require West Melville to make any minimum amount of
exploration expenditures.
Upon completion of these payments and shares issuances, WMM and Gorilla will proceed under the 
terms of a joint venture agreement prescribed by the Option Agreement (the “Joint Venture”). The Joint
Venture terms will require West Melville to fund the project fully through to the completion of a preliminary
economic assessment, following which project expenditures will be funded on a 90/10 proportionate basis
as between the Company and Gorilla, respectively, with the Company acting as the project manager and
2
holding voting control of the Joint Venture project committee.  If, at any time, either party’s Joint Venture
interest is diluted to less than 1.0%, that diluted party’s interest will be cancelled and the Joint Venture will 
terminate.
The existing 3.0% NSR royalty encumbering the Wels Property is governed by a 2011 agreement 
between Gorilla and two arm’s length holders, Roger Hulstein and Farrell Andersen. That royalty
agreement provides that 2% of the 3% NSR may be purchased from the royalty holders for lump-sum
cash payment of $1,500,000.  Pursuant to the Option Agreement, the Company will pay the $20,000 
annual advance royalty due under that 2011 agreement.
In conjunction with the Option Agreement, West Melville proposes to carry out a non-brokered private 
placement financing (the “Financing”) to raise gross proceeds of up to $2,000,000.  The Financing
proceeds will be raised by the issuance of up to 8,000,000 units at a price of $0.25 per unit (the “Unit
Offering Price").
Each unit will consist of one WMM Share and one-half of one WMM Share purchase warrant. Each whole
warrant will entitle the holder to purchase one additional WMM Share at a price of $0.35 per share for a 
period of 18 months following the date of closing, subject to an acceleration provision under which, if at
any time from four months and one day after the closing of the Financing, the volume weighted average
trading price of WMM Shares on the TSX Venture Exchange over a period of 10 consecutive trading days 
exceeds $0.50, the Company may, within five days of such event, provide notice (the “Notice”) to the
holders of the Warrants that the Warrants will expire on the date which is 30 calendar days after the date
of the Notice.
The proceeds of the Financing will be used to fund the option payments under the Option Agreement, the
Company’s exploration of the Wels Property, and for general working capital purposes.
The Company has commissioned Mr. R. Allen Doherty, P.Geo. to prepare an updated technical report 
compliant with the requirements of National Instrument 43-101 Standards of Disclosure for Mineral 
Projects (“NI 43-101”) to be filed in support of its submissions to the TSX Venture Exchange (“TSXV”).
The Option Agreement and the Financing are subject to the prior acceptance of the TSXV.  The proposed 
acquisition under the Option Agreement will constitute a “Fundamental Acquisition” by the Company
under the Policies of the TSXV.  The acceptance of the TSXV will require, among other things, the
completion and filing of the updated NI 43-101 compliant technical report on the Wels Property noted 
above.
All of the securities to be issued in connection with these transactions will be subject to a four-month hold 
period running, in each case, from the distribution date of such securities. Finder's fees may be paid by
the Company on a portion of the Financing.
Forward-Looking Statement Cautions:
This material change report contains certain "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Canadian securities legislation,
relating to, among other things, the Company's plans for the acquisition of the above-described Wels Property, the completion of the
proposed Financing, and the future exploration of the Wels Property. Although the Company believes that such statements are
reasonable, it can give no assurance that such expectations will prove to be correct. Forward-looking statements are statements
3
that are not historical facts; they are generally, but not always, identified by the words "expects," "plans," "anticipates," "believes,"
"intends," "estimates," "projects," "aims," "potential," "goal," "objective," "prospective," and similar expressions, or that events or
conditions "will," "would," "may," "can," "could" or "should" occur, or are those statements, which, by their nature, refer to future
events. The Company cautions that Forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs, estimates and opinions of the Company's
management on the date the statements are made and they involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Consequently, there can
be no assurances that such statements will prove to be accurate and actual results and future events could differ materially from
those anticipated in such statements. Except to the extent required by applicable securities laws and the policies of the TSX Venture
Exchange, the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forward-looking statements if management's beliefs, estimates or
opinions, or other factors, should change. Factors that could cause future results to differ materially from those anticipated in these
forward-looking statements include, the Company's inability to secure the acceptance by the TSX Venture Exchange for the above-
described option agreements, delays faced by the Company in completing the NI 43-101 technical reports, accidents and other risks
associated with mineral exploration operations, the risk that the Company will encounter unanticipated geological factors, the
possibility that the Company may not be able to secure permitting and other governmental or First Nations clearances, or complete
the financing necessary to carry out the Company's exploration plans, and the risk of political uncertainties and regulatory or legal
changes in the jurisdictions where the Company carries on its business, including the Yukon Territory, that might interfere with the
Company's business and prospects. The reader is urged to refer to the Company's reports, publicly available through the Canadian
Securities Administrators' System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval (SEDAR) at www.sedar.com for a more complete
discussion of such risk factors and their potential effects
The securities described herein have not been and will not be registered under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, and may not be offered or sold in the United States except pursuant to registration or an available exemption from
registration under such Act.
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the TSX Venture
Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this material change report. 
 
5.2
Disclosure for Restructuring Transactions
Not applicable
Item 6.
Reliance on Subsection 7.1(2) of National Instrument 51-102
Not applicable
Item 7.
Omitted Information
None
Item 8.
Executive Officer
John Robins, Chairman 
Business Telephone:  604.682.4750
Item 9.
Date of Report
August 15, 2016
West Melville Metals Inc.
Per:
“John Robins”                        
John Robins, Chairman