
SB-1 1 formsb1.htm PARADIGM VENTURES CORP. FORM SB-1 Paradigm Ventures Corp.
Form SB-1
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM SB-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP.
(Name of small business issuer in its charter)
Nevada
1040
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
Applied for
(IRS Employer  Identification
No.)
1455 Bellevue Ave., Suite 211, W. Vancouver, BC V7T 1C3
604-725-5377
(Address and telephone number of principal executive offices)
1455 Bellevue Ave., Suite 211, W. Vancouver, BC V7T 1C3 (Address of principal place of
business or intended principal place of business)
John. D. Briner Law Corp., 999 W. Hastings, Suite 510, Vancouver, BC V6C 2W2
(Name, address and telephone number of agent for service)
604-685-7552
Copies of all communication to:
Paradigm Ventures Corp.
1455 Bellevue Ave., Suite 211,
W. Vancouver, BC V7T 1C3
Approximate date of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after the effective date of
the Registration Statement.
If any of the securities being registered on this form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous
basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933 check the following box. x
If this form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under
the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement
number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. o
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. o
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. o
If delivery of the prospectus is expected to be made pursuant to Rule 434, please check the
following box. o
1
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of each
class of
securities to be
Dollar Amount to
registered
Common stock
be registered
$35,000.00
Number of
Shares to be
registered
7,000,000
Proposed
maximum
offering price per
Amount of
unit
$0.005
registration fee
$100
The registrant  hereby  amends  this  registration  statement  on  such  date  or  dates a s may  be
necessary  to  delay  its  effective  date  until  the  registrant  shall  file a  further  amendment  which
specifically states that this registration statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance
with  Section  8(a)  of  the Securities Act of 1933 or until the registration statement shall become
effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Disclosure alternative used (check one): Alternative 1   Alternative 2 X
2
Subject to Completion, Dated November 15, 2005
PROSPECTUS
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP.
7,000,000 Shares of Common Stock
The selling shareholder named in this prospectus is offering 7,000,000 shares of common stock
of  Paradigm  Ventures  Corp.  We  will  not  receive  any  of  the  proceeds from  the  sale  of  these
shares. The shares were acquired by the selling shareholder directly from us in a private offering
of  our  common  stock  that was exempt  from  registration  under  the  securities  laws.  The  selling
shareholder has set  an  offering  price  for  these  securities  of  $0.005  per  share  and  an  offering
period  of  four  months  from  the  date  of  this  prospectus.  See  “Security  Ownership of  Selling
Shareholder and Management” for more information about the selling shareholder.
Our common stock is presently not traded on any market or securities exchange. The offering
price may not reflect the market price of our shares after the offering.
This investment involves a high degree of risk. You should purchase shares only if you
can afford a complete loss. See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 4.
Neither the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  nor  any  state  securities  commission
h a s approved  or  disapproved  of  these  securities  or  passed  upon  the  adequacy  or
accuracy of the prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell these
securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is
effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and is not soliciting an offer to buy
these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.
Shares Offered by
Selling Shareholder
Per Share
Minimum Purchase
Total Offering
Price To Public
$0.005
$100
$35,000.00
Selling Agent
Commissions
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Proceeds to Selling
Shareholder
$0.005
$100
$35,000.00
Proceeds to the selling shareholder do not include offering costs, including filing fees, printing
costs,  legal  fees,  accounting  fees,  and  transfer  agent  fees  estimated at  $10,000.  Paradigm
Ventures Corp. will pay these expenses.
This Prospectus is dated November 15, 2005.
Paradigm Ventures Corp.
1455 Bellevue Ave., Suite 211,
W. Vancouver, BC V7T 1C3
604-
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY 
   The Offering 
    Selected Financial Information 
RISK FACTORS 
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
DILUTION 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
USE OF PROCEEDS TO ISSUER 
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS 
    General
    Sheep Mountain Prospect 
Summary 
    Acquisition Details 
    Mining Claims 
    Land Status, Topography, Location and Access 
    Previous Operations and Exploration History 
    Geology of the Mineral Claims 
Mineralization 
    Proposed Program of Exploration 
Proposed Phase I and Phase II Programs 
Compliance With Government Regulation 
Employees 
Plan of Operations 
Results Of Operations 
Liquidity And Capital Resources 
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND SIGNIFICANT EMPLOYEES 
REMUNERATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF MANAGEMENT AND CERTAIN SECURITY
HOLDERS 
INTEREST OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS IN CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS 
SECURITIES BEING OFFERED 
SEC POSITION ON INDEMNIFICATION 
EXPERTS 
AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
REPORTS TO STOCKHOLDERS 
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
SIGNATURE PAGE AND EXHIBITS
4
4
 4
 4
 5
 8
 9
 9
 10
 10
 14
 15
 15
 15
 16
 16
 21
 21
 22
 23
 23
 25
 25
 25
 26
 26
 26
 27
27
27
 28
 28
 29
 29
 29
 30
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP.
Paradigm Ventures Corp. was organized under the laws of the State of Nevada on May 3, 2005,
to  explore  mining  claims  and  property  in  the  state  of  New  Mexico. As  of the  date  of  this
prospectus,  we  have  conducted  only  limited  operations. We  have staked  out  a  prospect  that
contains 7 lode mining claims located in Luna County, New Mexico. We refer to these mining
claims as the Sheep Mountain Prospect.
Our plan of operation is to conduct mineral exploration activities on the Sheep Mountain Prospect
in  order  to  assess  whether  these  claims  have  any  potential  for gold. The  report  of  Leroy
Halterman,  a  certified  and  registered  geologist  indicates that  the  Sheep  Mountain  Prospect
represents a viable exploration target for a number of types of deposits. Our plan of operation is
to conduct the first two phases of a staged exploration program on the Sheep Mountain Prospect.
Our proposed  exploration  program  is  designed  to  explore  for  gold  potential on  these mineral
claims. We are an exploration  stage  company  and  we  cannot  assure you that  a  commercially
viable mineral deposit exists on our mineral claims.
Since we are in the exploration stage, we have not yet realized any revenues from our planned
operations.  As  of  October  31,  2005,  we  had  $7,930  in  cash  on  hand, total tangible  assets  of
$5,033, and liabilities of $Nil. Since our inception through October 31, 2005, we have incurred a
net  loss  of  $3,537.  We  attribute  our net loss  to  having  no  revenues  to  offset  our  operating
expenses.  Our  working capital is  not  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  complete  any  phases  of  our
exploration program. Accordingly, we will require additional financing in order to complete the full
exploration program described more fully in the section entitled, "Business and Properties."
We are not a "blank check company," as we do not intend to participate in a reverse acquisition
or merger transaction. A "blank check company" is defined by securities laws as a development
stage company that has no specific business plan or purpose or has indicated that its business
plan is to engage in a merger or acquisition with an unidentified company or companies, or other
entity or person.
Our offices are located at 1455 Bellevue Ave., Suite 211, W. Vancouver, BC V7T  1C3 and our
telephone number is 604-725-5377.
The Offering
n
l
f
e
c
u
r
i
i
t
i
e
n
l
e
e
f
s offered
g shareholder(s)
S
................................................................................................ 
S
........................................................................................
O
g price
.......................................................................................................
S h a r e s outstanding 
offering
prior 
.........................................................
S h a r e s to 
offering.....................................................
outstanding
after
to
the
be
r
i
7,000,000 shares of
common stock
Scott Cabianca
$0.005 per share
10,000,000 shares of
common stock
10,000,000 shares of
common stock
the
U
..................................................................................................
e of
s
proceeds
We will not receive any
proceeds from the sale
of the common stock by
the selling shareholder.
Selected Financial Information
5
The following  summary  financial  data  is  derived  from  our  audited  financial statements  for  the
period  ended  October  31,  2005,  included  elsewhere  in this offering  memorandum.  We  have
prepared our financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Our  results  of  operations for  any interim  period  do  not  necessarily  indicate  our  results  of
operations  for the full  year.  You  should  read  this  summary  financial  data  in  conjunction  with
"Management's  Discussion  and  Analysis  or  Plan  of  Operation,"  "Business," and  our financial
statements.
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the risks
described  below  and  all  other  information  contained  in  this  prospectus before  making  an
investment decision.
Risks Related To Our Financial Condition And Business Model
IF WE DO NOT OBTAIN ADDITIONAL FINANCING, OUR BUSINESS WILL FAIL.
Our current operating funds are not sufficient to complete the first two phases of exploration of
our mineral claims. Therefore, we will need to obtain additional financing in order to complete our
business plan. We currently do not have any operations and we have no income. We do not have
any  arrangements  for  financing and  we  may  not  be  able  to  find  such  financing  if  required.
Obtaining  additional financing  would  be  subject  to  a  number  of  factors,  including  investor
acceptance of  mineral  claims  and  investor  sentiment.  These  factors  may  adversely  affect the
timing, amount, terms, or conditions of any financing that we may obtain or make any additional
financing unavailable to us.
IF W E COMPLETE A FINANCING THROUGH THE SALE OF ADDITIONAL SHARES OF
OUR COMMON STOCK, THEN SHAREHOLDERS WILL EXPERIENCE DILUTION.
The most likely source of future financing presently available to us is through the sale of shares
of  our  common  stock.  Any  sale  of  common  stock  will  result  in dilution of  equity  ownership  to
existing shareholders. This means that if we sell shares of our common stock, more shares will
be outstanding and each existing shareholder will own a smaller percentage of the shares then
outstanding.
OUR COMPANY WAS RECENTLY FORMED AND WE HAVE NOT PROVEN THAT WE
CAN  GENERATE  A  PROFIT. IF  WE FAIL  TO  GENERATE  INCOME  AND  ACHIEVE
PROFITABILITY, AN INVESTMENT IN OUR SECURITIES MAY BE WORTHLESS.
We have no operating history and have not proved we can operate successfully. If we fail, your
investment in our common stock will become worthless. From inception to October 31, 2005, we
incurred a net loss of $3,537.
We were organized under the laws of the State of Nevada, and have had no operations other
than to sell shares to our one shareholder and to acquire rights to mining claims in New Mexico.
As of the date of this prospectus, one shareholder holds our common stock. We face all of the
risks inherent in a new business. The purchase of the securities offered hereby must therefore be
regarded  as th e placing  of  funds  at  a  high  risk  in  a  new  or  "start-up"  venture  with  all the
unforeseen costs, expenses, problems, and difficulties to which such ventures are subject.
6
BECAUSE WE ANTICIPATE OUR OPERATING EXPENSES WILL INCREASE PRIOR TO
OUR  OBTAINING REVENUES, WE  EXPECT  SIGNIFICANT  LOSSES  PRIOR  TO  ANY
PROFITABILITY.
Prior t o completion  of  our  exploration  stage,  we  anticipate  that  we  will  incur  increased
operating  expenses  without  realizing  any  revenues.  We  therefore  expect to  incur significant
losses  into  the  foreseeable  future.  If  we  are  unable  to  generate significant  revenues  from  the
exploration of our mineral claims and the production of minerals thereon, we will not be able to
earn profits or continue operations. There is no history upon which to base any assumption as to
the likelihood that we will prove successful, and we may not be able to generate any operating
revenues or ever achieve profitable operations. If we are unsuccessful in addressing these risks,
our business will most likely
fail.
OUR MINERAL CLAIMS  HAVE  NEVER  BEEN  EXPLORED.  BECAUSE  OF  THE
SPECULATIVE  NATURE  OF EXPLORATION  OF  MINING  PROPERTIES,  THERE 
IS
SUBSTANTIAL  RISK  THAT  NO  COMMERCIALLY EXPLOITABLE  MINERALS  WILL  BE
FOUND AND OUR BUSINESS WILL FAIL.
The search for valuable minerals as a business is extremely risky. Our mineral claims may not
contain any potential for diamonds. Exploration for minerals is a speculative venture necessarily
involving substantial risk. The expenditures to be made by us in the exploration of our mineral
claims may not result in the discovery of commercial quantities of diamonds. Problems such as
unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions are involved in mineral exploration and
often result in unsuccessful exploration efforts. In such a case, we would be unable to complete
our business plan.
MINERAL EXPLORATION  IS  HIGHLY  SPECULATIVE,  INVOLVES  SUBSTANTIAL
EXPENDITURES, AND IS FREQUENTLY NON-PRODUCTIVE.
Mineral exploration  involves  a  high  degree  of  risk  and  exploration  projects  are frequently
unsuccessful. Few prospects that are explored end up having reserves. To  the  extent  that  we
continue to be involved in mineral exploration, the long-term success of our operations will be
related  to  the  cost  and  success o f our  exploration  programs.  We  cannot  assure  you  that  our
exploration efforts will be successful. The risks associated with mineral exploration include:
·the identification of potential mineralization based on superficial analysis; and
  · the capital available for exploration and development.
Substantial expenditures are required to determine if a prospect has economically mineable
mineralization and it may take several years to establish proven and probably reserves. Because
the  probability  of  an  individual  prospect  ever  having reserves is  extremely  remote,  in  all
probability  our  properties  do  not  contain  any reserves,  and  any  funds  and  time  spent  on
exploration will probably be lost.
BECAUSE O F THE  INHERENT  DANGERS  INVOLVED  IN  MINERAL  EXPLORATION,
THERE IS A RISK THAT WE MAY INCUR LIABILITY OR DAMAGES AS WE CONDUCT OUR
BUSINESS.
The search for valuable minerals involves numerous hazards. As a result, we may become
subject  to  liability  for  such  hazards,  including  pollution,  cave-ins,  and other hazards  against
which  we  cannot  insure  or  against  which  we  may  elect  not t o insure.  The  payment  of  such
liabilities may have a material adverse effect on our financial position.
7
IF WE DO NOT CONDUCT MINERAL EXPLORATION ON OUR MINERAL CLAIMS AND
KEEP  THE  CLAIMS  IN  GOOD  STANDING, THEN  OUR  RIGHT  TO  THE  MINERAL  CLAIMS
WILL  LAPSE  AND  WE  WILL  LOSE  EVERYTHING T H A T WE  HAVE  INVESTED  AND
EXPENDED TOWARDS THESE CLAIMS.
We must complete mineral exploration work on our mineral claims and keep the claims in good
standing. If we do not fulfill our work commitment requirements on our claims or keep the claims
in good standing, then our right to the claims will lapse and we will lose all interest that we have
in these mineral claims.
BECAUSE OF OUR LIMITED RESOURCES AND THE SPECULATIVE NATURE OF OUR
BUSINESS, THERE IS A SUBSTANTIAL DOUBT AS TO OUR ABILITY TO CONTINUE AS A
GOING CONCERN.
The report  of our  independent  auditors,  on  our  audited  financial  statements  for  the  period
ended October 31, 2005, indicates that there are a number of factors that raise substantial doubt
about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our continued operations are dependent on our
ability  to  obtain  financing  and upon our  ability  to  achieve  future  profitable  operations  from  the
development of  our mineral properties. If we are not able to continue as a going concern, it is
likely investors will lose their investment.
Risks Related To Our Market and Strategy
BECAUSE OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICER(S) HAS OTHER BUSINESS INTERESTS, HE MAY
NOT  BE  ABLE  OR WILLING TO  DEVOTE  A  SUFFICIENT  AMOUNT  OF  TIME  TO  OUR
BUSINESS OPERATIONS, CAUSING OUR BUSINESS TO FAIL.
Mr. Cabianca our executive officer and director, presently spends approximately 15 hours per
week on business management services for our company. It is possible that the demands on Mr.
Cabianca’s from other obligations could increase with the result that he would no longer be able
to  devote  sufficient  time  to  the  management o f our  business.  In  addition,  he  may  not  possess
sufficient time for our business if the demands of managing our business increased substantially
beyond current levels.
Risks Related To This Offering
THERE IS A LACK OF A PUBLIC MARKET FOR OUR COMMON SHARES, WHICH LIMITS
OUR  SHAREHOLDERS' ABILITY  TO  RESELL  THEIR  SHARES  OR  PLEDGE  THEM  AS
COLLATERAL.
There is currently no public market for our shares, and we cannot assure you that a market for
our stock will develop. Consequently, investors may not be able to use their shares for collateral
or loans and may not be able to liquidate at  a suitable price in the event of an emergency. In
addition, investors may not be able to resell their shares at or above the price they paid for them
or may not be able to sell their shares at all.
REGULATIONS RELATING  TO  "PENNY  STOCKS"  MAY  LIMIT  THE  ABILITY  OF  OUR
SHAREHOLDERS  TO SELL THEIR SHARES AND, AS A RESULT, OUR SHAREHOLDERS
MAY HAVE TO HOLD THEIR SHARES INDEFINITELY.
If a market develops for our common stock, our common stock would, most likely, be subject to
rules  promulgated  by  the  SEC  relating  to  "penny  stocks,"  which  apply t o non-NASDAQ
companies whose stock trades at less than $5.00 per share or whose tangible net worth is less
than  $2,000,000.  These  rules  require  brokers who  sell "penny  stocks"  to  persons  other  than
established  customers  and  "accredited investors"  to  complete  certain  documentation,  make
suitability  inquiries o f investors,  and  provide  investors  with  certain  information  concerning  the
risks of trading in the security. These rules may discourage or restrict the ability of brokers to sell
our common stock and may affect the secondary market for the common stock.
8
SINCE NEITHER THE  SOLE  OFFICER  NOR  THE  PRINCIPAL  AND  SELLING
SHAREHOLDER IS A UNITED STATES RESIDENT, IT MAY BE DIFFICULT TO ENFORCE
ANY LIABILITIES AGAINST THEM.
Mr. Cabianca, our sole officer and director and our principal and selling shareholder, resides in
British Columbia, Canada. Accordingly, if events should occur that give rise to any liability on his
part, shareholders would likely have difficulty in enforcing such liabilities. If a shareholder desired
to  sue  him,  shareholders would  have  to  serve  him  with  a  summons  and  complaint.  Even  if
personal service is accomplished and a judgment is entered against that person, the shareholder
would  then  have  to  locate  assets  of  that  person,  and  register  the  judgment i n the  foreign
jurisdiction where assets are located.
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus contains "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the United States
Private  Securities  Litigation  Reform  Act  of  1995  that  involve risks  and  uncertainties.  We  use
words  such  as  "anticipate",  "expect",  "intend", "plan",  "believe",  "seek"  and  "estimate",  and
variations  of  these  words and similar  expressions  to  identify  such  forward-looking  statements.
You should not place too much reliance on these forward-looking statements. Our actual results
are most likely to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements for
many reasons, including the risks faced by us described in the preceding "Risk Factors" section
and elsewhere in this prospectus.
These forward-looking statements address, among others, such issues as:
§ the amount and nature of future exploration, development and other capital expenditures,
§ mining claims to be drilled,
§ future earnings and cash flow,
§ development projects,
§ exploration prospects,
§ drilling prospects,
§ development and drilling potential,
§ business strategy,
§ expansion and growth of our business and operations, and
§ our estimated financial information.
9
These statements  are  based  on  assumptions  and  analyses  made  by  us  in  light  of our
experience  and  our  perception  of  historical  trends,  current  conditions a n d expected  future
developments,  as  well  as  other  factors  we  believe  are appropriate  under  the  circumstances.
However, whether actual results and developments will meet our expectations and predictions
depend  on  a  number o f risks  and  uncertainties  which  could  cause  our  actual  results,
performance and financial condition to differ materially from our expectation.
Consequently, these cautionary statements qualify all of the forward-looking statements made
in this prospectus. We cannot assure you that the actual results or developments anticipated by
us will be realized or, even if substantially realized, that they would have the expected effect on
us or our business or operations.
DILUTION
The common stock to be sold by the selling shareholder is common stock that is currently
issued and outstanding. Accordingly, there will be no dilution to our existing shareholders.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
The selling shareholder may sell some of all of his common stock in one or more transactions,
including block transactions:
·on such public markets or exchanges as the common stock may from time to time be trading;
· in privately negotiated transactions;
· through the writing of options on the common stock;
·
· in any combination of these methods of distribution.
in short sales; or
The selling shareholder has set an offering price for these securities of $0.005 per share, a
minimum purchase of 20,000 shares ($100.00), and an offering period o f four months from the
date of this prospectus.
The shares may also be sold in compliance with the Securities and Exchange Commission's
Rule 144. In the event of the transfer by the selling shareholder of his shares to  any  pledgee,
donee, or other transferee, we will amend this prospectus and the registration statement of which
this prospectus forms a part by the filing of a post-effective registration statement in order to name
the  pledgee, donee, or other transferee in place of the selling shareholder who has transferred
his shares.
The selling shareholder may also sell his shares directly to market makers acting as principals
or brokers or dealers, who may act as agent or acquire the common stock as a principal. Any
broker or dealer participating in such transactions as agent may receive a commission from the
selling shareholder or, if they act  as agent for the purchaser of such common stock, from such
purchaser.  The selling shareholder will likely pay the usual and customary brokerage fees for
such services.  Brokers  or  dealers  may  agree  with  the  selling  shareholder  to sell  a specified
number of shares at a stipulated price per share and, to the extent such broker or dealer is unable
to do so acting as agent for the selling shareholder, to purchase, as principal, any unsold shares
at  the  price required to  fulfill  the  respective  broker's  or  dealer's  commitment  to  the  selling
shareholder.  Brokers  or  dealers  who  acquire  shares  as  principals  may  thereafter resell  such
shares from time to time in transactions in a market or on an exchange, in negotiated transactions
or  otherwise,  at  market  prices  prevailing at  the  time  of  sale  or  at  negotiated  prices,  and  in
connection with such resales may pay or receive commissions to or from the purchasers of such
shares. These transactions may involve cross and block transactions that may involve sales to
and through other brokers or dealers. We can provide no assurance that all or any of the common
stock offered will be sold by the selling shareholder.
10
If, after the date of this prospectus, the selling shareholder enters into an agreement to sell his
shares to a broker-dealer as principal and the broker-dealer is acting as an underwriter, we will
need to file a post-effective amendment to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a
part.  We  will  need t o identify  the  broker-dealer,  provide  required  information  on  the  plan  of
distribution, and revise the disclosures in that amendment, and file the agreement as an exhibit to
the registration statement. Also, the broker-dealer would have to seek and obtain clearance of the
underwriting compensation and arrangements from the NASD Corporate Finance Department.
The selling shareholder, Scott Cabianca, and any broker-dealers or agents that are involved in
selling the shares are deemed to be "underwriters" in connection with such sales according to
SEC rules and regulations.
We are bearing all costs relating to the registration of the common stock, which are estimated
at $20,000. The selling shareholder, however, will pay any commissions or other fees payable to
brokers or dealers in connection with any sale of the common stock.
We are  paying the  expenses  of  the  offering  because  we  seek  to:  (i)  become  a  reporting
company with the Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "1934 Act"); and
(ii)  enable  our  common  stock  to  be  traded  on  the  OTC  Bulletin  Board. W e believe  that  the
registration  of  the  resale  of  shares  on  behalf  of  existing shareholder  may  facilitate  the
development of a public market in our common stock if our common stock is approved for trading
on the OTC Bulletin Board.
We consider that  the  development  of  a  public  market  for  our  common  stock  will  make an
investment in our common stock more attractive to future investors. In order for us to continue with
our mineral exploration program, we will at some point in the near future need to raise additional
capital through private placement offerings. We believe that obtaining reporting company status
under  the 1934  Act and trading on the OTC Bulletin Board should increase our ability to raise
these additional funds from investors.
T h e selling  shareholder  must  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  Securities Act  and the
Securities  Exchange  Act  in  the  offer  and  sale  of  the  common  stock. In particular,  during  such
times as the selling shareholder may be deemed to be engaged in a distribution of the common
stock, and therefore be considered to be an underwriter, he must comply with applicable law and
may, among other things:
·Not engage in any stabilization activities in connection with our common stock;
·Furnish each broker or dealer through which common stock may be offered, such copies of this
prospectus, as amended from time to time, as may be required by such broker or dealer; and
·Not bid for or purchase any of our securities or attempt to induce any person to purchase any of
our securities other than as permitted under the Securities Exchange Act.
USE OF PROCEEDS TO ISSUER
We will  not receive  any  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  the  common  stock  offered  through this
prospectus by the selling shareholder.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Glossary of Mining Terms
    
 
11
Archean
Assaying
Conglomerate
Cratons
Development Stage
O f or  belonging  to  the  earlier  of  the  two  divisions  of
Precambrian time,  from approximately  3.8  to  2.5  billion  years
ago,  marked  by  an  atmosphere w i th little  free  oxygen,  the
formation of the first rocks and oceans, and the development of
unicellular life. Of or relating to the oldest known rocks, those of
the  Precambrian  Eon,  that  are  predominantly  igneous in
composition.
 
Laboratory examination that determines the content or
proportion of a specific metal (ie: gold) contained within a
sample.  Technique usually involves firing/smelting.
 
A  coarse-grained  clastic  sedimentary  rock,  composed  of
rounded to subangular fragments larger than 2 mm in diameter
(granules,  pebbles,  cobbles, boulders)  set  in  a  fine-grained
matrix  of  sand  or  silt,  and  commonly cemented  by  calcium
carbonate, iron oxide, silica, or hardened clay; the consolidated
equivalent of gravel. The rock or mineral fragments may be of
varied composition and range widely in size, and are usually
rounded  and smoothed  from  transportation  by  water  or  from
wave action.
 
Parts of the Earth's crust that have attained stability, and have
been little deformed for a prolonged period.
 
A  “development  stage”  project  is  one  which  is  undergoing
preparation  of  an established  commercially  mineable  deposit
for  its  extraction but  which  is not yet in production. This stage
occurs after completion of a feasibility study.
Dolomite Beds
Doré
Dyke or Dike
Exploration Stage
Fault
Feldspathic
 
Fold
Foliation
Formation
 
Gabbro
Geochemistry
Geophysicist
Geotechnical
Dolomite beds are associated and interbedded with limestone,
co mmo n l y representing postdepositional 
replacement  of
limestone.
 
unrefined gold bullion bars containing various impurities such
as  silver, copper  and mercury, which will be further refined to
near pure gold.
 
A  tabular  igneous  intrusion  that  cuts  across  the  bedding  or
foliation of the country rock.
 
An “exploration stage” prospect is one which is not in either the
development or production stage.
 
A break in the continuity of a body of rock. It is accompanied by
a movement on one side of the break or the other so that what
were once parts of one continuous rock stratum or vein are now
separated. The amount of displacement of the parts may range
from a few inches to thousands of feet.
 
Said of a rock or other mineral aggregate containing feldspar.
 
a  curve  or  bend  of  a  planar  structure  such  as  rock  strata,
bedding planes, foliation, or cleavage
 
A general term for a planar arrangement of textural or structural
features in  any  type  of  rock;  esp.,  the  planar  structure  that
re su l ts f r o m flattening  of 
the  constituent  grains  of  a
metamorphic rock.
 
a distinct layer of sedimentary rock of similar composition.
 
igneous  rocks
A  group  of  dark-colored,  basic 
(commonly
c o mp o s e d principally of  basic  plagioclase 
labradorite  or  bytownite)  and clinopyroxene (augite),  with  or
without  olivine  and  orthopyroxene;  also,  any member  of that
group.  It  is  the  approximate  intrusive  equivalent  of  basalt.
Apatite and  magnetite  or  ilmenite  are  common  accessory
minerals.
 
t h e study  of  the  distribution  and  amounts  of  the  chemical
elements i n minerals,  ores,  rocks,  solids,  water,  and  the
atmosphere.
 
one who studies the earth; in particular the physics of the solid
earth, the atmosphere and the earth’s magnetosphere.
the study of ground stability.
intrusive
Gneiss
Granitic
 
Heap Leach
12
Intrusions
Kimberlite
Lamproite
 
Lithospere
 
Mantle
 
Mapped or
Geological
 
Mapping
Metavolcanic
 
Migmatite
Mineral
Mineralization
A  foliated  rock  formed  by  regional  metamorphism,  in  which
bands o r lens-shaped  strata  or  bodies  of  rock  of  granular
minerals  alternate with bands or lens-shaped strata or bodies
or  rock  in  which  minerals having flaky  or  elongate  prismatic
habits predominate.
 
Pertaining to or composed of granite.
 
a  mineral  processing  method  involving  the  crushing  and
stacking of  an  ore  on an  impermeable  liner  upon  which
solutions  are  sprayed  that  dissolve metals such  as  gold  and
copper; the solutions  containing  the  metals are  then collected
and treated to recover the metals.
Masses of igneous rock that, while molten, were forced into or
between other rocks.
 
A  blue/gray  igneous  rock  that  contains  olivine,  serpentine,
calcite and silica  and  is  the  principal  original  environment  of
diamonds.
 
Dark-colored igneous rocks rich in potassium and magnesium.
 
The solid outer portion of the Earth.
 
The zone of the Earth below the crust and above the core.
 
the recording  of  geologic  information  such  as  the  distribution
and nature of rock
 
u n i ts and  the  occurrence  of  structural  features,  mineral
deposits, and fossil localities.
 
Said of partly metamorphosed volcanic rock.
 
A composite rock composed of igneous or igneous-appearing
a n d / o r me ta m o rp h i c materials 
generally
distinguishable megascopically.
 
a  naturally  formed  chemical  element  or  compound  having  a
definite chemical composition  and,  usually,  a  characteristic
crystal form.
 
a  natural  occurrence  in  rocks  or  soil  of  one  or  more  metal
that
are
Mineralized Material
Mining
Outcrop
Pipes
 
Plagioclase
Probable Reserve
Production Stage
Proterozoic
Reserve
yielding minerals.
 
The term  “mineralized  material”  refers  to  material  that  is  not
included in the reserve as it does not meet all of the criteria for
adequate demonstration for economic or legal extraction.
 
Mining is the process of extraction and beneficiation of mineral
reserves t o produce  a  marketable  metal  or  mineral  product.
Exploration continues during the mining process and, in many
cases,  mineral  reserves are expanded  during  the  life  of  the
mine  operations  as  the  exploration potential  of  the  deposit  is
realized.
 
that part of a geologic formation or structure that appears at the
surface of the earth.
Vertical conduits.
 
Any of a group of feldspars containing a mixture of sodium and
calcium feldspars, distinguished by their extinction angles.
 
T h e term  “probable  reserve”  refers  to  reserves  for  which
quantity  and  grade and/or  quality  are  computed 
from
information similar to that used for proven (measured) reserves,
but  the  sites  for  inspection, sampling, and  measurement  are
farther  apart  or  are  otherwise  less  adequately spaced. The
degree  of  assurance,  although  lower  than  that  for  proven
reserves, is high enough to assume continuity between points
of observation.
 
A “production stage” project is actively engaged in the process
of extraction and beneficiation of mineral reserves to produce a
marketable metal or mineral product.
 
Of or relating to the later  of  the  two  divisions  of  Precambrian
time,  from approximately  2.5  billion  to  570  million  years  ago,
marked by  the  buildup of  oxygen  and  the  appearance  of  the
first multicellular eukaryotic life forms.
 
The term “reserve” refers to that part of a mineral deposit which
could be economically and legally extracted or produced at the
time of the reserve determination. Reserves must be supported
by  a 
to bankable  standards  that
demonstrates  the  economic  extraction. (“Bankable standards”
implies 
the  costs  and
achievements developed in the study is sufficient for the project
to  be eligible  for  external  debt  financing.)  A  reserve  includes
adjustments to the in-situ tonnes and grade to include diluting
materials and allowances for losses that might occur when the
the  confidence  attached
feasibility study  done
that
to
material is mined.
 
Formed by the deposition of sediment.
 
a form  of  strain  resulting  from  stresses  that  cause  or  tend  to
cause contiguous parts of a body of rock to slide relatively to
each other in a direction parallel to their plane of contact.
 
A concordant sheet of igneous rock lying nearly horizontal. A
sill may become a dike or vice versa.
 
the direction or trend that a structural surface, e.g. a bedding or
fault plane, takes as it intersects the horizontal.
 
to remove overburden in order to expose ore.
 
Generally unconsolidated  matter,  deposited  directly  by  and
underneath a 
glacier without  subsequent  reworking  by
meltwater, and consisting of a mixture of clay, silt, sand, gravel,
and boulders ranging widely in size and shape.
 
Not succeeding the underlying rocks in immediate order of age
or not fitting together with them as parts of a continuous whole.
 
a 
mineralization, principally quartz.
 
the rock adjacent to a vein.
like  crosscutting  body  of  hydrothermal
thin,  sheet
Sedimentary
 
Shear
Sill
Strike
Strip
 
Till
Unconformably
Vein
Wall Rock
 
13
General
W e are  an exploration  stage  company  engaged  in  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of mineral
properties. W e have staked out a prospect that contains 7 lode mining claims located in Luna
County, New Mexico. We refer to these mining claims as the Sheep Mountain Prospect. Our plan
of operation is to conduct mineral exploration activities on the Sheep Mountain Prospect in order
to  assess  whether  these  claims  have  any  potential  for  gold.  The  report o f Leroy  Halterman,  a
certified and registered geologist indicates that the Sheep Mountain Prospect represents a viable
exploration target for a number of types of deposits. Our plan of operation is to conduct the first
two  phases  of a staged  exploration  program  on  the  Sheep  Mountain  Prospect.  Our  proposed
exploration program is designed to explore for gold potential on these mineral claims. We are an
exploration stage company and we cannot provide assurance to investors that our mineral claims
contain a commercially exploitable mineral deposit, or reserve, until appropriate exploratory work
is done and an economic evaluation based on such work concludes economic feasibility.
Gold
Gold has two  primary  uses:  product  fabrication  and  bullion  investment.  Fabricated gold has  a
variety  of  end  uses,  including  jewelry,  electronics,  dentistry,  industrial and  decorative  uses,
medals,  medallions  and  official  coins.  Gold  investors purchase  gold  bullion,  official  coins  and
high-carat  jewelry.  The  worldwide supply of gold consists of a combination of new production
from  mining and existing  stocks  of  bullion  and  fabricated  gold  held  by  governments,  financial
institutions, industrial organizations and private individuals. The price o f gold is volatile and is
affected by numerous factors beyond our control such as the sale or purchase of gold by various
central  banks  and  financial institutions, inflation or deflation, fluctuation in the value of the US
dollar and  foreign  currencies,  global  and  regional  demand,  and  the  political  and economic
conditions of major gold-producing countries throughout the world.
Sheep Mountain Prospect
Summary
The Sheep Mountain prospect represents a disseminated, epithermal gold prospect with deeper
replacement  manto  potential  as  well  as  porphyry  copper  and  molybdenum potential.  The
prospect  contains  7  lode  mining  claims  and  is  located  in western Luna  County,  New  Mexico,
approximately  15  miles  south  of  Gage,  New  Mexico in  the Klondike  Hills  (Figure  1).  The
Klondike Hills are at the northern edge of the Cedar Mountain of southwestern New Mexico. The
closest major inhabitation is the city of Deming, New Mexico 45 miles to the northeast. Rocks on
the  property consist  of  the  Mississippian  to  Ordovician  limestone,  dolomites  and  shales and
minor Tertiary felsic volcanics. These rocks have been structurally deformed by both thrust and
normal faults and altered and mineralized with heavy and precious metals.
In early May,Leroy Halterman, a certified and registered geologist and representing us located 7
lode-mining claims on our behalf. This was based on his knowledge of the area from previous
work that had been done on the property. Sampling in the early 1980’s on the property by other
companies  indicated  a  large  area  of anomalous  pathfinder  elements  including  arsenic  and
antimony in addition to anomalous gold and silver. We have not performed any sampling or other
geological  work  on  the  property.  The  earlier  sampling  in  the  area  of  the claims has  yielded
samples as high as 4.2 grams of gold and 460 grams of silver per ton. In addition to gold, these
samples  were  assayed 
for  silver,  molybdenum, arsenic  and  antimony.  The  associated
anomalous elements such as gold along with high arsenic and antimony are considered to be
characteristic of the low temperature hydrothermal systems. This type of system deposited many
of the world’s largest gold deposit including those that are found in Nevada.
The Sheep Mountain Prospect has the potential for deposits other than disseminated gold. Some
of  the  samples  were  highly  anomalous  in  molybdenum  adding  to  the speculation  that  this
mineralization may be associated with a porphyry copper-molybdenum deposit in the valley just
south and possibly under the SMC claims. This type of deposit has been found 10 miles north in
the  valley next  to Victorio  Peak.  At  Victorio  Peak  manto  type  of  lead,  copper,  silver  and gold
deposits were formed in the Fusselman Limestone that lies directly below the Percha Shale. The
same type of geology exists on the SMC claims along with some evidence of higher temperature
mineralization that would help form this type of deposits.
Acquisition Details
Under the United  States  Mining  Law  of  1872,  land  can  be  claimed  for  minerals  by  distinctly
marking the location on the ground so that its boundaries can be readily traced and making a
record of the name or names of the locators, date of location, and a description of the claim or
claims located by reference to some natural object or perm anent monument that will identify the
claim. In addition, State law requires the monumentation of claims by corner posts, and in some
cases, side and  end  center  posts.  A  copy  of  a  location  notice  must  be  placed  at  the point  of
discovery and the location notice must be recorded with the recorder of the county in which the
claim  is  situated.  The  Federal  Land  Policy  and  Management Act  of  1976  requires  that  claim
location documents also be filed with appropriate offices of the Bureau of Land Management.
14
In 2005, the availability of the property known as Sheep Mountain Prospect was brought to our
attention. Based on geological expertise, Mr. Leroy Halterman detailed the potential the property
held for hosting gold bearing rock and that it warranted further exploration. Pursuant to Federal
Law  and  State  Law,  we  requisitioned Mr. Halterman  to  stake  and  register  the  property  in  the
name  of  Paradigm  Ventures Corp  as  unpatented  lode  mining  claims.  Either  an  annual
assessment  work in excess of $100 per claim along with appropriate filing must be done or an
annual maintenance fee payable to the Federal government of $125 per claim is required. Thus a
total payment of $875 per year for the entire claim block is required to keep the claims valid.
Mining Claims
The Sheep Mountain  prospect  represents  a  viable  exploration  target  for  a  number  of types of
deposits.  It  has  favorable  host  rocks,  structure,  alteration  and  related gold,  silver  and
molybdenum mineralization. In addition to the geology, it is located an in area where significant
mineral deposits have been located and produced over the last 100 years.
The Sheep Mountain prospect is like many prospects that lack sufficient exploration during the
mid 1980’s when the decline of precious and base metal prices forced companies to cut back or
eliminate exploration expenditures. Previous work on the property did not invalidate any of the
suppositions as to the prospect’s models and potential. Rather they increased the knowledge of
the  property and elevated  it  as  a  prospect.  This  property  is  of  Merit  and  warrants  additional
financial expenditure and exploration.
Land Status, Topography, Location and Access
The "SMC" claim  block  consists  of  7  unpatented  mining  claims  covering  approximately 140
acres of BLM land and minerals (Figure 2). These 7 contiguous claims lie within Section 21 and
22 Township 26 South and Range 13 West. They are not subject to any royalty but either an
annual assessment work in excess of $100 per claim along with appropriate filing must be done
or an annual maintenance fee payable to the Federal government of $125 per claim is required.
Thus a total payment of $875 per year for the entire claim block is required to keep the claims
valid.
Access to the Sheep Mountain Prospect is obtained by traveling west from Deming on Interstate
10  to  Gage,  New  Mexico  and  then  south  on  a  county  road  which turns  to the  west  along  the
southern margin of the Klondike Hills and traverses the southern edge of the property (Figure 3).
From this point several ranch roads lead into the claim block. The topography of the area consist
of hills of low to moderate relief, which have been dissected by erosion. Access within the area is
good. Vegetation is sparse consisting of short grasses, cacti and scattered junipers. The primary
use of the surface is cattle grazing.
15
16
17
18
19
Previous Operations and Exploration History
The Klondike Hills were included in an old mining district designated as the Carrizalillo-Cedar
district. This district extended in a northwest--southeast belt and included the Cedar Mountains
and  Klondike  Hills  in  the  northwest a n d the  Carrizalillo  Hills  in  the  southeast.  There  are
numerous prospect pits and shallow shafts on the property, particularly in Section 21, 22 and 27
within and near  the  claim  block.  The  early  work  concentrated  on  fault  structures, along which
jasperoid and/or gossan-like iron-rich mineralization were deposited.
Energy Reserves Group, Minerals Division, initially investigated the Sheep Mountain Prospect
during regional recon-naissance work in southwestern New Mexico in June of 1981. At that time
it  was  noted  that  the  geology  in  the  area  was  favorable for  disseminated  precious  metal
mineralization as well as other types of deposits. Anomalous arsenic values were obtained from
the  initial  sampling program  and  the  area  was  slated  for  further  investigation.  A  subsequent
evaluation  yielded  not  only  high  values  of  the  pathfinder  elements  but also anomalous  gold,
silver  and  some  associated  base  metals  that  resulted  in the staking  of  the  PAL  claim  block.
Energy Reserve suffered financial difficulty as a result of falling oil and gas prices and was forced
it to abandon its minerals program and farmed out this property to another company.
This company performed further sampling and drilled one 494 foot deep hole. The drill hole was
located in the northern portion of the PAL claim block and on of the SMC claims. It bottomed in
silicified dolomite not reaching the target Fusselman below the Percha Shale but it did intercept
anomalous  gold  between  70  and 300 feet and anomalous silver from 240 to 340 feet. In their
report they noted that they had unknowingly placed the drill hole on the down-thrown side of a
fault that was later mapped. In this report they stated that they would not have drilled the hole
there  if  they  had  known  about  the  fault.  However,  it  is interesting  is  that  they  did  intercept  a
significant thickness of anomalous gold and silver mineralization and that they had two hundred
feet  of  silicification in  the  bottom  of  the  hole.  This  may  indicated  that  they  were  nearing  an
intrusive  body  that  may  have  been  mineralized  such  as  in  the  copper-molybdenum porphyry
model.
Geology of the Mineral Claims
The Klondike Hills lay at the northern edge of the Cedar Mountains and are considered to be a
part of the same structural trend (Figure 4). The Cedar Mountains are a northwest trending Basin
and Range structure bounded by high angle normal faults. Exposures in the Cedar Mountains
consist  of  Tertiary volcanic  and  intrusive  rocks  with  one  small  window  of  Paleozoic  and
Cretaceous rocks  exposed.  A  valley  that  parallels  the  northern  edge  of  the  volcanic pile
separates  the  Klondike  Hills  from  the  main  body  of  the  Cedar  Mountains. Exposures  in  the
Klondike  Hills  consist  of  Paleozoic  strata  of  Ordovician through  Mississippian  age  and  a  few
exposures of Precambrian rocks that are present in the center of the hills. Tertiary volcanic rocks
are exposed northwest of the prospect area and a small exposure of an intrusive is also present
within the prospect area.
Rocks outcropping  within  the  Sheep  Mountain  Prospect  area  include  the  Ordovician E l Paso
Formation,  the  Ordovician  Montoya  Group,  the  Silurian  Fusselman  Dolomite, the  Devonian
Percha  Shale,  the  Mississippian  Keating  Formation,  and  the Tertiary intrusive  unit  mentioned
above.
The El Paso Formation consists of thin to medium-bedded limestone with argillaceous and silty
intervals. It is the primary target formation on the property. Extensive jasperoid development and
argillic alteration has been noted in the formation occurring in association with fault structures.
20
The El Paso Formation is overlain by the Montoya Group, which is divided into four formations of
predominantly dolomitic composition. Thin-bedded sediments in the upper formation of this group
may also have some potential as a host rock.
The Silurian Fusselman dolomite, a fine-grained, massive dolomite overlies the Montoya Group.
The Fusselman has been included with the Montoya Group on the geologic map, Figure 4, as it
has been on previously published geologic maps of the area.
The Devonian Percha Shale is green-gray shale seen in a small, poorly exposed outcrop near
the  southern  edge  of  the  prospect  and  in  tailings  from  a  relatively shallow  shaft  on  the
southeastern edge of the prospect. The Percha Shale is also a potential host rock in this area.
The lower part  of  the  Mississippian  Keating  Formation  (the  lower  member  of  the  Escabrosa
Group) consists of medium-bedded limestone exposed at a small outcrop near the southern edge
of the prospect. Jasperoid has developed along a structure in the Keating in this area.
Structurally, the  Klondike  Hills  are  quite  complex.  The  area  lies  within  the  east-southeast
trending  Laramide  overthrust  belt  of  southwestern  New  Mexico.  The  complex relationships
among the units exposed is  due  to  a  series  of  relatively flat-lying thrust plates in which upper
plate  Ordovician  and  Silurian  rocks have been  thrust  over  each  other  and  over  lower  plate
Devonian and Mississippian strata. These thrust slices have in turn been broken by two sets of
Tertiary high  angle  normal  faults  that  trend  northeast  and  northwest.  To  complicate matters
further, the area also lies along the west trending Texas lineament. The Texas lineament is a
very  old  zone  of  weakness  that  extends  to  the  basement and which  has  added  an  east-west
trending strike-slip component to the deformation of the strata in the area.
Mineralization
Mineralization and alteration found at the Sheep Mountain Prospect consists of jasperoid, argillic
alteration, silicification and iron staining of thin-bedded sediments and development of iron-rich,
gossan-like  material.  Copper,  fluorite,  calcite, barite  and  iron  mineralization  was  also  noted  in
silicified rock found on the dump of a shallow shaft that was sunk on a structure on the southeast
side of the property.
T h e jasperoid  at  the  Sheep  Mountain  Prospect  frequently  contains  visible  blades o f barite.
Jasperoid  occurs  over  a  wide  area  on  the  property,  both  along  high angle Basin  and  Range
structures and along the planes of the low angle thrust faults. Jasperoid appears to form most
readily in the EI Paso limestone, but also occurs in the dolomites of the Montoya Group. Silica
appears to have migrated easily through the reactive EI Paso limestones and has replaced the
rock  for  some distance  beyond  the  major  structures.  In  contrast,  the  dolomites  of  the Montoya
Group appear to have been less reactive and silica replacement occurs only i n narrow  bands
along the structures that served as conduits for mineralizing solutions.
The occurrence of the iron-rich gossan-like mineralization also appears to be confined closely to
structures,  primarily  the  Basin  and  Range  structures on  the south  side  of  the  property.  This
mineralization occurs in addition to and in association with jasperoid development along these
structures and can be seen in the dump material.
Argillic alteration was noted in thin-bedded units of the El Paso Formation in several locations
and  partial  silicification  of  argillically  altered  sediments that  also occurred  in  several  places.
Silicification of thin-bedded El Paso sediments can often be found beneath jasperoid outcrops
where  hematitic  and  limonitic staining occurs  in  conjunction  with  the  argillic  alteration  and
silicification. Silicification, brecciation, and calcite veining was noted in the Percha Shale on the
dump of a shallow shaft on the southeast side of the property.
21
The primary  drilling  target  on  the  Sheep  Mountain  Prospect  is  the  El  Paso  limestone. Thin-
bedded  El  Paso  sediments  dip  into  major  structures  in  several  areas on  the property  where
alteration and mineralization have been observed. Consequently, several target areas may be
tested where the EI Paso Formation could serve as a host for ore-grade mineralization.
The Percha Shale may also be a drilling target on the southeast side of the property. Although
this area is less well exposed, the fissile shales of the Percha may prove to be an excellent host
rock  where  the  formation  dips into mineralized  structures.  In  other  districts  in  southern  New
Mexico the Percha has served as a dam for upward migrating hydrothermal fluid forcing the fluid
to migrate and precipitate ore bodies in the underlying Fusselman Limestone. One example of
this type of mineralization is 10 miles north in the Victorio mining district.
Drilling depths to the precious metals mineralized zones within these units are expected to be
shallow and should not exceed 400 feet. However, should the initial work indicate that porphyry
copper-molybdenum deposit exists than deeper holes may be required to test this target.
Proposed Program of Exploration
W e engaged  a  geologist,  Mr.  Halterman,  to  conduct  the  first  step  in  evaluating t h e Sheep
Mountain  Prospect.  The  evaluation  report  concludes  that  the  property merits  exploration  and
evaluation. He concluded the Sheep Mountain Prospect warrants additional work because the
areas where alteration and anomalous precious metals rock samples were found have not been
adequately  evaluated. There  has  not  been  any  trench  sampling  or  drilling.  To  date  the  only
drilling has  been  one  misplaced  drill  hole.  A  two-phase  program  is  recommended  with the
second phase depending upon the successful results of the first phase. Trenching refers to the
process in which an area and material to be sampled is channeled in one direction with a shovel
or by earth moving equipment, and the material for the sample is taken at regular intervals along
the channel. The procedure is repeated with several other channels in different directions until a
sample of the proper size has been secured. Drilling refers to a method of sampling a deposit by
means of a drill or borehole. The boreholes will be located in  areas where favorable structure
and mineralization exists and drill at an angle to intercept the target across its strike and at the
most favorable depth. Geochemical sampling refers to the search for economic mineral deposits
b y detection  of  abnormal  or  anomalous  concentrations  of  base  elements  or  complexes
containing these elements in surface materials or material within a few feet of the surface.
The first phase  will  include  conventional  soil  sampling  on  specified  grids.  Conventional soil
sampling means taking soil sample from specified areas in the SMC claim block. These samples
will be taken a few feet below the surface in areas mapped out in advance.
Based upon  the  results  of  the  Phase  I  program  a  drilling  program  will  take  place t o test  the
existing anomalies and those disclosed during the Phase I program. The proposed programs are
presented below.
Proposed Phase I and Phase II Programs
Phase I. The Phase I program will be limited to defining drill targets for the Phase II program. It is
anticipated to cost approximately $14,000. The following discussion gives  a brief description of
the Phase I program.
22
1. Additional mapping and sampling to confirm earlier sampling and to better target drill holes to
test untested mineralized areas of the SMC claim block.
2. Perform close spaced geochemical soil sampling across the entire staked area. This type of
sampling would collect samples from approximately 1-2 feet below the surface and have them
tested for gold, silver, molybdenum antimony, mercury and arsenic.
The Quaternary gravel that covers the central portion of the prospect may limit the usefulness of
conventional soil geochemistry but test grids will have to be surveyed, sampled and analyzed to
determine  its  usefulness.  Quaternary refers  to a  geologic  period  following  the  Tertiary  Age
beginning 2 to 3 million years ago and extending to the present
 
Cost Estimates Phase I Program
Item  
Soil Samples 150, average $30/Sample  
Rock samples 50 samples @ $30/ sample  
Sampling supplies 200 samples @ $2.00/ sample  
Geologist, 12 days @ $400/day  
Per diem 12 days @ $100/day  
Vehicle Mileage 2,000 @ $.50 / Mile 
Miscellaneous and field supplies   
Total Phase I Cost
$
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
Estimated
Cost 
4,500 
1,500 
400 
4,800 
1,200 
1,000 
600 
 14,000
Phase II Program. The Phase II program is estimated to cost approximately $53,000 and will
involve the drill testing of strong rock and soil geochemical anomalies. A geochemical anomaly
refers to a concentration of one or more elements in rock, soil, sediment, vegetation, or water that
is markedly higher or lower than background. In addition to testing the geochemical anomalies,
geological  mapping  will generate other  drill  targets  that  may  not  be  highly  mineralized  at  the
surface  but will still warrant testing with several drill holes. These holes should be drilled to a
depth of 300 to 400 feet or until the geological target has been intercepted.
Item 
Drilling  
Mineralized Outcrops and soil anomalies, 2holes 400 ft. each /$25.00/ft 
Test Geological targets 2 holes 350 ft each./ $25.00/ft 
Assaying, 200 samples $30  
Geologist 28 days @ $400/ day  
Per Diem 28 days @ $100/ day  
Vehicle 5000 miles @$.50/mile  
Miscellaneous 
Total Phase II Cost
$
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $
Estimated
Cost 
  
20,000 
17,500 
6,000 
5,100 
1,400 
2,500 
1,500 
53,000
23
Compliance With Government Regulation
We will be required to conduct all mineral exploration activities in accordance with  the state
and  federal  regulations. Such operations  are  subject  to  various  laws  governing  land  use,  the
protection of  the environment,  production,  exports,  taxes,  labor  standards,  occupational health,
waste  disposal,  toxic  substances,  well  safety  and  other  matters.   Unfavorable  amendments  to
current laws, regulations and permits governing operations and activities of resource exploration
companies,  or  more  stringent implementation  thereof,  could  have  a  materially  adverse  impact
and cause increases in capital expenditures which could result in a cessation of operations.  We
have had no material costs related to compliance and/or permits in recent years, and anticipate
no material costs in the next year. We will not be required to obtain a permit in order to conduct
Phases 1 and 2 of our proposed exploration program.
Employees
We have  no employees  other  than  our  sole  director  and  officer  who  as  of  the  date  of this
prospectus is serving without compensation. We anticipate that we will be conducting most of our
business through agreements with consultants and third parties.
Plan of Operations
Our business plan  is  to  proceed  with  the  exploration  of  the  Sheep  Mountain  Prospect to
determine  whether  there  is  any  potential  for  gold  or  other  metals  located on 
the property
comprising  the  mineral  claims.  We  have  decided  to  proceed  with the  two phases  of  a  staged
exploration program recommended by the geological report. We anticipate that these phases of
the  recommended  geological  exploration program will  cost  approximately  $14,000  and
$53,000.00 respectively. We had $7,930 i n cash reserves as of October 31, 2005. The lack of
cash has kept us from conducting any exploration work on the property.
 
    We are looking to proceed with the two phases of the exploration program with financing from
Scott  Cabianca,  our  principal  shareholder.  On  June  1,  2005  Mr.  Cabianca gave  a  written
commitment  to  loan  us  $125,000  at  5%  per  annum  for  a  period o f two  years.  Mr.  Cabianca's
commitment may not be enforceable, as we have not given any consideration to him to make it a
binding agreement. However, we believe it likely that Mr. Cabianca will fulfill this commitment, as
h e is  the only  shareholder  and  would  benefit  the  most  from  the  continued  existence of  the
company. Should Mr. Cabianca not provide us with the funds necessary to cover our operating
expenses, the company in all likelihood would cease to exist.
  
     We will commence Phase 1 of the exploration program once we receiving funding. Phase 2
would commence after completion of the Phase 1 program. As such, we anticipate that we will
incur the following expenses over the next twelve months:
 
 ·$875.00 to be paid to the Federal government to claims valid;
 ·$14,000.00 in connection with the completion of Phase 1 of our recommended geological work
program;
 ·$53,000.00 in connection with the completion of Phase 2 of our recommended geological work
program; and
 ·$10,000 for  operating  expenses,  including  professional  legal  and  accounting expenses
associated  with  compliance  with  the  periodic  reporting requirements  after  we  become  a
reporting  issuer  under  the  Securities Exchange  Act  of  1934,  but  excluding  expenses  of  the
offering.
24
If w e determine  not  to  proceed  with  further  exploration  of  our  mineral  claims due  to  a
determination that the results of our initial geological program do not warrant further exploration
or due to an inability to finance further exploration, we plan to pursue the acquisition of an interest
in other mineral claims. We anticipate that any future acquisition would involve the acquisition of
an option to earn an interest in a mineral claim as we anticipate that we would not have sufficient
cash to purchase a mineral claim of sufficient merit to warrant exploration. This means that we
might offer shares of our stock to obtain an option on a property. Once we obtain an option, we
would then pursue finding the funds necessary to explore the mineral claim by one or more of the
following means: engaging in an offering of our stock; engaging in borrowing; or locating a joint
venture partner or partners.
Results Of Operations
We have not yet earned any revenues. We anticipate that we will not earn revenues until such
time as we have entered into commercial production, if any, of our mineral properties.  We  are
presently in the exploration stage of our business and we can provide no assurance that we will
discover  commercially  exploitable  levels o f mineral  resources  on  our  properties,  or  if  such
resources are discovered, that we will enter into commercial production of our mineral properties.
 
Liquidity And Capital Resources
We are bearing all costs relating to the registration of the common stock, which are estimated
at $20,000. The selling shareholder, however, will pay any commissions or other fees payable to
brokers or dealers in connection with any sale of the common stock.
We are  paying the  expenses  of  the  offering  because  we  seek  to  (i)  become  a  reporting
company with the Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "1934 Act"); and
(ii)  enable  our  common  stock  to  be  traded  on  the  OTC  Bulletin  Board. W e believe  that  the
registration  of  the  resale  of  shares  on  behalf  of  our existing shareholder  may  facilitate  the
development of a public market in our common stock if our common stock is approved for trading
on the OTC Bulletin Board. We have not yet determined whether we will separately register our
securities under Section 12 of the 1934 Act.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND SIGNIFICANT EMPLOYEES
 
Information about our sole director and executive officer follows:
NAME 
Scott Cabianca
AGE  
35
POSITION AND TERM OF OFFICE 
President, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director since
inception
Our Bylaws provide for a board of directors ranging from 1 to 12 members, with the exact
number to be specified by the board. All directors hold office until the next annual meeting of the
stockholders following their election and until their successors have been elected and qualified.
The board of directors appoints officers. Officers hold office until the next annual meeting of our
board o f directors  following  their  appointment  and  until  their  successors  have  been appointed
and qualified.
Set forth below is a brief description of the recent employment and business experience of our
sole director and executive officer:
Mr. Cabianca  has  over  ten  years  of  business  experience  related  to  precious and  base metal
exploration.  Mr.  Cabianca  owns  and  operates  a  private  consulting business that  provides
services to various companies throughout North America. This has included geological fieldwork,
consultative services and administrative duties.
25
Academic Background: Mr. Cabianca has the following academic credentials:
·B.A. (honors) in the field of Political Science from the University of Alberta
 ·M.A.(ip) in the field of Political Science from the University of British Columbia
 ·Professional Diploma  in  Renewable  Resource  Mmg  from  the  British  Columbia  Institute of
Technology.
REMUNERATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
The following table sets forth the remuneration of our sole director and officer for the period from
inception through June 30, 2005:
NAME OF INDIVIDUAL
CAPACITIES IN WHICH
REMUNERATION WAS RECEIVED
AGGREGATE
REMUNERATION
Scott Cabianca
Sole executive officer
$-0-
We have no employment agreements with our executive officers. We do not pay compensation
to our directors for attendance at meetings. We reimburse the directors for reasonable expenses
incurred during the course of their performance.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF MANAGEMENT AND CERTAIN SECURITY HOLDERS
The following table lists the share ownership of persons who, as of the date of this prospectus
owned  of  record  or  beneficially,  directly  or  indirectly,  more than five  percent  (5%)  of  the
outstanding common stock, and our sole officer and director:
(1) This table is based on 10,000,000 shares of common stock outstanding
(2) Scott Cabianca may be deemed to be the promoter of our company
 
As of the date of this prospectus, Mr. Cabianca was our only shareholder.
SHARES TO BE
OFFERING FOR
SHARES TO
BE OWNED
UPON
SELLING
COMPLETION
SHAREHOLDER'S
OF
ACCOUNT
OFFERING
SHARES
OWNED
PRIOR TO
OFFERING
PERCENTAGE OF CLASS
(1)
BEFORE
OFFERING
AFTER
OFFERING
10,000,000
7,000,000
3,000,000
100%
30%
NAME AND
ADDRESS OF
OWNER
Scott Cabianca
(2) 1919
Bellevue, #602
W. Vancouver,
B.C. V7V 1B7
INTEREST OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS IN CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS
 
    As of the date of this prospectus, other than the transaction described above, there are no, and
have not been since inception, any material agreements or proposed transactions, whether direct
or indirect, with any of the following:
26
· any of our directors or officers;
  · any nominee for election as a director;
 ·a n y principal  security  holder  identified  in  the  preceding  "Security Ownership of  Selling
Shareholder and Management" section; or
 ·any relative or spouse, or relative of such spouse, of the above referenced persons.
SECURITIES BEING OFFERED
We  are authorized to issue up to 75,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per
share, and we are not authorized to issue preferred stock.
Common Stock
The holders of common stock are entitled to one vote for each share held of record on  all
matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders. We do not have cumulative voting rights in the
election of directors, and accordingly, holders of a majority of the voting shares are able to elect
all of the directors.
Subject to preferences that may be granted to any then outstanding preferred stock, holders of
common stock are entitled to receive ratably such dividends as may be declared by the board of
directors out of funds legally available therefore as well as any distributions to the stockholders.
We  have  never  paid  cash dividends on  our  common  stock,  and  do  not  expect  to  pay  such
dividends in the foreseeable future.
In the  event of a liquidation, dissolution or winding up of our company, holders of common
stock are entitled to share ratably in all of our assets remaining after payment of liabilities and the
liquidation preference of any then outstanding preferred stock. Holders of common stock have no
preemptive or other subscription or conversion rights. There are no redemption or sinking fund
provisions applicable to the common stock.
Transfer Agent And Registrar
West Coast Stock Transfer Inc., 850 W. Hastings, Suite 302, Vancouver, B.C. V6C  1E1, serves
as the transfer agent and registrar for our common stock.
SEC POSITION ON INDEMNIFICATION
Our bylaws provide that each officer and director of our company shall be indemnified by us
against all costs and expenses actually and necessarily incurred by him or her in connection with
the defense of any action, suit or proceeding in which he or she may be involved or to which he
or she may be made a party by reason of his or her being or having been such director or officer,
except in relation to matters as to which he or she has been finally adjudged in such action, suit
or proceeding to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of duty.
The indemnification  provisions  of  our  bylaws  diminish  the  potential  rights o f action,  which
might otherwise be available to shareholders by affording indemnification against most damages
and settlement amounts paid by a director in connection with any shareholders derivative action.
However,  there  are n o provisions  limiting  the  right  of  a  shareholder  to  enjoin  a  director  from
taking actions in breach of his fiduciary duty, or to cause the Company to rescind actions already
taken, although as a practical matter courts may be unwilling to grant such equitable remedies in
circumstances in which such actions have already been taken. Also, because the Company does
not presently have directors' liability insurance and because there is no assurance that we will
procure such insurance or that if such insurance is procured it will provide coverage to the extent
directors would be indemnified under the provisions, we may be forced to bear a portion or all of
the cost of the director's claims for indemnification under such provisions. If we are forced to bear
the costs for indemnification, the value of our stock may be adversely affected.
27
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 (the "Act") may
be  permitted  to  directors,  officers  and  controlling  persons of  the Company  pursuant  to  the
foregoing  provisions,  or  otherwise,  the  Company has  been advised  that  in  the  opinion  of  the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission, s u c h indemnification  is  against  public  policy  as
expressed in the Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
LEGAL MATTERS
Aaron D. McGeary Attorney will pass upon certain matters relating to the legality of the
common stock offered hereby for us.
EXPERTS
Our financial statements as of October 31, 2005, have been audited by Shelley International
CPA, independent certified public accountants, as set forth in its report. The financial statements
have been included in reliance upon the authority of Mark Shelley as an expert in accounting and
auditing.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
We have  not previously  been  subject  to  the  reporting  requirements  of  the  Securities and
Exchange  Commission.  We  have  filed  with  the  Commission  a  registration  statement on  Form
SB-1 under the Securities Act with respect to the shares offered hereby. This prospectus does
not  contain  all  of  the  information  set  forth  in  the registration  statement  and  the  exhibits  and
schedules thereto. For further information with respect to our securities and us you should review
th e registration  statement  and  the  exhibits  and  schedules  thereto.  Statements made in  this
prospectus  regarding  the  contents  of  any  contract  or  document  filed a s an  exhibit  to  the
registration statement are not necessarily complete. You should review the copy of such contract
or document so filed.
 
    You can inspect the registration statement and the exhibits and the schedules thereto filed with
the  commission,  without  charge,  at  the  office  of  the  Commission a t Judiciary  Plaza,  450  Fifth
Street,  NW,  Washington,  D.C.  20549.  You  can also obtain  copies  of  these  materials  from  the
public reference section of the commission at 450 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20549, at
prescribed rates. You can obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by
calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The Commission maintains a web site on the Internet that
contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that
file electronically with the Commission at HTTP://WWW.SEC.GOV.
REPORTS TO STOCKHOLDERS
As a result of filing the registration statement, we are subject to the reporting requirements of the
federal  securities  laws,  and  are  required  to  file  periodic reports and other  information  with  the
SEC.  We  will  furnish  our  shareholders with  annual  reports  containing  audited  financial
statements certified by independent public accountants following the end of each fiscal year and
quarterly  reports  containing  unaudited  financial  information  for  the  first three quarters  of  each
fiscal year following the end of such fiscal quarter.
28
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders
Paradigm Ventures Corp.
W e have audited  the  accompanying  balance  sheet  of  Paradigm  Ventures  Corp.  (a  Nevada
corporation  in  the  development  stage)  as  of  October  31,  2005  and  the  related statements  of
operations,  statement  of  stockholders’  equity  and  cash  flows  for the  period  from  May  3,  2005
(inception)  to  October  31,  2005,  and  for  the periods ended  October  31,  2005.  These  financial
statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the financial statements  are  free  of  material
misstatement. The Company has determined that it is not required to have, nor were we engaged
to  perform,  an  audit  of  its internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Our  audit  included
consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express
no such opinion.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
and disclosures  in  the  financial  statements.  An  audit  also  includes  assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. We believe that  our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects,
the  financial  position  of  Paradigm  Ventures  Corp.,  as o f October  31,  2005,  and  the  related
statements  of  operations,  statement  of stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the period from
May  3,  2005  (inception) to  October  31,  2005  and  in  conformity  with  accounting  principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
T h e accompanying  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  the  Company will
continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company is
in the development stage and has not commenced operations. Its ability to continue as a going
concern  is  dependent  upon  its  ability  to develop additional  sources  of  capital,  and/or  achieve
profitable operations. These conditions raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a
going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the
outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ Mark Shelley
Mark Shelley 
Shelley International CPA 
Mesa, Arizona 
November 17, 2005
29
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP
Balance Sheet (Unaudited)
From Inception (May 3, 2005) to October 31, 2005
ASSETS
 
Cash
 
Total Current Asset
 
Undeveloped Mineral Property
 
Total Assets
 
 
LIABILITIES
 
Accounts Payable and accrued expense
$
   
   
   
   
   
  $
   
   
   
   
  $
October
31, 
2005
7,930 
  
7,930 
  
5,033 
  
12,963 
  
  
  
  
-
Total Current Liabilities
 
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
 
Common Stock
75,000,000 shares authorized, par value
$0.001, issued and outstanding 10,000,000
 
Paid in Capital
 
Accumulated Deficit during Development Stage
 
Total Stockholders' Equity
 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
30
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP
Income Statement (Unaudited)
From Inception (May 3, 2005) to October 31, 2005
REVENUE
 
EXPENSES
Operating Expenses
Professional and management fees
Bank charges
Total Expenses
 
Provision for Income Taxes
 
Net Income (Loss)
 
Basic and Diluted Earnings
$
- 
  
  
  
  
  
10,000 
  
6,500 
  
(3,537)
  
12,963 
  
12,963
for the
period from
inception to
October 31,
2005
- 
  
  
- 
3,500 
37 
3,537 
  
- 
  
(3,537)
$
per Common Share
31
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP
Statement of Cashflow (Unaudited)
From Inception (May 3, 2005) to October 31, 2005
Operations Activity
 
Net Income (Loss)
 
Adjustment to Net Income (Loss)
 
Officer Contributed Services
 
Balance Sheet
 
Changes in Accounts Payable
 
Cash Flow Provided by Operations
 
Investing Activity
 
Purchase of underdeveloped mineral property
 
Cash Flow Invested
 
Financing Activities
 
Shares Sold
a
for the
period from
inception to
October 31,
2005
(3,537)
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
  
(3,537)
  
  
  
(5,033)
  
(5,033)
  
  
  
16,500
$
Cash Flow Provided by Financing
 
Net Change in Cash Flow
 
Beginning Cash Balance
 
Ending Cash Balance
See Notes for supplemental information
32
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP
Shares issued for cash at
$0.00165 per share
 
Net Loss for the Period
 
Balance, October 31, 2003
$
16,500 
  
7,930 
  
- 
  
7,930
Statement of Stockholders Equity (Unaudited)
From Inception (May 3, 2005) to October 31, 2005
  Paid in
during
Deficit
Total
Accumulated  Equity  
 
 
  
 Development  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
  $ 16,500 
6,500  
   
   
  
(3,537)
(3,537) 
  
   
   
  
(3,537)  12,963 
6,500
Stage
Amount   Capital
Common Stock
Shares
10,000,000 $ 10,000 $
   
   
   
  
   
   
   10,000,000   10,000
33
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1. GENERAL ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS
The Company, was organized in the state of Nevada on May 3, 2005. The Company is  in its
development stage and currently has no operations and no segments.
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING PRACTICES
The relevant accounting policies and procedures are listed below.
Accounting Basis
The statements were prepared following generally accepted accounting principles of the United
States of America consistently applied.
Earnings per Share
34
T h e basic earnings  (loss)  per  share  is  calculated  by  dividing  the  Company’s  net  income
available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares during
the  year.  The  diluted  earnings  (loss)  per  share  is  calculated  by dividing the  Company’s  net
income  (loss)  available  to  common  shareholders  by  the  diluted weighted  average  number  of
shares outstanding during the year. The diluted weighted average number of shares outstanding
is  the  basic  weighted  number o f shares  adjusted  as  of  the  first  of  the  year  for  any  potentially
dilutive debt or equity.
The Company has not issued any options, warrants or similar securities since inception.
Dividends
The Company  has  not  yet  adopted  any  policy  regarding  payment  of  dividends. N o dividends
have been paid during the periods shown.
Use of Estimates
T h e preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  accounting  principles generally
accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America  requires  management to  make estimates  and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue
and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
35
Revenue Recognition
The Company has no revenue and no operations.
Advertising
Advertising is expensed when incurred. There has been no advertising since inception.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is the total of the current taxes payable and the net of the change
in the deferred income taxes. Provision is made for the deferred income taxes where differences
exist between the period in which transactions affect current taxable income and the period in
which they enter into the determination of net income in the financial statements.
NOTE 3. GOING CONCERN
The accompanying  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  that  the Company will
continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of
liabilities in the normal course of business. However, the Company has accumulated a loss and
is new. This raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from this uncertainty.
NOTE 4. PROVISION FOR INCOME TAXES
The Company  provides  for  income  taxes  under  Statement  of  Financial  Accounting Standards
NO. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. SFAS No. 109 requires the use of an asset and liability
approach in accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based
on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities and the
tax rates in effect when these differences are expected to reverse.
SFAS No. 109 requires the reduction of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on
the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax
assets will not be realized. In the Company’s opinion, it is uncertain whether they will generate
sufficient  taxable income  in the  future  to  fully  utilize  the  net  deferred  tax  asset.  Currently  the
Company’s deferred assets equals the valuation allowance
No income tax reports have been filed with the federal government.
NOTE 6. OPERATING LEASES AND OTHER COMMITMENTS:
The Company also has no lease obligations.
36
NOTE 7.   THE EFFECT OF RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Below is a listing of the most recent accounting standards and their effect on the Company.
SFAS 148 Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation-Transition and Disclosure
Amends FASB  123  to  provide  alternative  methods  of  transition  for  an  entity  that voluntarily
changes to the fair value based method of accounting for stock-based employee compensation.
SFAS 149 Amendment of Statement 133 on Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities
T h i s Statement  amends  and  clarifies  financial  accounting  and  reporting  for  derivative
instruments,  including  certain  derivative  instruments  embedded  in  other contracts  (collectively
referred to as derivatives) and for hedging activities under FASB Statement NO. 133, Accounting
for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
SFAS 150 Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both Liabilities and Equity
This Statement requires that such instruments be classified as liabilities in the balance sheet.
SFAS 150 is effective for financial instruments entered into or modified after May 31, 2003.
Interpretation No. 46 (FIN 46)
Effective January 31, 2003, The Financial Accounting Standards Board requires certain variable
interest entities to be consolidated by the primary beneficiary of the entity if the equity investors in
the entity do not have the characteristics of a continuing financial interest or do not have sufficient
equity  at  risk for  the entity  to  finance  its  activities  without  additional  subordinated  financial
support  from  other  parties.  The  Company  has  not  invested  in  any  such  entities, and  does  not
expect to do so in the foreseeable future.
T h e adoption  of  these  new  Statements  is  not  expected  to  have  a  material  effect o n the
Company’s financial position, results or operations, or cash flows.
NOTE 8. RELIANCE ON OFFICERS AND CONTRIBUTED SERVICES
The president and vice-president of the Company are the persons who have the experience to
promote  this  new  publication.  If  they  were  to  no  longer  be able  or willing  to  function  in  that
capacity  the  Company  would  be  negatively  affected. These  officers  have  contributed  their
services on a part time basis to the Company. The value of these services has been estimated
and included in the financial statements.
NOTE 9. LONG TERM DEBT
The company has no long term debt or similar contingencies.
NOTE 10. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
A t inception  the  Company  completed  an  offering  and  raised  $16,500  cash  selling 10,000,000
shares of stock at $0.00165 a share.
37
Total authorized shares are 75,000,000. Total outstanding shares issued are 10,000,000.
 
No dealer, salesman or any other person has been authorized to give any quotation or to make
any representations in connection with the offering described herein, other than those contained
in this prospectus. If given or made, such other information or representation, must not be relied
upon as having been authorized by the Company or by any underwriter. This prospectus does
not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy any securities offered hereby in
any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such an offer or solicitation in such
jurisdiction.
DEALER PROSPECTUS DELIVERY OBLIGATION
Until __________________ (90th day after the later of (1) the effective date of  the registration
statement or (2) the first date on which the securities are offered publicly), all dealers that effect
transactions in these securities, whether or not participating in this offering, may be required to
deliver a prospectus. This is in addition to the dealers' obligation to deliver a prospectus when
acting as underwriters and with respect to their unsold allotments or subscriptions.
PART II - INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
ITEM 1. INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS.
Section 78.7502 of the Nevada Revised Statutes and Article VII of our Articles o f Incorporation
permit us to indemnify our officers and directors and certain other persons against expenses in
defense  of  a  suit  to  which  they  are  parties b y reason  of  such  office,  so  long  as  the  persons
conducted themselves in good faith and the persons reasonably believed that their conduct was
in our best interests or not opposed to our best interests and, with respect to any criminal action
or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe their conduct was unlawful. See our Articles
of Incorporation filed as Exhibit 2.1 to this registration statement.
Indemnification is not permitted in connection with a proceeding by us or in our right in which the
officer or director was adjudged liable to us or in connection with any other proceeding charging
that the officer or director derived an improper personal benefit, whether or not involving action in
an
official capacity.
ITEM 2. OTHER EXPENSES OF ISSUANCE AND DISTRIBUTION.
The expenses to be paid by us in connection with the securities being registered are as follows:
AMOUNT
Securities and Exchange Commission Registration Fee 
Accounting Fees and Expenses 
Legal Fees and Expenses 
Transfer Agent and Registrar Fees and Expenses 
Printing Expenses 
Miscellaneous Expenses 
Total
2 
  $
3,000 
   
6,500 
   
250 
   
200 
   
   
48 
  $ 10,000*
*Estimated amount
ITEM 3. UNDERTAKINGS.
The Company hereby undertakes to:
1) File, during any period in which it offers or sells securities, a post-effective amendment to
this registration statement to:
i) Include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act; and
ii) Reflect in the prospectus any facts or events which, individually or together, represent a
fundamental  change  in  the  information  in  the  registration  statement;  and notwithstanding  the
foregoing,  any  increase  or  decrease  in  volume  of  securities offered (if the total dollar value of
securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or
high end of estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed
with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b)) if, in the aggregate, the changes in the volume and
price represent no more than a 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in
the "Calculation of Registration Fee" table in the effective registration statement; and
iii) Include any additional or changed material information on the plan of distribution.
2) For determining liability under the Securities Act, treat each post-effective amendment as a
new registration statement of the securities offered, and the offering of the securities at that time
to be the initial bona fide offering.
3) File a post-effective amendment to remove from registration any of the securities that remain
unsold at the end of the offering.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 (the "Act") may
be permitted to directors, officers and controlling persons of the small business issuer pursuant to
the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, we have been advised that in the opinion of the Securities
and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Act
and is, therefore, unenforceable.
In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by
us of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the Company in the
successful  defense  of  any  action,  suit  or proceeding)  is  asserted  by  such  director,  officer  or
controlling  person i n connection  with  the  securities  being  registered,  we  will,  unless  in  the
opinion of our counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by us is against public policy
as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
ITEM 4. UNREGISTERED SECURITIES ISSUED OR SOLD WITHIN ONE YEAR.
The Company sold 10,000,000 shares of its common stock in 2003 to Scott Cabianca for cash
consideration  of  $16,500.00.  The  Company  relied  upon  the  exemption  from registration
contained  in  Section  4(2)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933.  Mr. Cabianca  was  deemed  to  be
sophisticated with regard in an investment in the registrant. No underwriters were used.
38
ITEM 5. INDEX TO EXHIBITS.
REGULATION
S-B NUMBER EXHIBIT
 
REGULATION 
S-B NUMBER
 
2.1
2.2  
10.1  
10.2  
23.1 
5.2
EXHIBIT
Articles of Incorporation  
Bylaws  
Acquisition and Evaluation Report dated May 26, 2005 
Loan commitment letter from Scott Cabianca dated June 1, 2005 
Consent of Shelley International CPA 
Consent and Opinion of Aaron D. McGeary
ITEM 6. DESCRIPTION OF EXHIBITS.
See Item 5 above.
 
 SIGNATURES
In accordance with the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it
has reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements of filing on Form SB-1 and
authorized this registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, in the city of
Vancouver, province of British Columbia, on November 15, 2005.
PARADIGM VENTURES CORP.
 
 
By:  /s/ SCOTT CABIANCA
Scott Cabianca
President
In accordance with the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement was
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates stated.
SIGNATURE
/s/ SCOTT CABIANCA
Scott Cabianca
TITLE
President, Secretary, Treasurer  and
director  (principal   executive, financial
and accounting officer)
DATE
November 15, 2005